CHAPTER: Astronomy

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION 

ASTRONOMY could take its place in this 
Xi. catalog of ideas on the ground that several 
of the great books are monuments of astronom- 
ical science, exemplifying the imaginative and 
analytical powers which have made it one of the 
most remarkable triumphs of the human mind. 
Its claim might further be supported by the 
fact that other great books— of mathematics, 
physics, theology, and poetry — have a context 
of astronomical imagery and theory. But the in- 
clusion of astronomy can be justified by what is 
perhaps an even more significant fact, namely, 
that astronomical speculation raises problems 
and suggests conclusions which have critical rel- 
evance for the whole range of the great ideas. 

Man has used astronomy to measure, not only 
the passage of time or the course of a voyage, 
but also his position in the world, his power of 
knowing, his relation to God. When man first 
turns from himself and his immediate earthly 
surroundings to the larger universe of which he 
is a part, the object which presses on his vision 
is the overhanging firmament with its luminous 
bodies, moving with great basic regularity and, 
upon closer observation, with certain perplex- 
ing irregularities. Alvvays abiding and always 
changing, the firmament, which provides man 
with the visible boundary of his universe, also 
becomes for him a basic, in fact an inescapable, 
object of contemplation. 

Careful and precise astronomical observa- 
tions antedate the birth of astronomy as a 
science. The early interest in the heavenly bod- 
ies and their motions is often attributed to the 
usefulness of the predictions which can be made 
from a knowledge of celestial phenomena. 

Whether their motive was entirely utilitar- 
ian, or partly religious and speculative, the 
Egyptians and Babylonians, we learn from 
Herodotus, undertook patient study of the 
heavens. They observed and recorded with 

immense persistence. They calculated and pre- 
dicted. They turned their predictions to use 
through the priestly office of prophecy to fore- 
tell eclipses, tides, and floods, and they em- 
ployed their calculations in the mundane arts of 
navigation and surveying to guide travel and 
fix boundaries. But they did not, like the Greeks, 
develop elaborate theories which sought to or- 
ganize all the observ'ed facts systematically. 

With the Greeks, the down-to-earth, every- 
day utility of astronomy seems to count for 
less than its speculative grandeur. The dignity 
which they confer upon astronomy among the 
disciplines reflects the scope and majesty of its 
subject matter. The Greek astronomer, con- 
cerned as he is with figuring motions that range 
through the whole of space and are as old as 
time or as interminable, takes for his object the 
structure of the cosmos. 

Aristotle and Plato pay eloquent tribute to 
the special worth of astronomy. In the opening 
chapters of his Metaphysics, Aristotle associates 
astronomical inquiry with the birth of philos- 
ophy. “Apart from usefulness,” he says, “men 
delight ... in the sense of sight” and, he adds, 
"it is owing to their wonder that men both now 
begin and at first began to philosophise.” They 
wondered first about “the obvious difficulties,” 
but little by little they advanced to “greater 
matters,” and “stated difficulties . . . about the 
phenomena of the moon and sun and stars, and 
about the genesis of the universe.” In his own 
philosophical thought, Aristotle’s treatise On 
the Heavens is not only one of the basic natural 
sciences, but certain of its principles have gen- 
eral significance for all the other parts of his 
physical science. 

A wider view of the importance of astronomy 
is taken by Plato. In the Timaeus, he dwells on 
“the higher use and purpose for which God has 
given eyes to us. . . . Had we never seen the 

88 THE GREAT IDEAS 

stars, and the sun, and the heaven,” Timaeus 
says, “none of the words which we have spoken 
about the universe would ever have been ut- 
tered God invented and gave us sight,” he 

continues, “to the end that we might behold 
the courses of intelligence in the heaven, and 
apply them to the courses of our own intelli- 
gence which are akin to them, the unperturbed 
to the perturbed; and that we, learning them 
and partaking of the natural truth of reason, 
might imitate the absolutely unerring courses 
of God and regulate our own vagaries.” 

For Plato, then, man’s intellectual relation to 
the heavens does more than initiate philosophy. 
Man’s self-rule, his purity and peace of soul, is 
at stakein that relation. That is one reason why, 
in both the Republic the Laws, Plato makes 
astronomy a required part of the curriculum 
for the education of rulers. “He who has not 
contemplated the mind of nature which is said 
to exist in the stars . . . and seen the connection 
of music with these things, and harmonized 
them all with laws and institutions, is not able,” 
the Athenian Stranger says in the Laws, “to 
give a reason for such things as have a reason.” 

Plato considers the opposition to astronomy 
on religious grounds by those who think that 
men who approach celestial phenomena by the 
methods of astronomy “may become godless 
because they see . . . things happening by ne- 
cessity, and not by an intelligent will accom- 
plishing good.” His answer points out that one 
of the “two things which lead men to believe in 
the gods ... is the argument from the order of 
the motion of the stars and of all things under 
the dominion of the mind which ordered the 
universe.” It was a false understanding of these 
matters which “gave rise to much atheism and 
perplexity.” 

The issues raised by Plato concerning the im- 
portance of astronomy for purification and pi- 
ety, for education and politics, run through the 
tradition of western thought. Though they are 
somewhat transformed in the context of Jewish 
and Christian beliefs, arid altered by later de- 
velopments in the science of astronomy itself, 
they remain as matters on which an author’s 
strong assent or dissent forcefully reflects his 
whole intellectual position. 

On the one hand, astronomers like Ptolemy, 

Copernicus, and Kepler, for all their difierences 
on points of scientific theory, seem to concur in 
reaffirming Plato’s conception of the bearing of 
their science on religion and morals. Lucretius 
and Augustine, on the other hand, while not 
agreeing with each other, seem to disagree with 
Plato. In the tradition of western thought, they 
represent different types of opposition to the 
Platonic view. 

Where Plato and his followers, including re- 
ligious Christians like Copernicus and Kep- 
ler, hold that true piety profits from astronom- 
ical study, Lucretius hopes that astronomy may 
help to free men from religious superstitions. If 
when they ‘ ‘gaze on the heavenly quarters of the 
great upper world” and direct their thoughts 
“to the courses of the sun and moon,” they do 
so with “a mind at peace” because they see only 
the workings of natural law and no evidences of 
a controlling power in the will of the gods, then 
men achieve the natural piety of the scientist 
— different in the opinion of Lucretius from the 
false worship which is based on fear. 

From his own experiences in dealing with the 
astronomy of the Manichean sect in relation to 
their religious doctrine, Augustine insists that 
the teachings of religion in no way depend upon 
astronomy. He denies that such knowledge is in 
any way essential to true piety. Though a man 
does not know “even the circles of the Great 
Bear, yet is it folly to doubt,” he writes, “that 
he is in a better state than one who can measure 
the heavens and number the stan, and poise the 
elements, yet neglecteth Thee ‘Who hast made 
all things in number, weight, and measure.’ ” 

When Faustus, the leader of the Manichcans, 
“was found out to have taught falsely of the 
heaven and stars, and of the motions of the sun 
and moon (although these things pertain not to 
the doctrine of religion),” his religious teach- 
ings, according to Augustine, ine vi tably suffered 
ridicule because of his pretension that they de- 
rived support from a science of the heavenly 
bodies. Augustine would disengage theology 
from astronomy. His position anticipates that 
later taken by Cardinal Barberini who, during 
the controversy over the Copernican hypothe- 
sis, is reported to have told Galileo that as- 
tronomy and religion have quite separate tasks, 
the one teaching how the heavens go, the other 
how to go to heaven. 

Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 89 

Still another point ofview on the importance courses of our own intelligence.” But in_one 

of astronomy is represented in the skeptical and 
humanist attitude of Montaigne. “I am very 
well pleased with the Milesian girl,” he remarks, 
“who . . . advised the philosopher Thales rather 
to look to himself than to gaze at heaven.” In 
saying this, or in quoting with approval the 
question asked of Pythagoras by Anaximenes — 
“To what purpose should I trouble myself in 
searching out the secrets of the stars, having 
death or slavery continually before my eyes.?” 
—Montaigne intends more than a preference 
for the moral over the natural sciences. He re- 
gards astronomical inquiry as a prime example 
of man’s “natural and original disease — pre- 
sumption.” It is presumptuous to suppose that 
our minds can grasp and plot the course of the 
heavens when we fail to comprehend things 
much nearer at hand. Hence Montaigne ad- 
vises everyone to say, in the spirit of Anaxi- 
menes: “Being assaulted as I am by ambition, 
avarice, temerity, superstition, and having so 
many other enemies of life, shall I go cudgel 
my brains about the world’s revolutions?” 

Kant can be as critical as Montaigne of the 
frailty of human knowledge. “The investiga- 
tions and calculations of the astronomers,” he 
writes, have shown us “the abyss of our igno- 
rance in relation to the universe.” But Kant — an 
astronomer himself as well as a moralist — does 
not, therefore, advise us to forsake the study of 
the heavens. On the contrary, he recommends 
it not only for its scientific value, but for its 
moral significance. 

“Two things,” Kant declares in a passage 
which has become famous, “fill the mind with 
ever new and increasing admiration and awe, 
the oftener and more steadily we reflect on 
them; the starry heavens above and the moral 
law within.” The two fit together to produce a 
single effect. Astronomy with its view ‘ of a 
countless multitude of worlds annihilates, as it 
Were, my importance as an animal creature. 
Morality “elevates my worth as an intelligence 
by my personality, in which the moral law re- 
veals to me a life independent of animality and 
even of the whole sensible world.” 

Kant’s association of the starry heavens with 
the moral life is not so much an echo of, as a 
Variant upon, Plato’s precept that we apply 
“the courses of intelligence in heaven ... to the 

passage of Freud tve find an almost complete re- 
turn to the Platonic insight. “Order has been 
imitated from nature,” he writes; “man’s ob- 
servations of the great astronomical periodici- 
ties not only furnished him with a model, but 
formed the ground plan of his first attempts to 
introduce order into his own life.” ' 

AsraoNOMY HAS Connections with 'biology and 
psychology, as well as with mathematics and 
physics. The obvious fact that the sun supports 
terrestrial life — operating here as a unique and 
indispensable cause — occasions the inference by 
Aquinas that it may also operate as a cause in 
the production of new species by spontaneous 
generation from putrefying matter. This no- 
tion bears some resemblance to the theory in 
contemporary genetics of the effect of cosmic 
radiations upon gene mutations. 

Unlike these notions in biology, speculations 
concerning celestial influences upon psycho- 
logical phenomena seem to cross the line be- 
tween astronomy and astrology. Sometimes the 
influence upon man and his actions is found in 
the constellations attending a nativity; some- 
times it is a particular influence of the sort still 
signified by the meaning of the word “lunacy”; 
and sometimes omens and auguries are read in 
the aspect of the heavens. 

The chapters on Prophecy and Sign and 
Symbol deal with the issues raised by astrol- 
ogy. Problems more closely associated with 
astronomical science and speculation are treat- 
ed in other chapters. The cosmological prob- 
lem of the origin of the material universe 
is discussed in the chapters on Eternity, 
Time, and World; the question of its size in the 
chapter on Space; the question of whether the 
celestial spheres are themselves alive or are 
moved by intelligences or spirits in the chapters 
on Angel and Soul; and the question of the 
nature of the heavenly bodies in the chapter on 
Matter. 

This last problem is of crucial significance in 
the history of astronomy itself. Opposed the- 
ories of the motions of the heavenly bodies be- 
come correlated with opposed theories con- 
cerning their matter — whether that is different 
in kind from terrestrial matter or the same. It 
is with reference to these related issues that what 

90 THE GREAT IDEAS 

has come to be called “the Copcrnican revo- 
lution” represents one of the great crises, cer- 
tainly one of the most dramatic turning points, 
in the development of astronomy, and of phys- 
ics and natural science generally. 

The Copernican revolution did not take place 
by the improvement and enlargement of astro- 
nomical obsen'ations alone, nor even by the ef- 
fect of these on alternative mathematical for- 
mulations. If it had not been accompanied by 
the radical shift from ancient to modern physics 
— especially with regard to the diversity or uni- 
formity of the world’s matter— the Copernican 
hypothesis concerning the celestial motions 
would have been no more than a mathematical 
alternative to the Ptolemaic hypothesis. Coper- 
nicus seems to advance it only as such, but in the 
hands of Kepler, Galileo, and Newton it be- 
comes much more than that. They, rather than 
Copernicus, seem to accomplish the revolution 
connected with his name. 

When their contribution is neglected or in- 
adequately grasped, the Copernican revolution 
appears to be, as is often popularly supposed, 
merely a shift in astronomical theory. The prob- 
lem being to organize mathematically the ap- 
parent motions of the heavens, Copernicus of- 
fers an alternative solution to that of Ptolemy. 
Instead of treating the earth as stationary and 
central in the cosmic system, Copernicus at- 
tributes three motions to the earth by treating 
it as a planet which revolves around the sun, 
spins on its axis, and varies the inclination of its 
axis with reference to the sun. 

What is usually supposed to be revolutionary 
about this hypothesis is its effect on man’s esti- 
mate of himself and his place or rank in the 
universe. On either of the rival hypotheses, the 
apparent motions of the heavens remain unal- 
tered, but not man’s conception of himself, of 
his earth, or of the universe in which the earth’s 
orbit cuts so small a figure. As Kant suggests, 
man’s stature seems to shrink. He becomes “a 
mere speck in the universe” which has been en- 
larged to infinity, or at least to an unimaginable 
immensity. He is displaced from its center to 
become a wanderer with his planet. Humanity’s 
self-esteem, according to Freud, was thus for 
the first time deeply wounded; he refers to the 
theory that “is associated in our minds with the 
name of Copernicus” as the “first great outrage” 

which humanity “had to endure from the 
hands of science.” 

It has been questioned whether this interpre- 
tation of the Copernican revolution fits all the 
documents in the case. Freud may be accurately 
reporting a popular feeling which, since the 1 8th 
century, has become a widespread consequence 
of Copernican and post-Copernican astronomy. 
But in earlier centuries when the Ptolemaic 
system prevailed, or even after Copernicus, the 
appraisal of man’s rank seems to depend more 
upon the position he occupies in the hierarchy 
of God’s creatures— below the angels and above 
the brutes— than upon the place or motion of 
the earth, or the size of the world. 

Boethius, for example, finds the Ptolemaic 
universe large enough to remind man of the 
infinitesimal space he occupies, Dante, too, 
comments on the smallness of the earth in the 
scheme of things. When in his visionary travel 
Dante reaches the Empyrean, he looks down 
upon the earth and “with my sight,” he tells us, 
“I returned through all and each of the seven 
spheres, and saw this globe, such that I smiled at 
its mean semblance; and that counsel I approve 
as best which holds it of least account.” 

Kepler, a passionate Copernican deeply con- 
cerned with the human significance of astron- 
omy, can be found arguing that the new hy- 
pothesis involves something more fitting for 
man than the old. In his last argument in de- 
fense of the Copernican view against that of 
Tycho Brahe as well as that of Ptolemy, he de- 
clares, “it was not fitting that man, who was 
going to be the dweller in this world and its 
contemplator, should reside in one place as in a 
closed cubicle. ... It was his office to move 
around in this very spacious edifice by means of 
the transportation of the Earth his home.” In 
order properly to view and measure the parts 
of his world, the astronomer “needed to have 
the Earth a ship and its annual voyage around 
the sun.” 

Yet the very fact that Kepler argues in this 
manner may be interpreted as indicating his 
sense of the drastic implications for man of the 
altered structure of the universe. Kepler may 
even be thought to announce the problem of the 
so-called “Copernican revolution” when, in de- 
nying that the earth can any longer “be reck- 
oned among the primary parts of the great 

Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 91 

world,” since it is only a part of a part, i.e., the 
planetary region, he deliberately adds the quali- 
fication: “But I am speaking now of the Earth 
in so far as it is a part of the edifice of the world, 
and not of the dignity of the governing crea- 
tures which inhabit it.” 

Whether or not it was the traumatic blow to 
the human ego which Freud conjectures, there 
can be little doubt that the shift from Ptolemy 
to Copernicus involved a real shock to the imag- 
ination. The Ptolemaic system conforms to the 
look of the world, which is indeed the reason 
why it is still the one used in practical courses in 
navigation. Here again Kepler defends Coperni- 
cus by explaining why “our uncultivated eye- 
sight” cannot be other than deceived and why 
it “should learn from reason” to understand 
that thingsare really different from theway they 
appear. 

A certain disillusionment may result from 
this affirmation — repeated by every schoolboy 
who is taught the Copernican system— that, de- 
spite what we see, the sun does not move around 
the earth, and the earth both rotates and re- 
volves. It undermines the trust men placed in 
their senses and the belief that science would 
describe the world as they saw it. In order to 
“save the appearances,” that is, to account for 
the phenomena, science might henceforward be 
expected to destroy any naive acceptance of 
them as the reality. 

Furthermore, though the Ptolemaic world 
was very large, the Copernican universe was 
much larger. Whereas in the former the radius 
of the earth was deemed negligible in relation to 
the radius of the sphere of the fixed stars, in the 
new universe the radius of the earth s orbit 
around the sun was negligible in relation to the 
same radius of the sphere of the fixed stars. It 
can hardly be doubted that this intensified some 
men’s sense of almost being lost in an abyss of 
infinity'. “I see those frightful spaces of the uni- 
verse which surround me,” Pascal writes, and 
I find myself tied to one corner of this vast ex- 
panse, without knowing why I am put in this 
place rather than in another.” When he regards 
the World’s immensity as “the greatest sensible 
mark of the almighty power of God,” Pascal ex- 
periences an awe which for him is qualified by 
reverence. Other men may experience the same 
feeling, but less with reverence than with a 

gnawing loneliness, born of the doubt that so 
vast a Cosmos — if cosmos it is rather than chaos 
— can have been beneficently designed as man’s 
habitation. 

Whatever the truth about the effect of the 
Copernican theory in the order of opinion, im- 
agination, and feeling, it did produce a direct 
result on the intellectual plane. It, more than 
any other single factor, led to the overthrow of 
certain crucial doctrines which had been linked 
together in the physics and astronomy of Aris- 
totle; it thus radically changed the fundamen- 
tal principles in terms of which man had under- 
stood the order and unity of nature. That scien- 
tific event deserves not only the name but the 
feme of the “Copernican revolution.” 

The revolution in the realm of theory goes 
much deeper than the substitution of one math- 
ematical construction for another to describe 
the motions of the world’s great bodies. As 
Freud points out, the heliocentric hypothesis 
associated with the name of Copernicus was 
known to the Alexandrian astronomers of anti- 
quity. It is, for example, attributed to Aris- 
tarchus by Archimedes in the Sand-Reckoner. 

As far as the earth’s rotation is concerned, 
Ptolemy admits it is quite “plausible” to sup- 
pose “the heavens immobile and the earth turn- 
ing on the same axis from west to east very 
nearly one revolution a day. ... As far as the 
appearances of the stars are concerned,” he goes 
on, “nothing would perhaps keep things from 
being in accordance with this simpler con- 
jecture.” 

Why, then, does Ptolemy reject a supposi- 
tion which is not only plausible but also, in 
accounting for the appearances, simpler} In part 
the answer may be that he does so because the 
contrary supposition conforms to our ordinary 
sense-experience of the earth’s immobility and 
the motions of the heavens from east to -west. 
But that is far from being the most important 
part of the answer. Ptolemy indicates the cru- 
cial part when he tells us that the othenvise 
plausible supposition of a rotating earth be- 
comes “altogether absurd” when we consider 
the speed and direction of the motions of bodies 
within the earth’s own atmosphere. His strong- 
est count against the supposition is that it does 
not conform to the Aristotelian physics which 

92 THE GREAT IDEAS 

distinguishes between natural and violent mo- 
tions, assigns certain fixed directions to the nat- 
ural motions of each of the four elements of 
matter, and denies that these elementary kinds 
of terrestrial matter enter into the composition 
of the heavenly bodies. 

That Aristotle’s physics and cosmology lie at 
the very heart of the issue is confirmed by the 
way in which Kepler later argues for the Coper- 
nican theory against Ptolemy. He does not de- 
fend its truth on the ground that it accounts for 
observable facts which the Ptolemaic hypoth- 
esis cannot handle. Nor does he prefer it merely 
because it is mathematically the simpler hy- 
pothesis. On the contrary, he specifically notes 
that anything which can be claimed on math- 
ematical grounds for Copernicus over Ptolemy 
can be equally claimed for Tycho Brahe over 
Ptolemy. (Brahe’s theory was that while the 
other planets revolve around the sun, the sun, 
with its planets, revolves around a stationary 
earth.) According to Kepler, the truth of these 
competing theories must finally be judged phys- 
icalty, not mathematically, and when the ques- 
tion is put that way, as it is not by Copernicus 
himself, Copernicans like Kepler, Galileo, and 
Newton take issue with what had been asso- 
ciated with the Ptolemaic theory— the physics 
of Aristotle. 

In order to examine this issue, it is necessary 
to state briefly here certain features of Aris- 
totle’s physics which are more fully discussed 
in the chapters on Change, Element, Me- 
chanics, and Physics. 

Just as Ptolemy’s astronomy conforms to 
what we see as we look at the heavens, so Aris- 
totle’s physics represents a too simple conform- 
ity with everyday sense-experience. We observe 
fire rising and stones falling. Mix earth, air, and 
water in a closed container, and air bubbles will 
rise to the top, while the particles of earth will 
sink to the bottom. To cover a multitude of 
similar observations, Aristotle develops the 
theory of the natural motions and places of the 
four terrestrial elements— earth, air, fire, and 
water. Since bodies move naturally only to at- 
tain their proper places, the great body which 
is the earth, already at the bottom of all things, 
need not move at all. Being in its proper place, 
it is by nature stationary. 

Two other observations exercise a decisive 
influence on Aristotle’s theory. The naked eye 
sees no type of change in the heavenly bodies 
other than local motion or change of place. Un- 
like terrestrial bodies,, they do not appear to 
come into being or perish; they do not change 
in size or quality. Furthermore, whereas the 
natural local motion of'sub-lunary bodies ap- 
pears to approximate the path of a straight line, 
the local motion of the celestial bodies appears 
to be circular rather than rectilinear. 

To cover these observations, Aristotle’s the- 
ory posits a different kind of matter for celestial 
and terrestrial bodies. An incorruptible matter 
must constitute the great orbs which are sub- 
ject to local motion alone and have the most 
perfect kind of local motion— that of a circle. 
Since they are subject to generation and cor- 
ruption, to change of quality and quantity, and 
are in local motion along straight lines, terres- 
trial bodies are of a corruptible matter. 

The interconnection of all these points is 
marked by Aquinas when he summarizes Aris- 
totle’s doctrine. “Plato and all who preceded 
Aristotle,’’ he writes, “held that all bodies are 
of the nature of the four elements” and con- 
sequently “that the matter of all bodies is the 
same. But the fact of the incorruptibility of 
some bodies was ascribed by Plato, not to the 
condition of matter, but to the will of the 
artificer, God. . . , This theory,” Aquinas con- 
tinues, “Aristotle disproves by the natural 
movements of bodies. For since he says that 
the heavenly bodies have a natural movement, 
different from that of the elements, it follows 
that they have a different nature from them. 
For movement in a circle, which is proper to 
the heavenly bodies, is not by contraries, where- 
as the movements of the elements are mutually 
opposite, one tending upwards, another down- 
wards. . . . And as generation and corruption 
are from contraries, it follows that, whereas the 
elements are corruptible, the heavenly bodies 
are incorruptible.” 

The same points which Aquinas relates in his 
defense of the Aristotelian theory, Kepler also 
puts together when he expounds that theory in 
order to attack it and the Ptolemaic astronomy 
which tries to conform to it. “By what argu- 
ments did the ancients establish their opinion 
which is the opposite of yours?” he asks. “By 

Chapter 5 : ASTRONOMY 93 

four arguments m especial: (i) From the na- 
ture of moveable bodies. (2) From the nature 
of the motor virtue. (3) From the nature of the 
place in which the movement occurs. (4) From 
the perfection of the circle.” He thenstateseach 
of these arguments, and answers each in turn. 

What IS extraordinary about Kepler’s attack 
upon the Ptolemaic astronomy cannot be un- 
derstood without examining Ptolemy’s defense 
of his theory, a defense which Copernicus meets 
in Ptolemy’s own terms rather than, as Kepler 
does, by going outside them. 

Though his expressed intention was to con- 
struct a mathematical theory of the celestial 
motions which would also conform to Aris- 
totle’s physics, Ptolemy, when he finished, 
recognized that the complications he had been 
compelled to add in order “to save the appear- 
ances” left him with a theory that did not con- 
form to Aristotle’s doctrine of the perfect cir- 
cular motion of the heavenly spheres. Instead 
of abandoning Aristotle’s physics, he defended 
his theory on the ground that astronomy, being 
mathematical rather than physical, could ad- 
mit such “unrealistic” complications if they 
served the purpose? of calculation and of “sav- 
ing the appearances.” 

In the thirteenth and last book of the Alma- 
gest, when he faces the fact that his mathemat- 
ical devices have become exceedingly difficult 
—and strained from the point of view of the 
Aristotelian reality — Ptolemy writes: “Let no 
one, seeing the difficulty of our devices, find 
troublesome such hypotheses. ... It is proper 
to try and fit as far as possible the simpler 
hypotheses to the movements of the heavens; 
and if this does not succeed, then any hypoth- 
eses possible. Once all the appearances are 
saved by the consequences of the hypotheses, 
why should it seem strange that such compli- 
cations can come about in the movements of 
heavenly things?” We ought not to judge the 
sinaplicity of heavenly things by comparison 
with whatseems to be simple in the e.xplanation 
of earthly phenomena. “We should instead 
judge their simplicity from the unchangeable- 
ness of the natures in the heavens and their 
movements. For thus they would all appear 
simple, more than those things which seem so 
here with us.” 

Ignoring the supposition thatsimplicitymust 
be judged differently in different spheres, Co- 
pernicus challenges Ptolemy on bis own grounds 
when he proposes “simpler hypotheses” to fit 
“the movements of the heavens.” But in doing 
so, he seems to adopt the traditional view of the 
mathematical character of astronomical hy- 
potheses. Yet, as will appear, he does not adopt 
this view in the unqualified form in which 
Osiander states it in his Preface to the Revolu- 
tions of the Heavenly Spheres. 

“It is the job of the astronomer,” Osiander 
writes, “to use painstaking and skilled observa- 
tion in gathering together the history of the 
celestial movements, and then — since he cannot 
by any line of reasoning reach the true causes 
of these movements— to think or construct 
whatever causes or hypotheses he pleases, such 
that, by the assumption of these causes, these 
same movements can be calculated from the 
principles of geometry, for the past and for the 
future too. 

“It is not necessary,” he adds, “that these 
hypotheses should be true, or even probable; 
it is enough if they provide a calculus which 
fits the observations. When for one and the 
same movement varying hypotheses are pro- 
posed, as eccentricity or epicycle for the move- 
ment of the sun, the astronomer much prefers 
to take the one which is easiest to grasp.” 

What distinguishes Kepler from both Ptol- 
emy and Osiander is the way in which he is 
concerned with the truth of alternative hypoth- 
eses in astronomy. He looks upon the truth of 
an hypothesis as something to be judged not 
merely in mathematical terms according to the 
adequacy and simplicity of a calculating de- 
vice, but to be measured by its conformity to 
all the physical realities. At the very beginning 
of his Epitome of Copernican Astronomy, he 
flatly declares that “astronomy is part of phys- 
ics.” And in the opening pages of the fourth 
book, he insists that astronomy has not one, 
but “two ends; to save the appearances and to 
contemplate the true form of the edifice of the 
World.” He follows this immediately by ob- 
serving that, if astronomy had only the first 
end, Tycho Brahe’s theory would be as satis- 
factory as that of Copernicus. 

Early in his scientific career, before writing 
the Epitome, Kepler asserts that “one cannot 

94 THE GREAT IDEAS 

leave to the astronomer absolute license to feign 
no matter what hypotheses.” He complains that 
astronomers “too often . . . constrain their 
thought from exceeding the limits of geometry.” 

It is necessar}' to go beyond geometry into 
physics to test the consequences of competing 
hypotheses which are equally good mathemat- 
ically. “You must seek the foundations of your 
astronomy,” he tells his fellow scientists, "in 
a rhore elevated science, I mean in physics or 
metaphysics.” 

Because Kepler thus conceives the task and 
truth of astronomy, Duhem in his great history 
of astronomy calls him a “realistic Copernican.” 
Galileo also, Duhem thinks, was a realistic 
Copernican. “To confirm by physics the Co- 
pernican hypotheses,” he writes, “is the center 
towards which converge Galileo’s observations 
as an astronomer and his terrestrial mechanics.” 

Newton was the third member of this trium- 
virate. For him there remained the solution of 
the problem of deducing Kepler’s formulation 
of the planetary orbits in a manner consistent 
with Galileo’s laws of motion in the dynamics 
of bodies falling on the earth’s surface. But the 
very posing of this problem itself depended on 
the insight that terrestrial and celestial me- 
chanics can proceed according to the same prin- 
ciples and laws. That insight entailed the com- 
plete overthrow of the ancient physics, with its 
division of the universe into two distinct parts, 
having different kinds of matter and different 
laws of motion. 

CoPERNicDS, WHO, despite Osiander’s apolo- 
getics, believed his theory to be true, did not 
himself face the great point at issue in the 
Copernican revolution— the material uniform- 
ity of the physical universe. We shall subse- 
quently consider the question of the truth of 
astronomical hypotheses, but whether or not 
Copernicus and the Copernicans had in their 
own day a right to believe their theory true, 
it was the acceptance of the Copernican hy- 
pothesis as true which led Kepler and Galileo 
to deny the truth of Aristotelian physics. 

If the earth is not at the center and station- 
ar)', then the basic doctrine of a natural direc- 
tion in motion and a natural place of rest for 
the various elements is completely upset. If the 
earth is one of the planets, then anything true 

on the earth— or of the earth, such as Gilbert’s 
theory of the magnetic fields generated by the 
earth’s axial rotation— could be equally true of 
all the other planets. 

“Read the philosophy of magnetism of the 
Englishman William Gilbert,” writes Kepler; 
“for in that book, although the author did not 
believe that the Earth moved . . . nevertheless 
he attributes a magnetic nature to it by very 
many arguments. Therefore, it is by no means 
absurd or incredible that any one of the pri- 
mary planets should be, what one of the pri- 
mary planets, namely, the Earth, is.” Such a 
statement plainly shows that when the earth 
becomes a planet, as it does in Copernican 
theory, no obstacle remains to the assertion of 
a homogeneity between the earth and the other 
planets both in matter and motion. The old 
physical dualism of a supralunar and a sublunar 
world is abandoned. 

“Not the movement of the earth,” White- 
head remarks, “but the glory of the heavens 
was the point at issue,” for to assert the heavens 
to be of the same stuff and subject to the same 
laws as the rest of nature brings them down to 
the plane of earthly physics. That is precisely 
what Newton finally does when, in the enun- 
ciation of his Third Rule of reasoning in natural 
philosophy, he dryly but explicitly completes 
the Copernican Revolution. Those “qualities 
of bodies . . . which are found to belong to all 
bodies within the reach of our experiments, 
are,” Newton maintains, “to be esteemed the 
universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever.” 

In the bifurcated world of ancient theory', 
astronomy had a very special place among the 
natural sciences, proportionate to the “glory 
of the heavens.” But with Newton it could be 
completely merged into a general mechanics 
whose laws of motion have universal applica- 
tion. That merger, begun by Newton, has been 
perfected since his day. The last obstacle to the 
generalization lay in the apparent discrepancies 
between electrical phenomena on the subatomic 
scale and gravitational phenomena on the astro- 
nomic scale. But inourown time the unified field 
equations of Einstein’s theory of relativity em- 
brace the very large and the very small motions 
of matter within a single conceptual scheme, 
with radical consequences for the revision of 
the Newtonian or classical mechanics. 

A V I. 

Chapter 5: ASTRONOm^ 95 

But the unification of nature which Kepler 
began and Newton completed, when set against 
Aristotle’s physics, may be even more radical. 
Newton’s theory, because of the amazing way 
in which it covered the widest variety of phe- 
nomena by the simplest, most universal for- 
mula, is considered by Kant to have “estab- 
lished the truth of that which Copernicus at 
first assumed only as an hypothesis.” But the 
larger contribution, in Whitehead’s opinion, is 
“the idea of the neutrality of situation and the 
universality of physical laws . . . holding indif- 
ferently in every part.” 

Whatever position we take today concerning 
the kind of truth which is possessed by hypoth- 
eses in mathematical physics, we now demand, 
in' the spirit of the three Copernicans— Kepler, 
Galileo, and, above all, Newton— that physical 
hypotheses account at once for all the phenom- 
ena of the inanimate universe. Whatever the 
tmth of modern as opposed to ancient physics, 
the Newtonian universe is so thoroughly estab- 
lished in our minds and feelings that, when we 
are reminded of the other universe in which 
men lived before the Copernican revolution, 
we tend to think it quaint, incredible, prepos- 
terous, superstitious, none of which it was. 

Finally, from the point of view of our under- 
standing of natural science itself, the astro- 
nomical controversy we have been considering 
is almost an archetypical model. It is necessary, 
of course, to appreciate the real achievement of 
Ptolemy as well as of Copernicus and Kepler in 
order to realize how genuine and difficult the 
issues were. Facts unknown to all of them may 
now have closed the dispute decisively, but 
issues in other spheres of modern science, almost 
identical in pattern with that great astronom- 
ical one, are not yet closed; and to the degree 
that we are able to re-enact in our minds the 
motion of thought on both sides of the Coper- 
nican controversy, we can confront comparable 
scientific issues — still open — with open minds. 

Darwin, for example, finds in the astronomi- 
cal controversy a precedent to which he can 
appeal in the defense of natural selection against 
its adversaries. “The belief in the revolution of 
the earth on its own axis,” he writes, ‘ syas u^til 
lately not supported by any direct evidence, 
hut the absence of direct evidence does not 
leave a scientific theory without foundation, 

Darwin argues, if it has the power to explain 
several large classes of facts, which “it can 
hardly be supposed that a false theory would 
explain” in so satisfactory a manner. Darwin 
defends the theory of natural selection as having 
such power. To those who object that “this'is 
an unsafe method of arguing,” he replies— 
citing an e.xample from astronomy — that “it 
has often been used by the greatest natural 
philosophers.” 

The great books of astronomy most lucidly 
exhibit the essential pattern of that kind of nat- 
ural science which has, in modern times, come 
to be called “mathematical physics.” Though 
that phrase may be modern, the ancients recog- 
nized the special character of the sciences which 
apply mathematics to nature and which consult 
experience to choose among hypotheses arising 
from different mathematical formulations. 

Outlining a curriculum for liberal education, 
Plato, in the Republic, groups music and astron- 
omy along with arithmetic and geometry as 
mathematical arts or sciences. In that context 
he treats them as pure mathematics. Astronomy 
is no more concerned with the visible heavens 
than music is with audible tones. Music is 
rather the arithmetic of harmonies, astronomy 
the geometry of motions. But in the Timaeus 
Plato turns mathematical formulae and calcula- 
tions to use in telling what he calls “a likely 
story” concerning the formation and structure 
of the sensible world of becoming. Here rather 
than in the Republic we have, according to 
Whitehead, the initial conception of mathe- 
matical physics as well as deep insight into its 
nature and pattern. 

Aristotle criticizes the notion of astronomy 
as a purely mathematical science. Just as “the 
things of which optics and mathematical har- 
monies treat” cannot be divorced from the 
sensible, so the objects of astronomy are also 
the visible heavens. “Astronomical experience,” 
Aristotle writes, “supplies the principles of 
astronomical science.” Yet, though its subject 
matter is physical and its method is in part em- 
pirical, astronomy like optics and harmonics 
takes the form of mathematical demonstration; 
and it is for this reason that Aquinas later calls 
such disciplines “mi.xed and intermediate 
sciences.” 

96 THE GREAT IDEAS 

The development of astronomy from Plato 
and Aristotle through Ptolemy, Copernicus, 
and Kepler to Galileo and Newton thus con- 
stitutes an extraordinary set of “case histories” 
for the study of what J. B. Conant calls the 
“tactics and strategy” of science, and especially 
mathematical physics. But astronomy has one 
peculiar feature which distinguishes it from 
other branches of mathematical physics. It is 
empirical rather than experimental. The astron- 
omer does not control the phenomena he ob- 
serves. He does not, like the physicist, chemist, 
or physiologist, produce an isolated system of 
events by means of the laboratory arts. 

Harvey comments on this aspect of astron- 
omy when he proposes an experiment that will 
enable the physiologist to do what the astron- 
omer cannot do, namely, deliberately prepare 
phenomena for examination by the senses. The 
astronomer must be content with the appear- 
ances as they are given. Defending psycho- 
analysis against attack “on the ground that it 
admits of no experimental proof," Freud points 
out that his critics “might have raised the same 
objection against astronomy; experimentation 
with theheavenly bodies is, after all, exceedingly 
difficult. There one has to rely on observation.” 

Since the invention of the telescope, the 
astronomer has had instruments of all sorts to 
increase the range and accuracy of his observa- 
tions; but the fact that the place where he uses 
such apparatus is called an observatory rather 
than a laboratory indicates that these instru- 
ments do not make astronomy an experimental 
science. Nevertheless, as Bacon points out, the 
telescope enabled Galileo to do more than im- 
prove upon the accuracy of prior observations. 
It brought within the range of observation 
certain celestial phenomena, hitherto imper- 
ceptible to the naked eye, such as the phases of 
Venus, the satellites of Jupiter, and the con- 
stitution of the Milky Way. 

' Concerning the last of these, Pascal later re- 
marks that the ancients can be excused for the 
idea they had of the cause of its color. “The 
weakness' of their eyes not yet having been 
artificially helped, they attributed this color to 
the great solidity of this part of the sky”; but it 
tyould be inexcusable for us, he adds, “to retain 
the same thought now that, aided by the ad- 
vantages of the telescope, we have discovered 

in'the Milky Way an infinity of small stars whose 
more abundant splendor has made us recognize 
the real cause of this whiteness.” 

Because it is a mixed science, both empirical 
and mathematical, astronomy 'advances not 
only with the improvement and enlargement 
of observation, but also with new insights or 
developments in mathematics. Kant gives us 
striking examples of how the work of the pure 
mathematicians contributes to the advance of 
physics and astronomy. Their discoveries are 
often made without any knowledge of their ap- 
plication to natural phenomena. “They inves- 
tigated the properties of the parabola,” He 
writes, “in ignorance of the law of terrestrial 
gravitation which would have shown them its 
application to the trajectory of heavy bodies. 

. . . So again they investigated the properties of 
the ellipse without a suspicion that a gravitation 
was also discoverable in the celestial bodies, and 
without knowing the law that governs it as the 
distance from the point of attraction varies, and 
that makes the bodies describe this curve in free 
motion.” 

So amazing are such mathematical anticipa- 
tions that Kant thinks Plato may be pardoned 
for supposing that pure mathematics “could 
dispense with all experience” in discovering the 
constitution of things. Whether or not Plato 
goes to this extreme, he does, in the Republic, 
seem to suggest the reverse of Kant’s concep- 
tion of the relationship between mathematics 
and astronomy. “The spangled heavens should 
be used as a pattern,” he writes, “and with a 
view to that higher knowledge”— mathemat- 
ics. Astronomy should be used to instigate dis- 
coveries in pnre mathematics by suggesting good 
problems and by requiring formulations which 
transcend an interest in the truth about the 
heavens. 

This twofold relation bemeen mathematical 
discovery and empirical observation is pres- 
ent in the development of astronomy itself, and 
of all branches of mathematical physics. But 
there is another aspect of the relationship which 
must be taken into account if we are to consider 
the problem of truth in such sciences. The way 
in which mathematical formulations fit the 
phenomena measures the truth of rival hypoth- 
eses with respect to the same reality. 

Chapter S: ASTRONOMY 97 

The logic of such verification has already 
been suggested in the discussion of the geo- 
centric and heliocentric hypotheses. It is fur- 
ther considered in the chapter on Hypothesis. 
To be satisfactory, an hypothesis must— in the 
language used ever since Simplicius— “save the 
appearances,” that is, account for the relevant 
phenomena. But two hypotheses (as for e.Yam- 
ple the geocentric and heliocentric) may, at a 
certain time, do an equally good job of saving 
the appearances. Then the choice between them 
becomes a matter of the greater mathematical 
elegance of one than the other, 
r That, however, does not give the mathe- 
matically superior theor)' a greater claim to 
truth. So far as reality is concerned, it is onl)', 
in Plato’s words, “a likely story”; or as Aquinas 
points out with reference to the geocentric 
hypothesis, “the theory of eccentrics and epi- 
cycles is considered as established because there- 
by the sensible appearances of the heavenly 
movements can be explained; not however, as 
if this reason were sufficient, since some other 
theory might explain them.” 

Two hypotheses may be equally satisfactory 
for the range of phenomena they were both de- 
vised to fit. But only one of them may have the 
quite amazing virtue of fitting other sets of 
observations not originally thought to be re- 
lated to the phenomena for which the hypoth- 

esis was devised. The word “consilience” has 
been used to name the property of an hypoth- 
esis which, in addition to saving a limited field 
of appearances, succeeds in fitting many other 
phenomena which seem to have become related 
— to hsLVtjtimped together under its covering e.x- 
planation. The heliocentric hypothesis, as de- 
veloped by Newton’s laws of motion and theory 
of gravitation, certainly has this property of 
consilience to a high degree, for it covers both 
celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and a wide 
variety of the latter. 

Is the heliocentric hypothesis true then? If 
the truth of an hypothesis depends on the range 
of the phenomena it fits or saves, it might seem 
to be so, for by its consilience it accounts for 
phenomena that the Ptolemaic theory cannot 
handle. But though this may cause us to reject 
the unsuccessful hypothesis, does it establish 
beyond doubt the truth of the successful one? 
Or, to put the question another way, is not our 
judgment here a comparative one rather than 
absolute? Are we sa)ing more than that one 
hypothesis is more successful than another in 
doing what an hypothesis should do? Are we 
logically entitled to regard that success as the 
sign of its e.xclusive truth, or must we restrict 
ourselves to the more modest statement that, 
as the better hypothesis, it simply tells a more 
likely story about reality?


OUTLINE OF TOPICS 

1. The end, dignity, and utility of astronomy 99 

2. The method of astronomy 

2a. Observation and measurement: instruments and tables 

2 b. The use of hypotheses: the heliocentric and geocentric theories 100 

2C. The relation of astronomy to mathematics: the use of mathematics by astronomy 

3. Causes in astronomy 

3a. Formal archetypal causes: the number and the music of the spheres 
3b. Physical efficient causes: gravitation and action-at-a-distance 

4. The relation of astronomy to the other liberal arts and sciences, the place of astronomy 

in the educational curriculum 

5. Astronomy and cosmology; the theory of the world or universe as reflecting astronomi- 

cal conceptions 

6. Astronomy and theology: astronomy as affecting views of God, creation, the divine 

I plan, and the moral hierarchy 102 

7. Astronomy and the measurement of time: calendars and clocks; days and seasons 

8. The heavenly bodies in general 10:^ 

8a. The special character of matter in the supra-lunar spheres 
Zb. Soul and intellect in the heavenly bodies 

* 8c. Celestial motion: periodicity and the great year ’ 10,} 

(1) The eternity of celestial motion 

(2) The form of celestial motion: circles, the equant, ellipses 

(3) The laws of celestial motion: celestial mechanics 105 

Zd, The creation of the heavens 

p. The particular heavenly bodies 

pa. The sun: its position, distance, size, and mass 

p A Tlie moon : its irregularities 106 

pc. The planets: their eccentricities, retrogradations, and stations 
gd. The earth: its origin, position, shape, and motions 

pc. The fi.xed stars: the precession of the equinoxes 107 

pyi The comets and meteors 

10. The influence of the heavenly bodies upon terrestrial phenomena 

loa. The influence of the heavenly bodies on living matter: generation and corrup- 

' tion 108 

10b. The influence of the heavenly bodies on the tides 

11. The influence of the stars and planets upon the character and actions of men 

12. The worship of the earth, sun, moon, and stars lop 

13. The history of astronomy


REFERENCES

REFERENCES 

 

1. The end, dignity, and utility of astronomy 

Old Testament: Job, 38:4-38 

7 Plato: Symposium, lS6d / Gorgias, 254c / 
Republic, bk vti, 394d-396b / Timaeus, 447a- 
452b; 455b-c / Laws, bk vii, 728b-c; 729d- 
730d; bk xn, 797c-798b 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982*‘ii- 

17] SOOd; BK XI , CH 6 591b; bk 

XII, CH 8 lio73'’i-7] 603d 

9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5 
1644'’2i- 645“5] 168c-d 

10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 2 
9b-c 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-813a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-771] 
67d-71a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi, sect 27 306b 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 

14 Plutarch: Nicias, 435b-d 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6b; bk hi, 83a; 
bk IV, 135b; bk ix, 270b-273a; bk xin,429a-b 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, 505a-506a; S09a-b; bk i, 510a-511a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 846 a- 8 Sla: 852a- 
853a; 888b-890a; 929a-b; bk v, 961a-96Sa / 
Harmonies of the World, 1080a-b 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 29 650d-651c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 32, 
A I, REP 2 175d-178a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedv, paradise, ii [46-148] 
108b-109b;x [1-27] 120b-c 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-70c; 2I3d-215a; 
257d-259d 

31 Descartes: Meditations, 1 , 76c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii [1-202] 232a- 
236b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 18Ia-184b; 242 217b-218a 

34 Newton: Principles, la-2a 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part rii, 94b-103a passim 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 175b [fn i] / Practical 
Reason, 360d-361c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 120, 
136c 

48 Melville: MobyDic\, 365b-367a 

54 Freud: General Introduction, S62c / Civiliza- 
tion and Its Discontents, 779c / New Intro- 
ductory Lectures, 832a; 876b-d 

2. The method of astronomy 

2a. Observation and measurement: instru- 
ments and tables 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b/ Timaeus, 
455a-b 

THE GREAT. IDEAS ■ ^ lb to 2c 

(2. 'The method of astronomy, la. Observation and 
measnrement: instmments and tables,) 

8 Amstotle: Frior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 
[46“i 8-27] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13 
[78'’3i- 79“7] 108b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 
[27o'’i-24] 361C'362a; bk n, ch 4 [287'‘3i-'*i4J 
379a; ch n 383b; CH 12 [292’^-9] 383c / 
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 [io73''i7-io74‘'i7] 
604a-c 

9 Aristotle; Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i 
[639*’7-i 2] 161c-d 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 24b-26a; bk i-ih, 
29a-86b; bk in-iv, 93a-119b; bk iv-vm, 
123a-269a; bk ix, 273a-290b; bk ix-xin, 
296a-46Sb 

16 Copernicus : Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk ii-tit, 557b-626a; bk hi, 631b- 
652b; 657b-674b; bk iv-v, 680a-739b; bk v, 
744b-812a; bk vi, 818a-838a 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 907b-908b 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c'28c 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29, 651b-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, 
A I, REP 2 175d-178a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-105] 
108b-d 

22 Chaucer; Franklin's Tale [11,582-605] 360b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 267a-b 

24 Rabelais : Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk 1, 29c 
28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 320b 

30 Bacon; Novum Organum, bk i, aph 109, 
129b; BK II, APH 39, 170b-c; aph 45, 176a; 
APH 46, I78a-b 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk i [284-291] 99b; 
BK HI [588-590] 148a; bk v [261-263] 181a 

33 Pascal; Vacuum, 358a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, phenomena 272a- 
27Sa: PROP 41-42 342a-368b / Optics, bk i, 
412a-423b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 58-59 
424a- b 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 102a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-c 
48 Melville; Moby Dick, 365b-367a 
54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 815a 

2b. The use of hypotheses: the heliocentric and 
geocentric theories 

7 Plato; Phaedo, 241c-242b; 247c / Republic, 
BK VI, 386d-387d; bk vii, 39Sc-396b; bk x, 
438c-439a / Timaeus, 447b-d; 452a-b / Laws, 
bk xii, 797d-7g8a 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [27o*’i-24] 
361c-362a: bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a; ch 8 
38Ia-382a; cH ii [29i'’io]-cH 13 [293'’33] 
383b-38Sb; ch 14 [296“24-297®9] 387d-388c / 
Meteorology, bk i, ch 7 [344*5-9] 450b / 
Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 8 [i073’’i7-io74''i7] 
604a-c 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 3 234a-c 
11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckoner, 520a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [526-533] 
67d-68a; [720-730] 70c 
, 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 5Sa-b 
• 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b; 9a-12b; bk 
HI, 83a; 86b-93a; bk iv, 120a-122b; bk ix, 
270b-273a; 291a-296a; bk xni, 429a-b 
16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
■ ' Spheres, '505a-S06a; S07a-S08b; bk i, 513b- 
515b; S17b-521a; bk hi, 62ab-629a: 653b- 
656b; BK IV, 675b'678a; ,bk v, 740a-b 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk. iv, 852a-853a; 857b- 
860b; 887a-890a; 907b-916a; bk v, g64b; 
966a-967a / Harmonies’ of the World, 1014b- 
1016a ’ , ^ 

19 Aquinas: Summa fheologica, part i, q 32, 
A I, rep 2 175d-178a | 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 2S7d-261c; 276c 
28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk vi, 107c-116a 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk h, aph 5, 139a; 
APH 36, 165c-166b; APH 46, 178b'C; 'aph 48, 
186b-d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [552-587] 147b- 
148a: BK IV [589-597] 165a-b; bk viu [66-178] 
233b-236a esp [122-158] 234b-235b 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 165a /, Vacuum, 

368b-369a , 

34 Newton: Principles, bk ih, phenomenon hi 
273d-274a; cenerXl schol, 371b'372a 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 226b-227a • 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d [fn 2] 

43 Mill: Liberty, 284a-b 

49 Darwin : Origin of Species, 239c 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xih, S63a-b; 
epilogue h, 694d-696d 

2t;. The relation of astronomy to mathematics: 
the use of mathematics by astronomy 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b / 
Timaeus, 451b-c: 455b 

8 Aristotle; Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 13 
' ' [7S'’3*"79'**6] 108b-c / Physics, bk h, ch 2 

[I93''25-I94"ii] 270a-c / Heavens, bk h, ch 14 
[297“3-9] 388c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 
[997‘’i3-998“i9] S16b-d; bk xh, ch 8 [1673'’!- 
17] 603d-604a; bk xih, ch 3 [1078*^14] 609c 

9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk 1, ch i 

[639''6-I2] 161c-d ' 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 813d-814a 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a'6a; 14a-24b; 

26a-28b ^ 

16 Copernicus; Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, 507a-508a; bk i, SlOa-b; 532b' 
556b _ > ■ 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v,' 964b-965a; 9683- 
986b passim 

18 Augustine: Confessions^ rkv; par 3-6 27c-28c 
/ Christian Doctrine, bkTi, ch 29, 651b-c 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, 
A i] rep 2 175d-178a; part r-ii, o 35, a 8, 
ANs 779c-780c 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, partii-h, Q 9, 

A 2, REP 3 424b:425a ' 

3 to 5 Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 101 

-'SO Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 37b; 46b-c 
31 Descartes: lAeditations,a, 76c 
34 NE%VTON;'Fr/nr//?/ey, lR-2a; bk hi 269a-372a 
36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a passim 
42 I^nt: ^Practical Reason, 361c / Judgement, 
5'sia-S52a i 

3. Causes in, astronomy 

3tf. Formal archetypal causes: the number and 
' the music of the spheres 

7 Plato: Pliaedo, 241b-242b / Republic, bk vii, 

39Sd-396b; bk x, 438c-439a / Timaeus, 447a- 
452b ' • - 

8 Aristotle; Heavens, bk i, cHa-5 359d-364a; 
BK II, CH 1-12 37Sb,d-384c / Metaphysics, bk 
I, CH 5, [g85'’22-986''2i] S03d-S04b; ch 8 

; ■ [989’’29-99o“i 2] 508a-b; bk xn, ch 8 603b- 
605a - ; 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-814b 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk 1, 8a; bk ix, 270b 
16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Sphefes, BK I, 511b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 846a-847b; 857b- 
860b; 863b-887a passim; 913a-b; 915b-9I6a; 
925b-928a; 932a-933a I Harmonies of the 
World, 1016b-1018a; 1023b-1085b esp 1049b- 
1050b 

18 Augustine : Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c 
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, 1 [76-126] 
107a-c; xxviii [1-78] 148d-149c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk h, apk 48, 
185c-d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, takt i, appendix, 371d-372a 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity [i 17-140] 4b-5a / At 
a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Arcades [54-83] 26b- 
27a / Comus, [238-243] 38b / Paradise Lost, 
BK IV [660-688] 166b-167b; bk v [153-184] 
178b-179a; [616-627] 188b-189a; bk viii [15- 
168] 232b-235b ' 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general sckol, 
369b-370a 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9, 
454c-d 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 96b-97a 

47 Goethe: Faust, prologue [243-246] 7a 

3i. Physical efficient causes; gravitation and 
action-at-a-distance 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk h, ch 8 38Ia-382a; 
CH 12 [292'^26-293''i2j 384b-c / Meteorology, 
BK I, CH 4-8 447d-4S2d / Metaphysics, bk xii, 
CH 8 603b-605a esp [1073^17-1074“! 7] 604a-c 
12 Lucretius: Nature ofThingSj ek v [509~533i 
67d-68a 

16 Kepler; Epitome, bk iv, 89Sb-905a; 922a-b, 
935a-952a passim; 959a-960a: bk v, 965a-967a 
28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk vi 106a-121a,c 

30 Bacon; Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35"37 
162a-169c; aph 45 176a-177c; aph 48, 183b-c 

31 Descartes: ix, ISc/ Discourse, paktv, 
S5b-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [573-587] 148a; 
BK VIII [122-158] 234b-235b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop t-9 276a- 
284a esp prop 7 281b-282b; prop 35, sciiol 
320b-324a; general schol, 371b-372a / 
Optics, BK III, 531b; S40a-541b 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect 102-108 
432d-434a passim 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect r, div 9, 
4S4c-d 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a; 118b- 
119a 

42 Kant; Pure Reason, 8d [£n 2] 

. 45 Faraday; Researches in Electricity, 670a-673d; 
817a-b; 824a-b; 832b [fn i] 

51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, epilogue 11, 694c- 
69Sc 

4. The relation of astronomy to the other liberal 

arts and sciences: the place of astronomy 
in the educational curriculum 

7 Plato; Gorgias, 254b-c / Republic, bk vii, 
391b-398c esp 394d-396b / Laws, bk vii, 
728b-730d; bk xii, 797b-798b 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 2 [i93'’25- 
f94“ii] 270a-c / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 6 
[io63“io-i7] 591b; bk xii, ch 8 [io73’>i-7] 
603d 

11 Nicoemchus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-813d 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 

16 Ptolemy; Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, 510a-b 

18 Augustine : Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 29, 
6Slb-c 

20 Aquinas : Sunma Theologica, part ii-ii, q 9, 
A 2, REP 3 424b-425a 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part 1, 72a-d 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 
29c; bk II, 82c-d 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-70c; 257d-259d • 

30 Bacon : Nopkot Organum, bk i, aph 80 120a-b 

31 Descartes: Meditations, i, 76c 

5. Astronomy and cosmologj’: the theory of the 

world or universe as reflecting astro- 
nomical conceptions 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-452b; 45Sa-b 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 5 [2i2’’7-2r] 
291d-292a / Heavens 359a-40Sa,c / Meteor- 
ology, BK I, ch 1-3 445a-447d / Metaphysics, 
BK xn, CH 8 603b-605a 

11 Archimedes; Sand-Reckpner, 520a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [951-1113] 
12d-14d; bk ii [1048-1104] 28b-29a; bk vi 
[647-652] 89a 

14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilitts, 55a-b 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 10b 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, Sllb; 516a-529a esp S16a-517b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-8S7b; 882a- 
886b 

(5. Astronomy and cosmology; the theory of the 
world or universe as reflecting astronomical 
conceptions.) 

17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr i 3Sa-39d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, x [7-21] 
120b-c 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-56a 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk 11 [890-920] 130b- 
131a; [1010-1055] 133a-134a; bk hi [418-429] 
144b; [501-539] 146b-147a; [552-587] 147b- 
148a; bk vii [261-273] 222b-223a; [551-557] 
229a; [617-625] 230b; bk viii [66-178] 233b- 
236a; bk x [282-329] 280b-2Slb 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk iii, hypothesis i- 
PROP 12 28Sa-286a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
SECT 24 320c-d 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 360d-361a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue h, 
69Sc-d 

54 Freud: General Introduction, 562c 

6. Astronomy and theology: astronomy as 
affecting views of God, creation, the 
divine plan, and the moral hierarchy 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1:1-19/ Joshua, 10:12- 
13— (D) Josue, 10:12-13 / Job, 9:6-9; 38:1-38 
/ Psalms, 19:1-6; 147:4— (D) Psalms, 18:1-7; 
146:4 / Jeremiah, 33:22; 51:15— (D) Jeremias, 
33:22; 51:15 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 43— (D) OT, Ecclesi- 
asticus, 43 / Song of Three Children, 34-51— 
(D) OT, Daniel, 3 :56-73 

New Testament: 1 Corinthians, 15:40-41 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vn, 396a / Timaens, 
45Sb-c / Statesman, S86c-589c / Laws, bk vii, 
729d-730d; bk xn, 797d-798b 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk 11, ch 4 [i96®25-*’4] 
272d-273a; bk viii 334a-355d esp ch 4-6 
33Sd-346b, ch 10 353b-3S5d / Heavens, bk 
II, CH I 375b,d-376a / Metaphysics, bk xii, 
CH 6-8 601b-605a 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-814b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [55-771] 
61d-71a esp [55-234] 61d-64a; [1161-1217] 
76b-77a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi, sect 27 306b 

14 Plutarch: Nicias, 435b-c 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 295c 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk 1, 5a-6b passim 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, SlOa-Slla 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a; 915b- 
916a; 933a / Harmonies of the World, 1017b- 
1018a; 1025a-b; 1048a; 1061a; 1071b; 1080b- 
1085b 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a- 
41a; TR IX, cH 8-9 70a-72a / Fourth Ennead, 
TR HI, ch 17 150d-151b 

€ to J 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c- 
28c; BK xni, par 6-48 112a-124a / Christian 
Doctrine, bk 11, ch 16, 644d-645a; ch 29 
6S0d-651c 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 23, 
A 7, ANS and REP 2 138d-140a; q 50, a 3, ans 
and REP 3 272a-273b; q 58, a i 300c-301a; 
Q 63, A I, REP 2 32Sc-326c; a 7, ans 331c-332b: 
QQ 66-68 343d-359b; q 70 362c-367a; q 102, 
A 2, REP I S2Sa-526a; q iio, a i, rep 2-3 
564c-S6Sd; q 115, aa 3-6 S88c-592d 

20 Aqvivias: ' Summa Theologica, part in, q 5, 
A 2 736d-737c; part hi suppl, q 77, aa 1-3 
943a-947a; q 91, aa 2-3 1017c-1022c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [67-96] 
lOb-c; XXXIV [100-139] 52b-d; paradise, i 
[94-142] 107b-d; II [46-148] 108b-109b; iv 
[22-63] llOd-lllb; vni [16-39] 116d-117a; 
[91-148] 117d-118c; X [1-45] 120b-d; xin [52- 
84] 126a-b; xxii [124-154] 140d-141b; xxvii 
[97-120] 148b-c; xxvin 148d-150b 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-21Sa 

27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, 
sc III [85-101] 109a 

30 Bacon: Novum Orgamim, bk i, aph 89 124a-d 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, S4d-S6a 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [694-732] 150b- 
ISlb; bk v [153-184] 178b-179a; bk viii 
[66-178] 233b-236a esp [66-84] 233b-234a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 194, 207b; 
242 217b-218a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
369b-371a / Optics, bk hi, S42a-S43a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226a-b; 227b-c 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 360d-361a 

47 Goethe: Faust, prologue [243-266] 7a-b 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c-d 

SI Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 69Sd- 
696d 

54 Freud: General Introduction, 562c / New In- 
troductory Lectures, 832a; 876b-d 

7. Astronomy and the measurement of time: 
calendars and clocks; days and seasons 

Old Testament; Genesis, 1:4-5,14-18 / Isaiah, 
38:7-8; 60:19-21— (D) Isaias, 38:7-8; 60:19- 
21 / Jeremiah, 33:20,25— (D) Jeremias, 33:20, 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 43:6-8- (D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 43:6-8 

New Testament: Revelation, 21:23-24; 22:5— 
iP) Apocalypse, 21:23-24; 22:5 

5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [454-461] 
44c-d 

5 Aristophanes; Clouds [607-626] 496a-b 

6 Herodotus: History, bk 11, 49d-50a; 79c 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk v, 487d 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vn,394d-396b/ Timaeus, 
451a-d 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 14 [223'’i2- 
224“!] 303c-d / Metaphysics, bk x, ch i 
[i052’’34-i053“i2] 579b-c 

8 to U Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 103 

9 Aristotlx: Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 
10 [777 ’’i 6-778“9] 319d-320a,c 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [614-750] 
6ga-70d 

14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 58d-59c / Solon, 
74a / Caesar, 599d-600a 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk ii, 34b-38a; bk in, 
77a-86b; 104b-107a 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk 1 , 510b; bk ii, 568a-576a; bk hi, 
646a-652b; 672a-674b 

17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vh, ch 7-8 122d- 
T24 c; ch 11-13 126a-129a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 29-30 
9Sd-96c / City of God, bk xi, ch 6 32Sc-d; 
BK XII, CH 15 351b-352d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q io, 
A 6, ANS 45c-46d; q 67, a 4, ans and rep 2-3 
352a-354a; q 70, a 2, ans and rep 3,5 364b- 
365a 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 77, A 2, ANS 945a-946b: q 91, a 2, rep 1-3, 
5,8 1017c-1020c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i [ 37-45] Ib-c; 
PURGATORY, 1 [13-21] SSa-b; 11 [1-9I 54c; iv 
[55-84] 58a-b; ix (1-12] 65d-66a; xv [1-15] 
75b-c; XXV [1-9] 91b-c; xxvii [1-6] 94c; para- 
dise, I [38-48] 106c; X [28-33] t 2 Qc ; xxvii 
[97-tao] 148b-c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 267b 

24 Rabelais; Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 
69b,d-70a 

25 Montaigne; ErM4'r,497b-c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 
177c-178b 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk hi [40-44] 136b; 
[555-623] 147b-149a; [726-732] ISla; bk v 
[166-179] 179a; bk viii [66-84] 233b-234a; 
bk X [651-679] 288b-289a 

34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol, 9b- 
10a; BK III, PROP 20 291b-294b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, 
SECT 17-31 lS8a-162a 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229a 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Pall, 376a-b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 219a-b; 
251a-b 

8. The heavenly bodies in general 

8 a . The special character of matter in the 
supra-lunar spheres 

New Testament: I Corinthians, 15:40-41 

7 Plato; Phaedo, 247b-248c / Timoeus, 448a- 
449c; 451d-452a / Laws, bk xii, 797d-798a 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [27o‘‘i2-*’26J 
361b-362a; bk i, ch 9 [279“i2]-bk 11, ch i 
[ 284'>61 370b-376a; bk ii, ch 7 380c-d / Meta- 
physics, bk viii, ch 4 [io 44'’2-8] 569a-b; bk ix, 
CH 8 [io 50*’6-27] 576b-d,’BKxr,cH 6 [1063*10- 
17] 591b; bk xii, ch 2 [io69’’24-27] 598d-599a 

9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk r, ch 5 
[644’’2i-645*5] 168c-d 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 
6b-c; (1052-1094] 14a-c; bk v [534-563] 
68a-b 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a; 8b; lOb-llb; 
BK XIII, 429a-b 

16 Copernicus; Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, 517b-518a; 519b-520a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-857b; 888b- 
890b; 894a-b; 904b-90Sa; 919b; 929b-930b; 
931b-932a; 934b-935b 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr 1 35a-39d / 
Third Ennead, tr v, ch 6 103b-104a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part t, q io, 
A 5, ans 44b-4Sc; a 6, rep 2 45c-46d; q 46, 
A I, REP 2-3,5 250a-252d; Q 55, a 2, ans 
289d-290d; q 58, a i, ans 300c-301a; a 3, 
ANS 301d'302d; q 63, a i, rep 2 325c-326c; 
Q 66, A 2 345d-347b; q 68, a i, ans 3S4a-355c; 
Q 70, A 3, ANS and REP 2 36Sb-367a; q 75, a 6, 
ANS 383c-384c; q 84, a 3, rep i 443d-444d; 
Q 97, A I, ANS S13c-S14c; q 104, a i, rep 1,3 
534c-536c; q 115, a 3, ans S88c-S89c; q 119, 
A I, ans 604c-607b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, 
A 4, ANS 5a-6a; part hi, q 5, a 2, ans and rep 
3 736d-737c; part hi suppl, q 91, a 3, rep 3 
1020d-1022c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [28- 
30] 56a; paradise, ii [19-45] 108a; [112-148] 
109a-b; xxviii [r-78] 148d-149c , 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a; 257d-2S8b 

28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk vi, llOb-c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 13, 146c- 
147a 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 

34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, rule in 270b 
27Ia; prop 1-7 276a-282b esp prop 7 281b 
282b 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 

86 . Soul and intellect in the heavenly bodies 

7 Plato: Phaedrus, 12<ic-d / Apology, 204d-20Sa 
/ Timaeus, 449b-4S0c; 451d-452b / Philebus, 
6I8b-619c / Laws, bk x, 762b-76Sc esp 764a- 
765c; BK xii, 797c-798b 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 1-2 375b, d- 
377c; CH 12 383b-384c / Metaphysics, bk xii, 
CH 8 603b-605a / Sotil, bk i, ch 3 [4o6'’26- 
407*>i3} 636b-637b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [76-90] 
62a-b: [no-145] 62c-63a 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-738] 230b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 854b-856a; 890a- 
895b; 896a-897a; 9I4a-b; g30b; g32a-g33a; 
959a-960a / Harmonies of the World, 1080b- 
1085b esp 1083b-I085b 

17 Plotinus; Second Ennead, tr ii-hi 40a-50a / 
Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 3, 84b; tr iv, ch 6, 
99d; TR V, CH 6 103b-104a / Fourth Ennead, 
TRiv, CH 6-8 161b-162d; ch 22-27 168d*172a; 

104 ^ THE GREAT -IDEAS " 8czo8r(2) 

(8. The heavenly bodies in general. 8 h. Soul and 
intellect in the heavenly bodies.) 

CH 30 I74b-c; CH 35, 177c; cH 42 180d--18Ib; 
TR vm, CH 2, 202a 

18 Augcstine; City of God, bk vii, ch 6 248a-b 

19 Aquinas: Stiimna Theologica, part i, q 18 , 
A I, REP 1 104c-105c; Q 47, A 1, ANS 256a-257b; 
Q 50, A 3 272a-273b; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a- 
278c; Q 52, A 2 279b-280a; Q 66, a 2, ans 
345d-347b; q 70, a 3 36Sb-367a; q no, a 1, 
REP 2-3 564C'565d; a 3, ans 566d-S67b; q 
115, A 4, REP I 589d-590c; Q 117, a 4, rep r 
599b-d; PART i-ii, Q 6, A 5, REP 2 648b 649a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologies, part hi suppl, 
Q 79, A i, ANS 9Slb-9S3b; q 91, a 2, rep 10 
1017c-1020c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hele, vii [67-96J 
lOb-c; PARADISE, I [103-126] 107b-c; 11 [112- 
138) 109a; vin [16-39] D6d-117a; [97-114] 
118a; XIII (52-72] 126a; xxviii 148d-150b; 
XXIX [37-45] ISOc 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 38b; bk v, 104b- 
105d 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 482 258a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 

47 Goethe: Faust, prologue (243-270] 7a-b 

8 r, Celestial motion; periodicity and the great 
year 

7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 43Sc-439a / Tintaeus, 
45Ia-452b / Statesman, S86c-S87b / Laws, bk 
VII, 730a-c 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i-ir 3S9a-389d / 
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 603b-605a 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 3 [699*11]- 
CH 4 [700*5] 234a'23Sa 

12 Lucretius; Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 
67d-68a; [614-649] 69a-c 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 13 271b; 
BK XI, sect 27 306b 

16 Ptolemv: Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b; 12b-14a; bk 
IV, 109a-112b 

16 Copernicus : Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk 1, 513b-514b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 928a-933a 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a-41a 
/ Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 8, 162b-d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, pat 3-6 27c-28c 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29, 6Slb-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, 
A I, REP 2 175d-178a; Q 115, a 3, -ans 588c- 
589c 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, partii-ii, q 2, 

A 3, aNS 392d-393c ' < 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [112- 

148] 109a-b; xxvn I97-I20] 148b-c; xxviii 
[1-78] 148d-149c ' . ' 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, llOb-c 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
245b-d 

30 Bacon: WowuR Organum, bkii, aph 46, 177d; 
APH 48, 185c-dc . I . 

- 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [726-732] 151a; 
BK VII [339-386] 224b-225b 1 

34 Newton; Principles, bk it, prop 53, schol 

266a-267a 1 Li, 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, 
sect 19-22 158b-159d passim 

54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 779c 

[ r ^ e 4 

8 c(l) The eternity of celestial motion 

7 Plato; Timaeus, 447b-c; 450b-4Sla; 460c-d 

8 Aristotle ;P/i_yr/«,BK_vin,CH i-2 334a*337b; 
CH 8-9 348b-353b / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 
[269'’2-io],360c-d; ch 3 [27o*’i7-26] 361d- 
362a; ch 9 [279*i2-'’4] 370b-d; bk 11, ch i 
375b,d-376a; ch 6 379c-380c /, Metaphysics, 
BK IX, ch 8 [i050*’20-27] 576c-d; bk xii, ch 7 

- [1073*3-10] 603a-b; ch 8 [1073*26-38] '603c 

12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk v [55-70] 
61d-62a; [110-125] 62c-d; [235-246] 64a'b; 
{351-379] 6Sc-66a; [1209-1217} 76d-77a; bk 
VI [601-607] 88b 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 28 293d- 
294a 

16 Ptolemy: vfiwflgfrf, bk xiii, 429a-b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 846a-848b; 888b- 

891a i 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 3-5, 67b- 
68b; CH 7-8 69c-70d / Third Ennead, tr vii, 
ch 7-8 122d-124c: CH 11-13 126a-129a / 
Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 7-8 161d-162d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,'q jo, 

A 2, REP 2 41d-42c; a 4, ans 43b-44b; a 5, 
ans 44b-4Sc ,1 ,, t 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 77,'A 2, ans 945a-946b: Q 91, A 2 1017c-1020c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, . 11(73-81] 
107a 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,. aph 35, 
163a-b r ! ‘ 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop 10 284a- 
285a / Optics, bk hi, 540a-S41b 1 . 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b t. ' 

8 c( 2 ) The form of celestial motion: circles, the 
equant, ellipses o < ' 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b; bk x, 

438c-439a / Timaeus, 451a-452b / Laws, bk 
VII, 730a-d j ji- !•, i ,< ' i’.i- 

8 Aristotle: P/yriVr, bk vhi, ch 8-9 348b-353b 
/ Heaven!, bk r, CH'2-5 35'9d-364a; bk n,'CH4 
[287*2-31] 378c-379a; ch 5 379l5-c; ch 8 381a- 
382a: CH 12 [293*4-14] 384c / Metaphysics, bk 
xn, CH 6 [io7iB32]-cH 7 [1072*22] 601d-602b: 
CH 8 [io73’’i7-io74“i4] 604a-c 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b: bk hi, 83a; 
86b; BK V, 148b-lS7a; bk ix, 270b; 2913-2963 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of.nhe Heavenly 
• Spheres, r 507 a - S 68 a ; bk i, 513b-S14b; bk in, 
628b-62ga; bk iv, 675b-678a esp 677b-678a: 
BK v,'740a-b; 784b-78Sb 

8c(3) to 9a 

Chapter, 5: ASTRONOMY 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 888b-893b; 929a- 
933a; bk v, 968a'979b esp 975a-977b; 984b- 

, , 98SbV Harmonies of the World, 1018a-b ■ ;■ 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 8 39c-d 
19 Aquinas: Simma Theologica, part i, q 66 , 

A 2, ANS 345d-347b 

•20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, partiii suppl, 
Q 77, A 2, ANS 945a-946b ' 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk Vi, llOb-d 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
■-■'245b-d 

30 Bacon: Novum Organnm, bk ii, aph 48, 
, 186b-d . r , ' , 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [616-627] 188b- 
• , 189a 

33 Pascal: 72,'181a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk 1, prop ii 42b-43b; 
prop 17 48b-50a 

CH 19-21 332b-333d; cH 23 334c-335c; bk 
XII, ch 'i5 351b-352d -. 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 46, 
A r, REP 2-3,5 250a-252d; a 3, ans and rep r 
2S5a-d: q 66, a i, ^ans and rep to contrary 
343d-345c; a 3 347b-348d; a 4,- ans and rep 5 
348d-349d: q 67, a 4 3S2a-354a; q 68, a i 
, 354a-355c; q 70, aa i-2 362c-365a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [73-81] 10b; 

, -- paradise, vii [121-148] 116b-c; x [1-6] 120b; 
XXIX [13-45] ISOb-c 

28 Galileo; Two New Sciences, third day, 214d 

30 Bacon: Advancetnent of Learning, 17b-d 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54b-S6a 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [708-735] ISOb- 
151b; BK VII [192-386] 221b-225b; bk viii 
[15-178] 232b-236a 

34 Newton: Optics, bk in, 542a-S43a 

J?c(3) The laws of celestial motion: celestial 
.. . mechanics 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 888a-895b passim; 

. ' 8973-9073 passim, esp 897a, 904b-90Sa; 933a- 
952a passim; bk v, 975a-979b / Harmonies of 
. the World, lOISa-b; 1019b-1020b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 1-3 and schol 
32b-35b; prop 4, corol vi 36a; prop 11-13 
42b-46a esp prop ii 42b-43b; prop 15 46b- 
47a; prop 17 ,48b-50a; bk ii, prop 51-53 and 
schol 259a-267a: bk hi 269a-372a passim, esp 

■ • .RULE i-iii 270a-271a, phenomenon i-prop 7 
272a-282b, prop 13 286a-b, prop 35, schol 
• ■320b-324a) prop 40 337b-338a, general 
SCHOL, 369a, 371b-372a , 

35 Home: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9, 

' 454c-d 

• 42iI^NT: Pure Reason, 8d [£n 2] 

. 51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk xiii, 563b; 
EPILOGUE II, 694d-695c 

L 

Bd, The creation of the heavens 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1:1-8,14-19; 2:i.-4 / 
Nehemiah, g:6 — (D) 11 Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 26:7; 
’ 37-t8; 38 / Psalms, S:3-4;'i9:i: 89:11; 102:25; 

136:5-9; 148:1-6 — {D) Psalms, 8:4-5; 18:2; 
' 88:12; 101:26; 135:5-9; 148:1-6/ Proverbs, y.ig', 

■ 8:27 / Jeremiah, 31:35; 5 i‘i 5 ""C^) 

• 31:35; 51:15 /^OTDS, 5:8 ' 

• New Testament: Acts, 14:15; Mts, 

■ 14:14; 17:24 / Hebrews, 1:10 / U Peter, 3:5 / 
Revelation, 14:7 — (D) Apocalypse, 14:7 

7 Plato: TimaetjS, 4 S 0 c- 452 b 

8 Aristotle; Physics, bk viii, ch i [251 i 3 -t 9 l 
33 Sb / Heavens, bk i, ch 10-12 370 d- 375 d 

9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i 

[64i’?i3-29] 164c-d , si 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [416 5® i 

■ ■ '66c-67c; [i2b4-i'2i3] 76d' 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 4-11 
90a-92b; bk xii, par 2-9 99c-101c; par 14-4° 
102b-110a; bk xiii, par 6-48 112a-124a / Cuy 
of God, bk XI, ch 7 326a-c; ch 9 3266-3270; 

9< The particular heavenly bodies 

9a The sun: its position, distance, size, andmass 
Old Testament: Joshua, 10:12-14— (D) Josue, 
10:12-14 ! Psalms, 136:7-8— (D) Psalms, 
135:7-8 / Isaiah, 13:9-11; 30:26; 60:19-20 — 
(D) Isaias, 13:9-11; 30:26; 60:19-20 / Joel, 
2:10,31; 3:15 / Amos, 8:9 
Apocrypha: Ecclesiaslicus, 43:1-5— (D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 43 :i-5 

New Testament: Matthew, 24:29-30 / Mar^, 
13:24-25 / Li%, 23:44-45 
6 Herodotus: History, bk 11, 53d-54b; 79c; 
BK IV, 130d-131a 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 394c 

7 Plato: Cratylus, 98a / Apology, 204d-205a / 
Republic, BK VI, 385c-385c / fimaeus, 4Slb-d 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, oh 7 [289“26-35] 
380d; ch 12 [zgi^zg-zgz^zy] 383c-384b; ch 13 
[293''34-294“i2] 385c Meteorology, bk i, ch 8 

. ■l345’’t-9] 451c-d . 'f 

11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckpner, S20a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [564-574] 
68b-c; [592-704] 68d-70b; [751-771] 70d-71a 

14 Plutarch: Pericles, 138d 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk hi 77a-107a; bk v, 
171b-182b; bk vi, 21Sa-222b 
16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, 520b-S29a; bk hi, 646a-674b; 
BK iv„710b-714a; 716a;73Ia 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 854b-856a; 8S7b- 
860b; 873a-876a; 882a-883b; 885b-886b; 
89Sb-905a; 907b-916a passim / Harmonies of 
the World, 1014b-1016a; 1080b-1085b 

18 Augustine; City of God, bk hi, ch 15, 176d- 
177a 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, a i, 
REP 5 362c;364b; q 119, a i, ans 604c-607b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 91, A I, REP 1 1016b-1017c; a 2 1017c-1020c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv [55- 

• 84] 58a-b; .paradise, i [ 38-63] 106c-d; x 

[1-48] 120b-d 

THE GREAT IDEAS 9b to 9d 

(9. The particular heavenly bodies. 9a, The sun: 
its position, distance, size, and mass.) 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 257d-258b 

28 GiLBERr; Loadstone, bk vi, n2d-n3a 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, BK 11, ai>h 36, 
165c-166b 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-S6a pas- 
sim ! Objections and Replies, 231a; 233c 

32 Mi - LTott : Paradise Lost, bk hi [555-623) 147b- 
149a; bk iv [539-543] 164a; bk vn [354-373] 
224b-225a; bk vih [66-168} 233b-23Sb 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 72, 181a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk 1, prop 66 118a-128b; 
BK m, phenomenon 111 273d'274a; prop 2 
276a-b; hypothesis i~prop 12 285a-286a; 
prop 25 299b-300b; prop 36 324a-b: prop 40 
337b-338a / Optics, bk in, 518a-b 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part 111, 98a-b 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 819 d 

9b. The moon: its irregularities 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1:14-18 / Psalms, 
136:7-9— (D) Psalms, 135:7-9 / Isaiah, 13:9- 
ii; 30:26; 60:19-20— (£)) Isatas, 13:9-11; 
30:26: 60:19-20 / Joel, 2:10,31; 3:15 

Apocrypha: Eccksiasticus, 43:6-8— (D) OT, 
Ecclestasttcus, 43 :6-9 

New Testament: Matthew, 24:29-30 / Marf{, 

13:24-25 

7 Plato: Cratylus, 98a-b / Apology, 204d-20Sa 
/ Timaeus, 4Slb-d 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk n, ch ii { 29 i’’i 8-23] 
383b; CH 12 [29i^2g-292'’27] 383c-384b; ch 14 
[29T*’2i-3i] 389b-c 

12 Lucretids; Nature of Things, bk v [471-479] 
67b; [575-584I 68c', [629-649] 69b-c; [705- 
771] 70b-71a 

14 Plutarch: Solon, 74a / Aemilitts Pattlus, 
220d-221b / Nictas, 435b-d / Dion, 789b- 
790a 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk iv~vi I08a-222b 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk iv 67Sa-731a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 876a-878a; 918a- 
928a; 9S2a-960a 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr in, ch 5, 43d- 
44a 

19 Aquinas: Snmma Tkeologica, part i, q 70, 
a I, REP 5 362c-364b 

21 Dante: Divme Comedy, paradise, n [46-148] 
108b-109b 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 
188c 

26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, Korc ii, sc ii 
(107-110] 2gSb / Midsummer-Night’s Dream, 
act II, sc I [103-114] 357a-b 

3 p Bacon: Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 36, 
I67a-b 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk ii [662-666] 12Sb; 
BK m [708-735} 150b-151b; bk v {257-266] 
180b-I81a; bk vii [346-386] 224b-225b; bk 

vin [122-158] 234b-235b / Samson Agonistes 
[86-89] 341b _ 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 164a / Pensees, 18 
174b-17Sa; 817, 330b 

34 Newton : Principles, bk i, prop 43-45 92b- 
101a; prop 66 ll8a-128bVBK m, phenomenon 
VI 27Sa; prop 3-4 and schol 276b-278b; 
PROP 22-38 294b-329a 

34 Huygens: CH I, 5S4b-5SSa 

9c. The planets; their eccentricities, retrogra- 
dations, and stations 

7 Plato; Republic, bk x, 438c-439a / Timaeus, 
451a-d 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 2 [285''28-33) 
377b-c; ch 7-12 380c'384c / Metaphysics, bk 
XII, CH 8 603b-60Sa 

16 Ptolemy; Almagest, bk ix~xiii 270a-465b 
16 Copernicus; Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk 1, S21b-S29a; bK v-vi 732a-838a 

16 Kepler; Epitome, bk iv, 860b-872b; 878b- 
882a; 888b-905a; 907b-910a; 928a-952a pas- 
sim: bk V 961a-1004a / Harmonies of the 
World, 1015b-1080b 

17 Plotinus; Second Ennead, tr ni, ch 5, 44a 
19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, 

A I, REP 2 17Sd-178a 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, paradise, ii {46-148] 
108b-109b; x [1-27] 120b-c; xxii [124-154] 
140d-141b 

24 Rabelais; Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 
29c 

30 Bacon; Novum Organum, bk n, aph 36, 
165c-166b 

31 Descartes; Discourse, part v, 54d-S6a'pas- 
sim 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk 111 {481-483] 146a; 
[573-5871 148a; bk v [166-170] 179a; [618-627] 
188b'189a; bk vn {557-564] 229a-b; bk vni 
[122-152] 234b-235b; bk ix [48-51] 248b; bk 
X [657-661] 288b 

33 Pascal; Vacuum, 368b-369a 

34 Newton; Principles, bk i, prop 1-3 and 
schol 32b-3Sb; prop 4, corolvi 36a; prop 
II 42b'43b; prop 15 46b-47a; prop 17 48b- 
50a; PROP 57-63 lllb-llSa; prop 65-69 
ll6b-130b; bk in, phenomenon i-v 272a- 
275a; prop 1-2 276a-b; prop 5-6 278b- 
281b; PROP 8-10 282b-285a; prop 13-19 286a- 
291b 

34 Huygens: Lrg/it, CH 1, 5S6a-S57b ■■ 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part nr, 102a ■ 

36 Sterne; Tristram Shandy, 227a 
45 'Fourier; Theory of Heat, 171b 
45 Faraday’ : Researches in Electricity, 632b 
Si Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk xin, 563b 

9d. The earth: its origin, position, shape, and 
motions 

Old Testament; Genesis, i:i-io / Job, iS : 4-7 / 
Psalms, 90:2; 102:25; 119:90— (D) Psalms, 
89:2; 101:26; 118:90 /Prorer^T, 3:19; 8:23-29/ 

9eio 10 CHAPTERS: ASTRONOMY 107 

Isaiah, 45:12; 48:13— (D) Isaias, 45:12; 48:13 
f Jeremiah, 51:15— (D) Jeremias, 51:15 

New Testament: Hebrews, 1:10 

7 Plato: Vhaedo, 241b-242b; 247b-c/ Timaeus, 
4S2a-b 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 13-14 384d' 
389d 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, CH3 [699*27]- 
CH 4 [699'^29] 234b-235a 

11 Ari.'himedes: Sand-Rechpner, 520a'b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [416-508] 
66C''j7c; [534-563] 68a-b 

14 Plutarch: Numa Pompiliiis, 55a-b 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 8 b- 12 b; bk ii, 40a- 
44b 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, 511b-513a; S14b-521a; S29a- 
532a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 8S4a-b; 873a-876a; 
911b-928a 

17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 26-27 
171b-172a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 23b-25d; bk vi 
106a-121a,c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
16Sc-166b 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-S6a pas- 
sim 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [ 702 - 734 ] ISOb- 
ISlb; bk IV [ 996 - 1004 ] 174a; bk v [577-579] 
187b-188a; bk vii [ 216 - 337 ] 221b-224b; bk 
VIII [ 15 - 38 ] 232b-233a; [ 66 - 168 ] 233b'235b; 
BKix [ 99 - 118 ] 249b'250a; bk x [ 668 - 678 ] 289a 

33 Pascal; Provincial Letters, 16Sa / Pensees, 72 , 
181a / Vacuum, 368b-369a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 66, corol 
XXH 127b'128b; bk hi, prop 18-21 288b-294b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 58 
424a-b 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 819d 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xhi, S63b; 
EPILOGUE II, 695d-696d 

9e. The fixed stars: the precession of the equi- 
noxes 

Old Testament; Genesis, 1:14-18 / Psalms, 
i36:7-9-(D) Psalms, 135:7-9 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 43:9-10 — \ U ) Ul, 
Ecclesiasticus, 43:9-11 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 4Sld'452a 

8 Aristotle; Heavens, bk ii, ch 7-12 380c- 
384c ! Meteorology, bk i, ch 8 [345*’i-9l 451c-d 

11 Archimedes: Sand-Rechpner, S20a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533I 
67d-68a; [585-591] 68d 

14 Plutarch: Lysander, 358d-3S9c 

16 Ptolemy; Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b; bk hi, 77a- 
b; BK vii-viii 223a-269a 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, S17b'S20b; bk ii, S85b-621b; 
bk hi, 622a-652b esp 622a'646a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 882a-887a; 887b- 
888a; 918a 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, 
A I, REP 5 362c-364b 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-148] 
108b-109b 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 
29c; BK II, 69d-70a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 107C'116a; 117c- 
121a,c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 165c- 
166b: aph 48 , 18Sc-d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [481-483] 146a; 
BK IV [641-676] 166b-167a; bk vii [346-352] 
224b; bk viii [15-38] 232b-233a; bk x [651- 
667] 288b-289a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 66, corol 
xx-xxi 126b-127b; bk hi, prop 21 294b; 
lemma i-prop 39 329a-333a / Optics, bk i, 
419a-b 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 102a 

9 /. The comets and meteors 

8 Aristotle: Meteorology, bk i, ch 4 447d- 
448d; ch 6-8 449b-452d 

14 Plutarch: Lysander, 358d-359c 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 8 S 6 b 

21 Dakte: Divine Comedy, paradise, xv [13-24] 
128c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 30 
159c'd; APH 35 , 163a-b; aph 36 , 166a'b 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [ 535 - 537 ] lOSa; 
[ 742 - 746 ] 109b; BK II [ 706 - 711 ] 126b; bk iv 
[ 555 - 560 ] 164b; BK XII [ 632 - 644 ] 333a 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, lemma 4-PR0P 42 
333a-368b; general schol, 369a 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b; 102 b 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 68c-69a; 615a'b 
[n 74-81] 

51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk viii, 340 d- 
341 a, c 

10 . The influence of the heavenly bodies upon 
terrestrial phenomena 

6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 79c 

7 Plato: Theaetetus, S18b / Statesman, 586c- 
589c 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [279*22-30] 
370 c; BK II, CH 3 377 c- 378 a / Meteorology, 
BK I, CH 2 445 b-d / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6 
[1072*9-18] 602 a 

10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 1-7 
9a-12a passim; par lo-ii 13b-14b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18 , 
A I, REP 1 104c-105c; Q 19 , A 6, ANS 113c-114d; 
Q 65 , A 4 , REP 3 342b-343c; q 67 , a 3 3Slb- 
352a; q 82 , a 4 , ans 434c-435c: q 86 , a 4 , 
REP 2-3 463d-464d: q 103 , a 5 , rep i 531b- 
532b; Q no, a i, rep 2-3 564c-565d; q 115 , 
AA 3-6 S88c-592d; q 116 , a i, ans 592d- 
593d 

THE GREAT IDEAS , lOa to II 

I 

(10. Tie influence of the heavenly bodies upon 
terrestrial phenomenal) 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part in suppl, 
Q 76, A I, REP 2 939d-941a: q 77, A i, ans 
943a'944d; q 86, a 2, ans and rep r-2 993c- 
994d; Q 91, A 1, REP I 1016b-1017c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [112- 
148] 109a-b; vii (121-141] 116b-c; viii [97-114] 
nSa; X [1-27] 120b-c; xin [52-78] 126a-b 

22 Chaucer: Miller's Tale [^187-3212] 212b- 
213 a; [3513-3533] 218 a 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 
72c 

27 Shakespeare: Troihis and Cressida, act i, 
sc HI [85-101] 109a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 14a 

32 Milton: Arcades [61-73] 26b / Paradise Lost, 
BK in [606-612] 148b; bk iv [660-688] 166b- 
167b; BK viii [85-106] 234a-b; bk x [641-719] 
288b-290a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 18 174b-175a 

36 Swift. Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b 

41 Gibbo.n; Decline and Fall, 226b 

Ida, The influence of the heavenly bodies on 
living matter: generation and corruption 

7 Plato: Craiylus, 98a / Theaetetus, SlSb 

8 Aristotle. Physics, bk ii, ch 2 [i94’'i3] 271a 
/ Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [279*22-30) 370c; bk 11, 
CH 3 377c-378a / Generation and Corruption, 
BK II, CH 10 437d-439c / Metaphysics, bk xii, 
CH 5 [1071*12-17] 600c; CH 6 [1072*9-18] 602a 

9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 5 
[680*30-35] 210d / Generation of Animals, bk 
I, CH 2 [716*15-20] 256b; bk ii, ch 3 [736*’3o- 
737*5] 277c-d; CH 4 [738*9-25] 278d-279a; bk 
IV, CH 2 [767*2-9] 308b; ch 10 [777'’i5-778“io] 
319d-320a,c 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [76-81J 
62a 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 25, 
A 2, REP 2 144c-145b: Q 70, A I, REP 4 362c- 
364b; A 3, REP 3 365b-367a: q 71, a i, rep i 
367a-368b: q 82, a 4, ans 434c-43Sc; q 86, 
a 4, REP 2-3 463d-464d; q 91, a 2, rep 2 
485b-486b; q 92, a i, ans 488d-489d; q 105, 
A I, REP 1 538d-S39c; Q 115, a 3 S88c-S89c; a 5, 
REP I S90d-591c; q 118, a i, rep 3 600a-601c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ir, q 60, 
A r, ANS 49d'50c; part hi suppl, q 76, a i, 
REP 2 939d-941a; q 84, a 2, rep 3 984c-985d; 
Q 86, A 2, ANS and rep 1-2 993c-994d; q 91, 
A I, REP 1 1016b-1017c; a 2, ans and rep 1,4 
1017c-l020c; a 3, rep 2 1020d-1022c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii (121- 

. 141] 116b-c; X [7-21] 120b-c; xiii [52-78] 

126a-b 

22 Chaucer; FranJfin’s Tale [11,343-347] 356b 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 105a-b 

28 Harvey; On Animal Generation, 416a; 427b- 
d; 428c-429a 

29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 340b 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk n, aph ii, 
140d-141a; aph 12, 141d; aph 35, 162b-c 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk iv [634-688J 166a- 
167b; BK vni [66-178] 233b-236a esp [90-97] 
234a; bk<ix [99-113] 249b , 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 18 174b-17Sa 

49 Darwin; Descent of Man, 256c 

XOb. The influence of the heavenly bodies on 
the tides 

6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 53d-S4b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 9I9b 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 105, 
A 6, REP I 543b-544a; q no, a 3, rep i 566d- 
S67b 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2, 
A 3, ans 392d-393c 

22 Chaucer: Franklin's Tale [11,355-388] 356b- 
3S7a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk 11, 47a-b; bk vi, 
n3a 

30 Bacon; Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
I64b-165c; aph 45, 176b; aph 46, 17Sc 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55c 

33 Pascal: PensSes, 817, 330b 

34 Newton: Prmaples, bk i , prop 66, corol 
xvin-xix 126a-b; bk 111, prop 24 296a-299b; 
PROP 36-37 324a-328b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 104 
433a-b 

11. The influence of the stars and planets upon 
the character and actions of men 

Old Testament: Isaiah, 47:13— (D) /raw, 47:13 
/ Jeremiah, 10:2— (D) Jeremias, 10:2 

Apocrypha: Baruch, 6:60-69— (D) OT, Baruch, 
6;6o-68 

6 Herodotus; History, bk ii, 65b; bk vii, 
223b-c; bk ix, 289d-290a 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk vii, 
S52a-c 

14 Plutarch: Romulus, 26\3-cJ Nicias, 435b-d/ 
Dion, 789b-790a 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 9a-b; 9d; bk iv, 79b,* 
BK VI, 9la-d / Histories, bk i, 19Sb-c*, bk v, 
295c 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi 42a-50a / 
Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2 78d-79b; ch 5-6 
80a-81b; tr ii, ch 10 88a-b / Fourth Ennead, 
TR IV, ch 30-45 I74fa-183a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 4-6 20a-d; 
BK VII, par 8-10 45d'47a / City of God, bk m, 
ch 15, 176d-l77a; bk v, ch 1-7 207d-212c / 
Christian Doctrine, bk n, ch 21-23 647a-648d 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, 
A 2, rep 1 364b-365a; Q 86, a 4, rep 2-3 463d- 
464d; Q 96, A 3, ans S12a-c; q 115, a 4 S89d- 
590c; A 5, REP I S90d-591c; q n6, a i, ans 
592d-593d; part i-h, Q 9, a 5 660d-662a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [67-96] 
lOb-c; PURGATORY, XVI [52-84] 77b-d; para- 

12 to 13 

DisE, IV [49-63] mb; VIII [1-12] 116 d; [91- 
148] 117 d' 118 c; xiii [52-78] 126 a-b; xxu [112- 
123] 140 d 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2438-2482] 200a-b 
/ Tale of- Man of Law [4610-4623] 237 b; 
[4715-4735] 239 b- 240 a / Wife of Bath’s Pro- 
logue [6187-6202] 266 a 

24 JRabelais:> and Pantagruel, bk 1, 

66 b- 67 d; bk ii,‘ 69 b,d- 70 d; bK'IIi, 136 c' 137 c; 
176 a-b; bk iv, 267 c-d 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 18d-20d; 213d-21Sa; 
246d-247c 

26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc 11 
[139-141] 570 d 

27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act 1, sc 1 [113-125] 
30 d- 31 a / Othello, act v, sc ii [105-111] 240 b 
/ King Lear, act 1, sc ii [112-166] 249 a'c; 
ACT IV, sc III [34-37] 272 a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk hi, 73 a 

29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 94 c; part 
II, 222 c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 14 b-c; 54 c- 
55 a 

32 Milton: Christs 'Nativity [125-140] 4 b- 5 a / 
Arcades [61-73] 26 b / Comus [93-144] 35 b- 36 b 
/ Paradise Lost, bk i [594-599] 106 b; bk viii 
(511-514] 243 b; bk x [657-661] 288 b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 173 203b-204a 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98 a-b 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 194b-19Sa; 332a- 

' 334 b; 407 b- 408 b 

47 Goethe: Faust, part h [4947~497^] 122b- 
123a; (6667-6670] 163b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 340 d- 
341 a, c 

12. The worship of the earth, sun, moon, and 
stars 

Old Testament: Genesis, 37:9-10 / Deuteron- 
omy, 4:19; 17:3 / 11 Ktngs, 23:4-5,11— ( 7 ?) 
IV Kings, 23:4-5,11 ! Jeremiah, 8:1-2; 10:2 — 
(D) Jeremias, 8:1-2; 10:2 / Ezekiel, 8:16 — {D) 

' Ezechiel, 8:16 / Zephaniah, 1:4-5 — {D) Soph- 
onias, 1:4-5 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 13:1-9 — (77) 
OT, Book^of Wisdom, 13:1-9 / Baruch, 6:60- 

' 69-(Z)) OT, Baruch, 6:60-68 

5 Sophocles: Antigone [332-340] 134 a 

5 Euripides: Orestes [1625-1693] 410 b-d 

5 Aristophanes: Clouds [563-626] 495c-496b 
/ Peace [406-416] 530d 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 31 a-b; 48 c; bk 
vii, 226 c 

7 Plato: Apology, 204d-20Sa / Laws, bk vii, 
728b-730d; bk xh, 797b'798b 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 8 [1074 i- 
14] 604 d- 605 a 

9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 2 

[7i6“i5-2o] 256 b „ , 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 11 [581-660J 
22b-23b; bk v [396-411] 66b; [821-836] 71d- 
72a 

14 Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 220d'221b 

15 Tacitus; Annals, bk xv, 176 a 

16 KzPLZKU’Harmonies of the World, 1080b- 

1085b . I, 

17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch' 24-26 
170b-l71d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q ii, 
A 3, REP i 49a-c; q 67, a 4, ans 352a-354a; 
Q 115, A 3, REP I 588c-S89c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv [49-63] 

mb; viii [1-12] 116d '■ 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2209-2482] 196b- 
200b / Franljin's Tale [11,339-393] 356b-357a 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 246 d- 247 c 

27 Shakespeare; Antony and Cleopatra, act iv, 
sc IX [5-18] 340c-d , , ^ 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 94 
431 b-c 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 59 c- 60 a; 81 d; 93 b- 

d; 346 d- 347 a ' 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 226 a-b; 227 c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 238d- 
239a; 2S2a-c 

47 Goethe; Faust, part ii [7900-7950] 192b- 

193b; [8034-8043] 19Sb; [8078-8081] 196b; 
[8285-8302] 202a ' 

13. The history of astronomy 

5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [442-461] 
44c-d 

6 Herodotus: /7;Vtoiy, bk ii, 49d-50a;‘6Sb; 79c 

7 pLhw.Phaedrus, 12Zc-d / Apology, 20kd-205a 
/ Statesman, 586c-S89c / Laws, bk vii, 728b- 
730d; BK XII, 797b-798b 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [270^12-26] 
361d-362a; ch 10 370d'371d; bk h, ch 1-2 
37Sb,d-377c; ch 12 [292**6-9] 383c; 'ch 13 
384d-387d / Meteorology, bk i, ch 6 449b- 
4S0b; ch 8 451b-452d: bk ir, ch i [354“27-32] 
460b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982’’ii-i7] 
500d; bk xh, ch 8 603b-605a 

11 Archimedes: Sand-Rechpner, 520 a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [726-730] 
70c 

14 Plutarch: Romulus, 20b-c / Numa Pompi- 
lius, 55a-b / Solon, 74a / Pericles, ,138d 
/ Aemilius Paulus, 220d-221b / Lysander, 
358d-359c / Nicias, 435b-d 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk hi, 77a-83a; bk iv, 
109a-110b; BK VII, 223a-232b passim; bk ix, 
272a-b 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, 508a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 861b-863a: 888b- 
891b; 907b-910a; 929a-933a passim: 9S5a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27 c- 
28 c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, 

A I, REP 2 175 d- 178 a 

22 Chaucer: MiV/ijrVTd/c [3187-3212] 212 b- 213 a 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 
69d-70a 

THE GREAT IDEAS -13 

(13. The history of astronomy 
25 Montaigne: E«fl)%2S7d'2S8b 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 107c-d; 117c-d; 
118d-119c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 24d / No- 
■ vtitn Orgamirn, bk i, aph 8o I 20 a-b: aph 89 
124a-d; bk 11 , aph 36 , 165c-167b 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [ 284 - 291 ] 99b; 
BK V [ 261 - 263 ] 181a; BK VIII [ 66 - 168 ] 233b- 
235b I Areopagiiica, 400a 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 165a / Vacuum, 
3S8a:368b-369a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 58 
424a-b; sect 104 433a-b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9, 
4S4c-d 

36 Sterne; Tristram Shandy, 227a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 68c-69a; 226b; 
299b-c; 664d [n 55-56] 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d [fn 2]; 175b [fn i] / 
Practical Reason, 361b-c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, parti, 219a-b; 
2Sla-b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 340d- 
341a, c; bk xiii, 563b; epilogue ii, 694d-696d


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For: The discussion of related disciplines, see Mathematics; Mechanics; Physics, 

The consideration of mathematical physics, see Mathematics 5b; Mechanics 3; Physics 
ib, 3; Science 5c. 

Other treatments of observation and measurement in natural science, Tee Experience 5-5C; 

Mechanics 2a; Physics 3, 4a, 4d; Quantity 6-6c; Science 5a~5b; Sense 5. 

The logic of hypotheses and their verification in scientific method, see Hypothesis 4b-4d; 
Physics 4b; Principle 30(2) ; Science 56. 

The general consideration of scientific method, see Logic 4b; Reasoning 6c; Science 
5-5e- , 

The distinction between formal and efficient causes, see Cause la; and for the role of causes 
and causal explanation in natural science, see Cause 5b; Nature 3c; Physics 2b; 
Science 4c. 

The consideration of certain mathematical forms used in astronomy, see Quantity sb(i)- 
3b(2), 3e(2). 

Other discussions of celestial and terrestrial mechanics, see Mechanics 4a, 5f-5f(2), 6c. 
The theory of gravitation and the problem of action-at-a-distance, see Mechanics 6d(i)- 
6d(2); Space 2c. 

The issues concerning matter and soul or intellect in relation to the heavenly bodies, see 
Angel 2a; Matter ib; Soul la; World 6a. 

Other discussions of the measurement of time, see Quantity 5b; Time 4. 

The interpretation of celestial phenomena in divination and augury, see Language 10; 

Prophecy 3b; Sign and Symbol 5b. 

Criticisms of astrology, see Religion 6a. 

The cosmological and theological implications of astronomy, see Angel 2a; Change I3“i4; 
Eternity 2; Infinity 3d-3e; Space 3a; Time 2b; World 4a, 40, 5, 7.
