CHAPTER: God

INTRODUCTION

GOD 

INTRODUCTION 

W ITH the exception of certain mathema- 
ticians and physicists, all the authors of 
the great books are represented in this chapter. 
In sheer quantity of references, as well as in 
variety, it is the largest chapter. The reason is 
obvious. More consequences for thought and 
action follow from the affirmation or denial of 
God than from answering any other basic ques- 
tion. They follow for those who regard the 
question as answerable only by faith or only by 
reason, and even for those who insist upon 
suspending judgment entirely. 

In addition to the primary question of God’s 
existence, there are all the problems of the 
divine nature and of the relation of the world 
and man to the gods or God. The solutions of 
these problems cannot help influencing man’s 
conception of the world in which he lives, the 
position that he occupies in it, and the life to 
which he is called. 

The whole tenor of human life is certainly 
affected by whether men regard themselves as 
the supreme beings in the universe or acknowl- 
edge a superior— a superhuman being whom 
they conceive as an object of fear or love, a 
force to be defied or a Lord to be obeyed. 
Among those who acknowledge a divinity, it 
matters greatly whether the divine is repre- 
sented merely by the concept of God— the 
object of philosophical speculation or by 
the living God whom men worship in all the 
acts of piety which comprise the rituals of re- 
ligion. 

The most radical differences in man’s concep- 
tion of his own nature follow from the exclusion 
of divinity as its source or model on the one 
hand, and from the various ways in which man 
is seen as participating in divinity on the other. 
Many fundamental themes and issues are there- 
fore common to this chapter and to the chapter 
on Man. 

Some of the topics in this chapter are pri- 
marily philosophical. They belong to the sub- 
ject matter of rational speculation or poetic 
imagination in all the great epochs of our cul- 
ture, regardless of differences in religious be- 
lief. Other topics, however, are peculiarly re- 
stricted to matters of faith or religion. With 
respect to such matters, dogmatic differences, 
or differences in articles of faith, must be ex- 
plicitly recognized. 

The materials here assembled must therefore, 
in some instances, be divided according to their 
origin from pagan or from Jewish and Christian 
sources. Though no great books from the Mo- 
hammedan tradition are included in this set, 
the fact that Gibbon discusses the Moslem 
faith and compares its teachings with those of 
Judaism and Christianity explains the inclusion 
of Mohammedanism in one group of topics. 
That is the group which deals with the doc- 
trines common to these three religions, as dis- 
tinguished from the tenets on which Judaism 
and Christianity differ dogmatically. The ex- 
istence of certain common beliefs in the west- 
ern tradition enables us to begin, as it seems 
advisable to do, with the conception of God 
that is shared by the living religions of western 
culture today. 

In our civilization, what is denied by an 
atheist who says there is no God ? Not idols or 
images which men may seek to placate. Not 
philosophical constructions or mythological fig- 
ures. Certainly not the universe itself, either as 
an infinite and everlasting whole, or as finite 
and temporal, but equally mysterious in its ul- 
timate incomprehensibility to the human mind. 
In our civilization, the atheist denies the ex- 
istence of a supernatural being, the object of 
religious belief and worship among Jews, Chris- 
tians, and Mohammedans. He denies the single, 
personal God Who created the world out of 

544 THE GREAT IDEAS 

nothing, WTio transcends this created universe 
and sustains it by His immanent power. Who 
has made laws for the government of all things 
and cares for each particular by His providence, 
and Who created man in His own image, re- 
vealed Himself and His will to men, and metes 
out eternal rewards and punishments to the 
children of Adam, whom He also helps by His 
grace. 

In this religious conception of God, one term 
must be saved from misinterpretation. The 
word “personal” should not be read with an- 
thropomorphic imagery, though its meaning 
does entitle man as well as God to be called a 
person rather than a thing. “Although the term 
person is not found applied to God in Scripture, 
either in the Old or New Testament,” Aquinas 
writes, “nevertheless what the term signifies is 
found to be affirmed of God in many places of 
Scripture; as that He is the supreme self-sub- 
sisting being, and the most perfectly intelligent 
being.” 

Boethius had defined a person as “an individ- 
ual substance of a rational nature,” or, as Locke 
later said, “a thinking intelligent being.” 
In applying the term person to God, in the 
meaning which Boethius had given it, Aquinas 
comments on the difference in its meaning when 
it is applied to men. God can be said to have a 
rational nature, he writes, only “if reason be 
taken to mean, not discursive thought, but, 
in a general sense, an intelligent nature . . . 
God cannot be called an individual” in the sense 
in which physical things are, but only in the 
sense of uniqueness. “Substance can be applied 
to God [only] in the sense of signifying self- 
subsistence.” Aquinas does not conclude from 
this that “person” is said improperly of God, 
but ratherithat when God is called “personal” 
the meaning is applied “in a more excellent 
way,” for God does not possess, God is, an in- 
telligence. 

We shall use this idea of a personal God, the 
reality of which the contemporary atheist 
denies," in order to distinguish divergent con- 
ceptions in other doctrines. Then we shall ex- 
amine more closely what is involved in this 
idea itself. > . . 

In the western tradition," the various pagan 
religions — reflected especially in the poems and 

histories of Greek and Roman antiquity — were 
all polytheistic. The number of their gods, 
Montaigne estimates, “amounts to six-and- 
thirty thousand.” Augustine offers one explana- 
tion of why there were so many. “The an- 
cients,” he writes, “being deceived either by 
their own conjectures or by demons, supposed 
that many gods must be invited to take an in- 
,terest in human affairs, and assigned to each a 
separate function and a separate department— 
to one the body, to another the soul; and in the 
body itself, to one the head, to another the 
neck, and each of the other members to one of 
the gods; and in like manner, in the soul, to one 
god the natural capacity was assigned, to an- 
other education, to another anger, to another 
lust; and so the various affairs of life were as- 
signed — cattle to one, corn to another, wine to 
another, oil to another, the woods to another, 
money to another, navigation to another, wars 
and victories to another, marriages to another, 
births and fecundity to another, and other 
things to other gods.” 

That polytheism, no less than. monotheism, 
conceives the divine as personal, appears in 
Plato’s Apology. When Socrates is accused of 
atheism, he asks whether the indictment means 
that he does not “acknowledge the gods which 
the state acknowledges, but some other new 
divinities or spiritual agencies in their stead.” 
Meletus answers that be thinks Socrates is a 
complete atheist who recognizes no gods at all. 
To this Socrates replies by suggesting) that his 
enemies must be confusing him with Anaxag- 
oras, who had blasphemed against Apollo by 
calling the sun “a red hot stone.” As for him- 
self, he offers evidence to show that he believes 
in divine or spiritual agencies “new or old, no 
matter”; and “if I believe in divine beings,” he 
asks, “how can I help beheving in ‘spirits or 
demigods?” > i' 

Like the one God of Judaism and Chris- 
tianity, the many gods of pagan antiquity have 
immortal life, but they are not without origin. 
Zeus is the son of ICronos, and he has many 
offspring, both gods and demigods, who per- 
form different functions and are not of equal 
station in the Olympian hierarchy. The realm 
of the divine includes such figures as the Titans 
and the Cyclops, who are neither gods nor men; 
and demigods, like Heracles, who are offspring 

Chapter 29; GOD 545 

of divine and human mating. These deities ex- 
ercise superhuman powers, but none is com- 
pletely omnipotent or omniscient, not even 
Kronos or Zeus who cannot escape the decrees 
of Fate. Moreover, with the exception, perhaps, 
of that of Zeus, the power of one divinity is 
often challenged and thwarted by another. This 
aspect of polytheism and its bearing on the in-' 
tervention of the gods in the affairs of men are 
discussed in the chapter on Fate. 

The extent to which we think of the pagans 
as idolatrous because they made graven images 
of their gods in human form, or regard the 
pagan conceptions of the gods as anthropomor- 
phic, depends on our interpretation of religious 
symbolism. Plato for one thinks that many of 
the poets’ descriptions of the gods and their 
activities should be dismissed as unworthy, 
precisely because they debase the gods to the 
human level. 

According to Gibbon, a Greek or Roman 
philosopher ‘‘who considered the system of 
polytheism as a composition of human fraud 
and error, could disguise a smile of contempt 
under the mask of devotion, without appre- 
hending that either the mockery or the com- 
pliance would expose him to the resentment of 
any invisible, or, as he conceived them, imagi- 
nary powers.” But the early Christians, he 
points out, saw the many gods of antiquity “in 
a much more odious and formidable light” and 
held them to be “the authors, the patrons, and 
the objects of idolatry.” 

Those who take symbols with flat literalism 
might also attack Christianity as anthropomor- 
phic and idolatrous; in fact they have. The 
defense of Christianity against this charge does 
not avail in the case of Roman emperor-wor- 
ship, which consisted not in the humanization 
of the divine for the sake of symbolic represen- 
tation, but in the deification of the merely 
human for political purposes. 

Although there are radical differences, there 
are also certain fundamental agreements be- 
tween paganism and Judaeo-Christianity re- 
garding the nature of the divine. As we have 
already noted, the deities are conceived per- 
sonally, not in terms of impersonal, brute 
forces. Conceived as beings with intelligence 
and will, the gods concern themselves with 
earthly society; they aid or oppose man s plans 

and efforts; they reward men' for fidelity ahd 
virtue or punish them for impiety and sin. 

D&pite all other differences between pagan- 
ism and Christianity, these agreements are sub- 
stantial enough to provide many common 
threads of theological speculation throughout 
our tradition, especially, with regard to the 
abiding practical problems of how man shall 
view himself and his destiny in relation to the 
divine or'the'supernatural. We have therefore 
attempted to place passages from the great 
books of pagan antiquity under every heading 
except those which are specifically restricted to 
the dogmas of Judaism and Christianity — even 
under headings which are worded monotheis- 
tically, since even here there is continuity of 
thought and expression from Homer and Virgil 
to Dante and Milton; from Plato, Aristotle, 
and Plotinus to Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, 
and Kant; from Lucretius to Newton and Dar- 
win. 

The doctrines known as deism and pantheism, 
like unqualified atheism, are as much opposed 
to the religious beliefs of polytheism as to the 
faith of Judaism and Christianity. 

Of these two, pantheism is much nearer 
atheism, for it denies the existence of a tran- 
scendent supernatural being or beings. God is 
Nature. God is immanent in the world and, 
in the extreme form of pantheism, not tran- 
scendent in any way. Certain historic doctrines 
which are- often regarded as forms or kinds of 
pantheism seem to be less extreme than this, 
for they do not conceive the physical univene 
as exhausting the infinite being of God. The 
world, for all its vastness and variety, may only 
represent an aspect of the divine nature. 

According to Spinoza, the attributes of ex- 
tension and thought, in terms of which we un- 
derstand the world or nature as being of the 
divine substance, are merely those aspects of 
God which are known to us, for the divine sub- 
stance consists “of infinite attributes, each one 
of which expresses eternal and infinite essence.” 
In the conception of Plotinus, the whole world 
represents only a partial emanation from the 
divine source. Yet thinkers like Plotinus and 
Spinoza so conceive the relation of the world to 
God that — as in the strictest pantheism — the 
religious doctrines of creation, providence, and 

546 the great IDEAS 

salvation are either rejected or profoundly al- 
tered. ' ' 

In the ancient world, the teaching of the 
Stoic philosophers expresses a kind of panthe- 
ism. “There is one universe made up of all 
things,” Marcus Aurelius writes, “and one God 
who pervades all things, and one substance, and 
one law, one common reason in all intelligent 
animals, and one truth.” He speaks of the 
“common nature,” which is apparently divine, 
and of which “every particular nature is a part, 
as the nature of the leaf is a part of the nature 
of the plant.” But, although he stresses the one- 
ness and divinity of all things, Aurelius also 
at times uses language which seems to refer to 
a god who dwells apart from as well as in the 
world, as, for example, when he debates 
whether the gods have any concern with human 
affairs. 

Another type of ancient pantheism appears 
in the thought of Plotinus, for whom all things 
have being only insofar as they partieipate in, 
even as they emanate from, the power of The 
One, or Primal Source. “God is sovranly pres- 
ent through all,” he writes. “We cannot think 
of something of God here and something else 
there, nor of all of God gathered at some one 
spot: there is an instantaneous presence every- 
where, nothing containing and nothing left 
void, everything therefore fully held by the 
divine.” The relation between The One and 
every other thing is compared to the number 
series. “Just as there is, primarily or secondarily, 
some form or idea from the monad in each of 
the successive numbers — the latter still partici- 
pating, though unequally, in the unit — so the 
series of beings following upon The First bear, 
each, some form or idea derived from that 
source. In Number the participation establishes 
Quantity; in the realm of Being, the trace of 
The One establishes reality: existence is a trace 
of The One.” 

But although The One is in all things, and 
all things depend upon it for their very exist- 
ence, The One itselfhas no need of them. It is in 
this sense that Plotinus says that “The One is 
all things and no one of them . - . Holding all — 
though itself nowhere held — it is omnipresent, 
for where its presence failed something would 
elude its hold. At the same time, in the sense 
that it is nowhere held, it is not present: thus 

it is both present and not present; not present 
as not being circumscribed by anything; yet as 
being utterly unattached, not inhibited from 
presence at any point.” Thus all things partake 
of The One in absolute dependence. But The 
One, considered in itself, is absolutely tran- 
scendent. Plotinus even denies it the name of 
God or Good or Being, saying it is 'beyond 
these. 

Whether or not Spinoza is a pantheist, has 
long been debated by his commentators. An 
explicit, even an extreme form of pantheism 
would seem to be expressed in the proposition 
that “whatever is, is in God, and nothing can 
be or be conceived without God.” But while 
the one and only substance which exists is at 
once nature and God, Spinoza identifies* God 
only with the nature he calls “natura nattirans.” 
God is not reduced to the nature that falls with- 
in man’s limited experience or understanding— 
the nature he calls “natiira natiirata.” 

“By natnra naturansf he explains, “we are 
to understand that which is in itself and is con- 
ceived through itself, or those attributes of sub- 
stance which express eternal and infinite es- 
sence, that is to say, God in so far as He is con- 
sidered as a free cause. But by natura natiirata 
I understand everything which follows from 
the necessity of the nature of God, or of any 
one of God’s attributes, that is to say, all the 
modes of God’s attributes in so far as they are 
considered as things which are in God and 
which without God can neither be nor can be 
conceived.” 

God is the infinite and eternal substance of 
all finite existences, an absolute and unchang- 
ing one underlying the finite modes in which it 
variably manifests itself. Though God for Spi- 
noza is transcendent in the sense of vastly ex- 
ceeding the world known to man, in no sense 
does God exist apart from the whole of nature. 
Spinoza’s view thus sharply departs from that 
of an orthodox Jewish or Christian theologian. 
When the latter says that God is transcendent, 
he means that God exists apart, infinitely re- 
moved from the whole created universe. When 
the latter speaks of God as being immanent in 
that universe, he carefully specifies that it is not 
by His substance, but by the power of His ac- 
tion and knowledge. But Spinoza calls God 
“the immanent, and not the transitive, cause of 

all things,” for the reason that “outside God 
there can be no substance, that is to say, out- 
side Him nothing can exist which is in itself.” 

These divergent conceptions of God’s im- 
manence and transcendence— so relevant to 
the question of who is or is not a pantheist — 
are further discussed in the chapters on Nature 
and World. 

Unlike pantheism, deism affirms gods or a 
God, personal intelligences existing apart from 
this world; but, as in the teaching of Lucretius, 
deism sometimes goes to the extreme of believ- 
ing in absentee gods who neither intervene in 
the order of nature nor concern themselves 
with human affairs. 

“The nature of the gods,” Lucretius writes, 
“must ever in itself of necessity enjoy immor- 
tality together with supreme repose, far re- 
moved and withdrawn from our concerns; since 
exempt from every pain, exempt from all 
dangers, strong in its own resources, not want- 
ing aught of us, it is neither gained by favors 
nor moved by anger.” 

Such gods neither create the world nor 
govern it; above all they do not reward or 
punish man, and so they do not have to be 
feared or propitiated. “To say that for the sake 
of men they have willed to set in order the 
glorious nature of the world and therefore it is 
meet to praise the work of the gods immortal, 
and that it is an unholy thing ever to shake by 
any force from its fixed seats that which by the 
forethought of the gods in ancient days has 
been established on everlasting foundations for 
mankind, or to assail it by speech and utterly 
overturn it from top to bottom; and to invent 
and add other figments of the kind ... is all 
sheer folly. For what advantage can our grati- 
tude bestow on immortal and blessed beings 
that for our sakes they should take in hand to 
administer aught?” 

Divinity seems to have moral significance to 
Lucretius only insofar as the gods exemplify the 
happy life; and religion is immoral because its 
superstitions concerning divine motives and 
meddling make men servile and miserable. 

When the deism of Lucretius is contrasted 
with the more familiar modern forms of that 
doctrine, the influence of Christianity is seen. 
The modern deist affirms the supremacy of one 

God, the infinite and eternal Creator of this 
world. Whose laws are the laws of nature 
which are laid down from the beginning and 
which govern all created things. Rousseau 
speaks of this as “the religion of man” and even 
identifies it with Christianity — “not the Chris- 
tianity of today, but that of the Gospel, which 
is entirely different.” He describes this religion 
as that “which has neither temples, nor altars, 
nor rites, and is confined to the purely internal 
cult of the supreme God and the eternal obliga- 
tions of morality.” 

Not all deists, certainly not those of the 17 th 
and early i 8 th centuries, go to the Lucretian 
extreme of picturing an uninterested and mor- 
ally neutral God. Many of them believe in an 
after-life. But modern deism did tend toward 
this extreme. By Kant’s time it had even ceased 
to look upon God as a personal intelligence.' 
Kant therefore takes great pains to distinguish 
deism from theism. 

The deist, according to Kant, “admits that 
we can cognize by pure reason alone the exist- 
ence of a supreme being, but at the same time 
maintains that our conception of this being is 
purely transcendental, and that all we can say 
of it is, that it possesses all reality, without be- 
ing able to define it more closely,” The theist, 
on the other hand, “asserts that reason is ca- 
pable of presenting us, from the analogy with 
nature, with a more definite conception of this 
being, and that its operations, as the cause of all 
things, are the results of intelligence and free 
will.” 

Kant even maintains that “we might, in 
strict rigor, deny to the deist any belief in 
God at all, and regard him merely as a main- 
tainer of the existence of a primal being or thing 
— the supreme cause of all other things.” In any 
case, deism seems to be an essentially un-Jewish 
and un-Christian or anti-Jewish and anti-Chris- 
tian doctrine, for it denies God's supernatural 
revelation of Himself; it denies miracles and 
every other manifestation of supernatural agen- 
cy in the course of nature or the life of man; 
it denies the efficacy of prayer and sacrament. 
In short, it rejects the institutions and practices, 
as well as the faith and hope, of any religion 
which claims supernatural foundation and su- 
pernatural warrant for its dogmas and rituals. 
Deism, which “consists simply in the worship 

of a God considered as great, powerful, and 
eternal,” is, in Pascal’s opinion, “almost as far 
removed from the Christian religion as atheisrh, 
which is its exact opposite.” 

What Pascal and Kant call “deism” and 
Rousseau “the religion of man,” others like 
Hume call “natural religion.” His Dialogues 
Concerning Natural 'Religion provide a classic 
statement of rationalism, which is the same as 
naturalism, in religion; though, as the chapter 
on Religion indicates, it may be questioned 
whether the word “religion” can be meaning- 
fully used fora doctrine which claims no knowl- 
edge beyond that of the philosopher, and no 
guidance for human life beyond the precepts of 
the morahst. 

The systematic exposition of man’s knowl- 
edge of God is the science of theology. In addi- 
tion to considering all things— the whole world 
and human life — in relation to God, theology 
treats especially of God’s existence, essence, and 
attributes. Throughout the range of its subject 
matter and problems, theology may be of two 
sorts: it may be either natural knowledge, ob- 
tained by ordinary processes of observation and 
reasoning; or knowledge which is supernatural 
in the sense of being based on divine revelation. 
This is the traditional distinction between nat- 
ural and sacred or, as it is sometimes called, 
dogmatic theology. The one belongs to the do- 
main of reason ; it is the work of the philosopher. 
The other belongs to the domain of faith, and 
is the work of the theologian who seeks to un- 
derstand his faith. 

These distinctions are discussed in the chap- 
ters on Theology, Metaphysics, and Wis- 
dom. Here we are concerned with different at- 
titudes toward the problem of man’s knowledge 
of God. The deist, as we have seen, rejects su- 
pernatural revelation and faith; theology, like 
religion, is held to be entirely natural, a work of 
reason. The agnostic makes the opposite denial. 
He denies that anything supernatural can be 
known by reason. It cannot be proved or, for 
that matter, disproved. The evidences of nature 
and the light of reason do not permit valid in- 
ferences or arguments concerning God or crea- 
tion, providence or immortality. 

It is usually with respect to God’s existence 
that the agnostic most, emphatically declares 

reason’s incompetence to demonstrate. He 
often accompanies the declaration with elabo- 
rate criticisms of the arguments which may be 
offered by others. This is not always the case, 
however. For example, the great Jewish theolo- 
gian, Moses Maimonides, thinks that God’s ex- 
istence can be proved by reason entirely apart 
from faith; but with regard to the essence or 
attributes of God, his position seems to be one 
which might be called agnostic. 

When men “ascribe essential attributes to 
God,” Maimonides declares, “these so-called 
essential attributes should not have any similar- 
ity to the attributes of other things, just as 
there is no similarity between the essence of 
God and that of other beings.” Since the mean- 
ing of such positive attributes as good or wise is 
derived from our knowledge of things, they do 
not provide us with any knowledge of God’s 
essence, for no comparison obtains between 
things and God. Hence Maimonides asserts that 
“the negative attributes of God are the true 
attributes.” They tell us not what God is,. but 
what God is not. i , 

Even though Maimonides holds that “exist- 
ence and essence are perfectly identical” in 
God, he also insists that “we comprehend only 
the fact that He exists, not His essence. . ■. . All 
we understand,” he goes on to say, in addition 
to “the fact that He exists,” is the fact that 
“He is a Being to whom none of his creatures is 
similar.” This fact is confirmed in all the nega- 
tive attributes such as eternal (meaning non- 
temporal), infinite, or incorporeal; even as it is 
falsified by all the positive attributes, expressed 
by such names as “good” or “living” or “know- 
ing,” insofar as they imply a comparison be- 
tween God and creatures. When they cannot 
be interpreted negatively, they can be tolerated 
as metaphors, but they must not be, taken as 
expressing an understanding “of the true es- 
sence of God,” concerning which Maimonides 
maintains, “there is no possibility of obtaining 
a knowledge.” ,, 

Aquinas takes issue with such agnosticism 
about the divine nature in his discussion of the 
names of God. Although he says that “we can- 
not know what God is, but rather what He is 
not,” Aquinas disagrees with Maimonides .that 
all names which express some knowledge of 
God’s essence must be. interpreted negatively 

or treated as metaphors. He denies that “when 
we say God lives, we mean merely that God 
is not like an inanimate thing” as "was taught 
by Rabbi Moses.” On the contrary, he holds 
that “these names signify the divine substance 
. . . although they fall short of representing 
Him. . . . For these names express God, so far 
as our intellects know Him. Now since our 
intellect knows God from creatures, it knows 
Him as far as creatures represent Him.” There- 
fore, Aquinas concludes, “when we say, God is 
good, the meaning is not, God is the cause of 
goodness, or, God is not evih but the meaning 
is, Whatever good we attribute to creatures 'pre- 
exists in God, and in a higher way.” 

If Maimonides were right that the names 
which are said positively of both God and 
creatures are “applied ... in a purely equivocal 
sense” {e.g., having literal meaning when said 
of creatures but being only metaphorical when 
said of God), then, according to Aquinas, it 
would follow that “from creatures nothing at 
all could be known or demonstrated about 
God.” Those who say, on the other hand, that 
“the things attributed to God and creatures 
are univocal” (/.<?., are said in exactly the same 
sense), claim to comprehend more than man 
can know of the divine essence. When the term 
wise “is applied to God,” Aquinas writes, “it 
leaves the thing signified as uncomprehended 
and as exceeding the signification of the name. 
Hence it is evident that this term wise is not 
applied in the same way to God and to man. 
The same applies to other terms. Hence no 
name is predicated univocally of God and crea- 
tures” but rather all positives names "are said 
of God and creatures in an analogous sense.” 

A further discussion of the names of God 
will be found in the chapter on Sign and 
Symbol; and the consideration of the analogi- 
cal, the univocal, and the equivocal will also 
be found there as well as in the chapter on 
Same and Other. We have dealt with these 
matters here only for the sake of describing that 
degree of agnosticism, according to which 
Maimonides, by contrast with Aquinas, is an 
agnostic. But agnosticism usually goes further 
and denies that man can have any natural 
knowledge of God — either of His existence or of 
BSs essence. 

So understood, agnosticism need not be in- 
compatible with religion, unless a given reli- 
gion holds, as an article of faith itself, that the 
existence of God can be proved by reason. In 
fact, the agnostic may be a religious man who 
accepts divine revelation and regards feith as 
divinely inspired. 

Montaigne’s Apology for Raimond de Sebonde 
illustrates this position. Sebonde had written a 
treatise on natural theology, which to Mon- 
taigne seems “hardy and bold; for he under- 
takes, by human and natural reasons to estab- 
lish and make good against the atheists all the 
articles of the Christian religion.” Though 
Montaigne says of his work, “I do not think it 
possible to do better upon that subject,” and 
though he entertains the conjecture that it may 
have been “drawn from St. Thomas Aquinas, 
for, in truth, that mind full of infinite learning 
and admirable subtlety, was alone capable of 
such imaginations”; nevertheless, Montaigne 
does “not believe that means purely humanare, 
in any sort, capable of doing it.” 

According to Montaigne, “it is faith alone 
that vividly and certainly comprehends the 
deep mysteries of our religion.” In his view, 
reason by itself is incapable of proving anything, 
much less anything about God. “Our human 
reasons,” he writes, “are but sterile and un- 
digested matter; the grace of God is its form; 
it is that which gives it fashion and value.” The 
light and value in Sebondc’s arguments come 
from the fact that faith supervenes “to tint and 
illustrate” them, and “renders them firm and 
solid.” 

Such arguments, Montaigne says, may serve 
as “direction and first guide to a learner” and 
may even “render him capable of the grace of 
God”; but for himself, skeptical of all argu- 
ments, the way of faith alone can provide “a 
certain constancy of opinion. . . . Thus have I, 
by the grace of God, preserved myself entire, 
without anxiety or trouble of conscience, in 
the ancient belief of our religion, amidst so 
many sects and divisions as our age has pro- 
duced.” 

Far from being religious as Montaigne was, 
the agnostic may be a skeptic about faith as 
well as reason. He may look upon faith either 
as superstition or as the exercise of the will to 
believe with regard to the unknowable and the 

550 THE GREAT IDEAS 

unintelligible — almost wishful thinking. He 
may even go so far as to treat religion as if it 
were pathological. 

Freud, for example, regards religion as an il- 
lusion to be explained in terms of man’s need 
to create gods in his own image — to find a sur- 
rogate for the father, on whom his infantile 
dependence can be projected. 'Freud finds con- 
firmation for this in the fact that in the reli- 
gions of the west, God “is openly called Father. 
Psychoanalysis,” he goes on, “concludes that he 
really is the father, clothed in the grandeur in 
which he once appeared to the small child.” 

Though the grown man “has long ago real- 
ized that his father is a being with strictly lim- 
ited powers and by no means endowed with 
every desirable attribute,” Freud thinks that 
he nevertheless “looks back to the memory- 
image of the overrated father of his childhood, 
exalts it into a Deity, and brings it into the 
present and into reality. The emotional strength 
of this memory-image and the lasting nature 
of his need for protection” — for, as Freud ex- 
plains, “in relation to the external world he is 
still a child”— “are the two supports of his 
belief in God.” 

At the other extreme from agnosticism is, as 
the name implies, gnosticism. Like deism, it 
dispenses with faith, but it exceeds traditional 
deism in the claims it makes for reason’s power 
to penetrate the divine mysteries. Between ex- 
clusive reliance on faith and an exaltation of 
reason to the point where there is no need for 
God to reveal anything, a middle ground is held 
by those who acknowledge the contributions 
of both faith and reason. Those who try to 
harmonize the two usually distinguish between 
the spheres proper to each, and formulate some 
principle according to which they are related 
to each other in an orderly fashion. 

Whatever is purely a matter of faith, Aquinas 
says, is assented to solely because “it is revealed 
by God.” The articles of Christian faith are 
typified by “the Trinity of Persons in Almighty 
God, the mystery of Christ’s Incarnation, and 
the like.” With regard to such matters, which 
Aquinas thinks belong primarily to faith, some 
auxiliary use can be made of reason, “not, in- 
deed, to prove faith,” he explains, but to make 
dear the things that follow from it. Certain 

matters, such as God’s existence and attributes, 
he classifies as belonging to “the preambles to 
faith” because they fall, in his view, within 
reason’s power to demonstrate, unaided by 
faith. Yet even here he does not assign the 
affirmation of the truth to reason alone. 

Just as “it was necessary for the salvation of 
man that certain truths which exceed human 
reason should be made known to him by divine 
revelation,” so even with regard to “those 
truths about God which human reason can 
investigate,” Aquinas thinks it was also nec- 
essary that “man be taught by a divine reve- 
lation. For the truth about God, such as reason 
can know it, would only be known by a few, 
and that after a long time, and with the admix- 
ture of many errors.” Because “human reason 
is very deficient in things concerning God”— 
“a sign of which is that philosophers . . . have 
fallen into many errors and have disagreed 
among themselves” — men would have no 
knowledge of God “free from doubt and un- 
certainty” unless all divine truths were “de- 
livered to them by the way of faith, being told 
to them, as it were, by God Himself Who can- 
not lie.” 

In different ways faith supports reason and 
reason helps faith. On matters which belong to 
both reason and faith, faith provides a greater 
certitude. On matters strictly of faith, reason 
provides some understanding, however remote 
and inadequate, of the mysteries of religion. 
“The use of human reason in religion,” Bacon 
writes, “is of two sorts: the former, in the con- 
ception and apprehension of the mysteries of 
God to us revealed; the other, in the inferring 
and deriving of doctrine and direction there- 
upon. ... In the former we see God vouch- 
safeth to descend to our capacity, in the ex- 
pressing of his mysteries in sort as may be sensi- 
ble unto us; and doth grift his revelations and 
holy doctrine upon the notions of our reason 
and applieth his inspiration to open our under- 
standing, as the form of the key to the ward 
of the lock. For the latter, there is allowed us 
an use of reason and argument, secondary and 
respective, although not original and absolute. 
For after the articles and principles of religion 
are placed and exempted from examination 
of reason, it is then permitted unto us to 
make derivations and inferences from and ac- 

Chapter 

cording to the analogy of them, for our better 
direction.” 

In addition to all discursive knowledge of 
God, whether it be by faith or by reason, there 
is the totally incommunicable and intimate ac- 
quaintance with the Supernatural which the 
mystic claims for his vision in moments of re- 
ligious ecstasy or which is promised to the 
blessed as their heavenly beatitude. When, at 
the culmination of Paradise, Dante sees God, 
“my vision,” he declares, "was greater than our 
speech.” 

Knowing that his “speech will fall more 
short . . . than that of an infant who still bathes 
his tongue at the breast," he tries nevertheless 
to communicate in words “one single spark of 
Thy glory for the folk to come.” In the pres- 
ence of God, he writes, his mind, “wholly rapt, 
was gazing fixed, motionless, and intent, and 
ever with gazing grew enkindled. In that Light 
one becomes such that it is impossible he should 
ever consent to turn himself from it for other 
sight; because the Good which is the object 
of the will is all collected in it, and outside of 
it that is defective which is perfect there.” 

The arguments for the existence of the gods 
or of one God constitute one of the greatest 
attempts of the human mind to go beyond the 
sensible or phenomenal world of experience. 
The attempt has been made in every age and 
by minds of quite different persuasions in re- 
ligious belief or philosophical outlook. It is 
possible, nevertheless, to classify the arguments 
into two or three main types. 

Within the domain of pure or speculative 
reason there seem to be two ways of approach- 
ing the problem of God’s existence. 

One is in terms of the conception of God 
as an infinite, perfect, and necessary being, 
whose non-existence is therefore inconceivable. 
According to Anselm, God cannot be conceived 
in any other way than as “a being than which 
nothing greater can be conceived.” But since 
“the fool hath said in his heart, there is no 
God,” how shall he be made to know that the 
God, which exists in his understanding at the 
moment when he denies His real existence, also 
really exists outside his understanding? “For 
it is one thing for an object to be in the under- 
standing, and another to understand that the 

29; GOD 551 

object exists.” Hence Anselm considers the 
consequence of supposing that God exists in 
the understanding alone. 

“If that, than which nothing greater can be 
conceived,” he argues, “exists in the under- 
standing alone, the very being, than which 
nothing greater can be conceived, is one than 
which a greater can be conceived” —for to 
exist in reality as well as in the understanding 
is to have more being. But this leads to “an 
irreconcilable contradiction,” since “if that, 
than which nothing greater can be conceived, 
can be conceived not to exist, it is not that than 
which nothing greater can be conceived.” 
Therefore Anselm concludes that a being “than 
which nothing greater can be conceived” must 
exist “both in the understanding and reality.” 

Anselm summarizes his argument by saying 
that “ 'no one who understands what God is, 
can conceive that God does not exist.” Since 
the non-existence of God is inconceivable, God 
must exist. Descartes gives the same argument 
a slightly different statement in terms of the 
inseparability of God’s essence from God’s 
existence. 

“Being accustomed,” he writes, “in all other 
things to make a distinction between existence 
and essence, I easily persuade myself that the 
existence can be separated from the essence of 
God, and that we can thus conceive God as not 
actually existing. But, nevertheless, when I 
think of it with more attention, I clearly see 
that existence can no more be separated from 
the essence of God than can its having its three 
angles equal to two right angles be separated 
from the essence of a rectilinear triangle, or 
the idea of a mountain from the idea of a 
valley; and so there is not any less repugnance 
to our conceiving a God (that is, a Being su- 
premely perfect) to whom existence is lacking 
(that is to say, to whom a certain perfection is 
lacking), than to conceive of a mountain which 
has no valley.” 

Spinoza defines a “cause of itself’ as “that 
whose essence involves existence; or that whose 
nature cannot be conceived unless existing.” 
Since in his conception of substance, substance 
•is necessarily infinite, it is also cause of itself 
Hence he concludes that “God or substance 
. . . necessarily exists"; for “if this be denied, 
conceive if it be possible that God does not 

552 THE GREAT IDEAS 

exist. Then it follows that His essence does not 
involve existence. But this is absurd. Therefore 
God necessarily exists.” 

This mode of argument, which takes still 
other forms, is traditionally called the “onto- 
logical argument” or the “« priori proof” of 
God’s existence. Its critics sometimes deny that 
it is an argument or proof in any sense at all. 
Aquinas, for example, interprets Anselm not as 
proving God’s existence, but rather as asserting 
that God’s existence is self-evident. Those who 
say that the proposition “God does not exist” 
is self-contradictory, are saying that the oppo- 
site proposition “God exists” must be self- 
evident. 

Aquinas does not deny that the proposition 
“God e.\ists” is intrinsically self-evident. On 
this point he goes further than Anselm, Des- 
cartes, and Spinoza. Where they say God’s 
essence involves His existence, Aquinas asserts 
that in God essence and existence are identical. 
When Moses asks God, “If they should say to 
me. What is His name? what shall I say to 
them?” the Lord says unto Moses, “I AM 
THAT I AM,” and adds, “Say to the children 
of Israel: HE WHO IS hath sent me to you.” 
This name— HE WHO IS— Aquinas holds to 
be “the rriost proper name of God” because it 
signifies that “the being of God is His very 
essence,” 

For this reason he thinks that the proposition 
“God exists” is self-evident in itself. Its subject 
and predicate are immediately related. Never- 
theless, Aquinas holds that the proposition is 
not self-evident to us “because we do not know 
the essence of God.” Even supposing, he 
writes, “that everyone understands this name 
God as signifying something than which noth- 
ing greater can be thought, nevertheless, it 
does not therefore follow that he understands 
that what the name signifies exists actually, but 
only that it exists mentally. Nor can it be ar- 
gued that it actually exists, unless it be ad- 
mitted that there actually exists something 
than which nothing greater can he thought; and 
this precisely is not admitted by those who 
hold that God does not exist.” 

The writer of the First Set of Objections 
to Descartes’ Meditations maintains that the 
criticism advanced by Aquinas applies to Des- 
cartes as well as to Anselm. Whether stated in 

terms of the conception of an absolutely perfect 
being or in terms of essence and existence, the 
argument is invalid, he thinks, j which asserts 
that God actually exists because His non-exist- 
ence is inconceivable. Kant’s later criticism of 
the ontological argument takes a similar course. 
A proposition may be logically necessary with- 
out being true in fact. 

“The conception of an absolutely necessary 
being,” he writes, “is a mere idea, the objective 
reality of which is far from being established 
by the mere fact that it is a need of reason. . . . 
The unconditioned necessity of a judgment 
does not form the absolute necessity of a 
thing.’’ From the fact that “existence belongs 
necessarily to the object of the conception,” 
we cannot conclude that “the existence of the 
thing ... is therefore absolutely necessary— 
merely,” Kant says, “because its existence has 
been cogitated in the conception. . . . What- 
ever be the content of our conception of an 
object, it is necessary to go beyond it, if we 
wish to predicate existence of the object. . , . 
The celebrated ontological or Cartesian argu- 
ment for the existence of a supreme being is 
therefore insufficient.” 

The second main approach to the problem 
of God’s existence lies in the sort of proof 
which, Locke thinks, “our own existence and 
the sensible parts of the universe offer so clearly 
and cogently to our thoughts.” He refrains 
from criticizing the argument from “the idea 
of a most perfect being,” but he does insist that 
we should not “take some men’s having that 
idea of God in their minds . . . for the only 
proof of a Deity.” He for one prefers to follow 
the counsel of St. Paul, that “the invisible 
things of God are clearly seen from the creation 
of the world, being understood by the things 
that are made, even his eternal power and God- 
head.” 

We have, according to' Locke, an intuitive 
knowledge of our own existence. We know, he 
says, that “nonentity cannot produce any real 
being”; and so “from the consideration of our- 
selves, and what we infallibly find in our con- 
stitution, our reason leads us to the knowledge 
of this certain and evident truth — That there 
is an eternal, most powerful, and most hpowing 
Being." 

Chapter 

Without labelling it a proof of God’s exist- 
ence, Augustine in his Confessions presents a 
similar argument— from the visible creation. 
“Behold,”' he says, “the heavens and the earth 
are; they proclaim that they were created; for 
they change and vary. . . . They proclaim also 
that' they made not themselves: ‘therefore we 
are, because we have been made; we were not 
therefore, before we were, so as to make our- 
selves’. .. . Thou therefore. Lord, madest them.” 

This second approach to the existence of God 
by reasoning from the facts of experience or 
the evidences of nature is called the “a posteriori 
proof.” In the tradition of the great books, it 
has been formulated in many different ways. 
What is common to all of them is the principle 
of causality, in terms of which the known exist- 
ence of certain effects is made the basis for in- 
ferring the existence of a unique cause— a first 
cause, a highest cause, an uncaused cause. 

Aristotle, for example, in the last book of his 
Physics, argues from the fact of motion or 
change to the existence of an unmoved mover. 
He sums up his elaborate reasoning on this 
point in the following statement. “We estab- 
lished the fact that everything that is in mo- 
tion is moved by something, and that the 
movent is either unmoved or in motion, and 
that, if it is in motion, it is moved either by 
itself or by something else and so on through- 
out the series: and so we proceeded to the posi- 
tion that the first principle that directly causes 
things that are in motion to be moved is that 
which moves itself, and the first principle of the 
whole series is the unmoved,” 

Aristotle’s argument, unlike that of Augus- 
tine or Locke, does not presuppose the creation 
of the world, at least not in the sense of the 
world’s having a beginning. On the contrary, 
he holds the world and its motions to be as 
eternal as their unmoved mover. “It is im- 
possible,” he writes in the Metaphysics, “that 
movement should either have come into being 
or cease to be.” Precisely because he thinks the 
world’s motions are eternal, Aristotle holds 
that the prime mover, in addition to being 
everlasting, must be immutable. This for him 
means “a principle whose very essence is ac- 
tuality.” Only a substance without any poten- 
cy, only one which is purely actual, can be an 
absolutely immutable, eternal being. 

29: GOD 553 

Whatever has any potentiality in its nature 
is capable of not existing. If everything were 
of this sort, nothing that now is “need be, 
for it is possible for all things to be capable of 
existing, but not yet to exist.” Hence,- in still 
another way, Aristotle seems to reach the con- 
clusion that a purely actual being must exist; 
and, furthermore, he seems to identify this 
being with a living and thinking God. “Life 
also belongs to God,” he writes; “for the ac- 
tuality of thought is life, and God is that ac- 
tuality; and God’s self-dependent actuality is 
life most good and eternal.” 

Where Aristotle argues from motion and 
potentiality to a prime mover and a pure ac- 
tuality, Newton gives the ■ a posteriori proof 
another statement by arguing from the design 
of the universe to God as its designer or archi- 
tect. “The most wise and excellent contrivances 
of things, and final causes” seem to him the best 
way of knowing God. “Blind metaphysical 
necessity, which is certainly the same always 
and everywhere, could produce no variety in 
things. All that diversity of natural things 
which we find suited to different times and 
places could arise from nothing but the ideas 
and will of a Being necessarily existing.” 

In similar fashion Berkeley maintains that 
“if we attentively consider the constant regu- 
larity, order, and concatenation of natural 
things, the surprising magnificence, beauty, 
and perfection of the larger, and the exquisite 
contrivance of the smaller parts of the creation, 
together with the exact harmony and corre- 
spondence of the whole, but, above all, the 
never enough admired laws of pain and pleas- 
ure, and the instincts or natural inclinations, 
appetites, and passions of animals; I say if we 
consider all these things, and at the same time 
attend to the meaning and import of the at- 
tributes, one, eternal, infinitely wise, good, 
and perfect, we shall clearly perceive that they 
belong to the . . . Spirit, who ‘works all in all,’ 
and ‘by whom all things consist.’” This seems 
to him so certain that he adds, “we may even 
assert that the existence of God is far more 
evidently perceived than the existence of men.” 

But, according to Berkeley, all the visible 
things of nature exist only as ideas in our minds, 
ideas which, unlike our own memories or imagi- 
nations, we do not ourselves produce. “Every- 

554 THE GREAT IDEAS 

thing we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive by 
sense,” he writes, must have some other cause 
than our own will, and is therefore “a sign or 
effect of the power of God.” To the “unthink- 
ing herd” who claim that “they cannot see 
God,” Berkeley replies that “God ... is in- 
timately present to our minds, producing in 
them all that variety of ideas or sensations 
which continually affect us.” 

The existence of anj' idea in us is for Berkeley 
ground for asserting God’s existence and power 
as its cause. But for Descartes one idea alone 
becomes the basis of such an inference. He 
supplements his a priori or ontological argu- 
ment with what he calls an “a posteriori dem- 
onstration of God’s existence from the mere 
fact that the idea of God exists in us.” 

That he is himself imperfect, Descartes 
knows from the fact that he doubts. Even 
when doubting leads to knowledge, his knowl- 
edge is imperfect, “an infallible token” of 
which, he says, is the fact that “my knowledge 
increases little by little.” But the idea which 
he has of God, he declares, is that of an abso- 
lutely perfect being, “in whom there is nothing 
merely potential, but in whom all is present 
really and actually.” On the principle that 
there cannot be more reality or perfection in 
the effect than in the cause, Descartes con- 
cludes that his own imperfect mind cannot be 
the cause of the idea of a perfect being. “The 
idea that I possess of a being more perfect than 
I,” he writes, “must necessarily have been 
placed in me by a being which is really more 
perfect.” 

The radical imperfection of man, and indeed 
of all creation, offers Augustine still another 
proof for God’s existence, which he attributes 
to the “Platonists.” “They have seen,” he 
writes, “that whatever is changeable is not the 
most high God, and therefore they have tran- 
scended every soul and all changeable spirits 
in seeking the supreme. They have seen also 
that, in every changeable thing, the form which 
makes it that which it is, whatever be its mode 
or nature, can only be through Him who truly 
is, because He is unchangeable. And therefore, 
whether we consider the whole body of the 
world, its figure, qualities, and orderly move- 
ment, and also all the bodies which are in it; 
or whether we consider all life, either that 

which nourishes and maintains, as the life of 
trees; or that which, besides this, has also sensa- 
tion, as the life of beasts; or that which adds 
to all these intelligence, as the life of man; or 
that which does not need the support of nutri- 
ment, but only maintains, feels, understands, 
as the life of angels — all can only be through 
Him who absolutely is. For to Him it is not 
one thing to be, and another to live, as though 
He could be, not living; nor is it to Him one 
thing to live, and another to understand, as 
though He could live, not understanding; nor 
is it to Him one thing to understand, another 
to be blessed, as though He could understand 
and not be blessed. But to Him to live, to 
understand, to be blessed, are to be. They have 
understood, from this unchangeableness and 
this simplicity, that all things must have been 
made by Him, and that He could Himself 
have been made by none.” 

The variety of arguments we have so far 
examined seems to fit the “five ways” in which, 
according to Aquinas, the existence of God can 
be proved a posteriori. “The first and most man- 
ifest way is the argument from motion,” which 
Aquinas attributes to Aristotle. “The second 
way is from the nature of an efficient cause.” 
Berkeley’s argument or Locke’s would seem, 
in some respects, to offer a version of this mode 
of reasoning. “The third way is taken from 
possibility and necessity,” and seems to develop 
the argument from potentiality in Aristotle’s 
Metaphysics, and to contain the inference from 
mutability and contingency which is implicit 
in the argument attributed to the Platonists 
by Augustine. “The fourth way is taken from 
the gradation to be found in things.” Proceed- 
ing from the existence of the imperfect to ab- 
solute perfection, it resembles in principle the 
reasoning of Descartes concerning the perfec- 
tion in the cause relative to the perfection in 
the effect. “The fifth way is taken from the 
governance of the world”— from the fact that 
everything acts for an end — and so is like the 
argument which Newton offers from final 
causes and the existence of order in the uni- 
verse. 

These “five ways” may or may not be re- 
garded as an exhaustive list of the a posteriori 
proofs. It may even be questioned whether the 
five ways are logically distinct and independ- 

ent. Aquinas himself says that “in speculative 
matters the medium of demonstration, which 
demonstrates the conclusion perfectly, is only 
one; whereas probable means of proof are 
many.” Since he considers the argument for 
God’s existence to be a certain, not a probable 
proof, it would seem to follow that, in strict 
logic, only one principle can be involved in 
that proof. 

As already suggested, the principle — com- 
mon to all the various ways in which such a 
posteriori reasoning is expressed — seems to be 
the principal of causality. This appears in the 
argument from the existence of contingent 
beings, which cannot cause their own being, 
to the existence of a being which needs no cause 
of its being, because its very essence is to exist. 
This may be the one argument for God’s exist- 
ence or, if one among many, it may be the core 
of all the others. It has the distinction at least 
of conceiving God as the cause of being, rather 
than of motion or of hierarchy and order in 
the world. 

According to the statement of Aquinas that 
“being is the proper effect of God,” it estab- 
lishes God as the unique and direct cause of the 
being possessed by every finite thing. This for- 
mulation of the proof is more fully examined in 
the chapter on Necessity and Contingency; 
and its relation to the question of whether the 
world had a beginning or is eternal, and if 
eternal, whether it is created or uncreated, will 
be seen in the chapters on Cause, Eternity, 
and World. 

The validity of the a posteriori argument for 
God’s existence — in one form or another — is 
questioned by those who think that the causal 
principle cannot be applied beyond experience, 
or who think that our knowledge of cause and 
effect is not sufficient to warrant such infer- 
ences. 

“The existence of any being can only be 
proved by arguments from its cause or its ef- 
fect,” Hume writes; “and these arguments 
are founded entirely on experience. ... It is 
only experience which teaches us the nature 
and bounds of cause and effect, and enables us 
to infer the existence of one object from that 
of another.” But Hume doubts “whether it be 
possible for a cause to be known only by its 

effect ... or to be of so singular and particu- 
lar a nature as to have no parallel and no sim- 
ilarity with any other cause or object, that has 
ever fallen under our observation. ... If ex- 
perience and observation and analogy be, in- 
deed, the only guides which we can reasonably 
follow in inferences of this nature,” as Hume 
thinks is the case, then it follows that “both 
the effect and the cause must bear a similarity 
and resemblance to other effects and causes 
which we know. 

“I leave it to your own reflection,” he adds, 
“to pursue the consequences of this principle.” 
One seems obvious enough; namely, that God 
— a unique and unparalleled cause — cannot be 
proved by reasoning from our experience of 
effects and their causes. Hume himself draws 
this conclusion when he declares that theology, 
insofar as it is concerned with the existence of 
a Deity, has “its best and most solid founda- 
tion,” not in reason or experience, but in “faith 
and divine revelation.” 

Like Hume, Kant thinks that our notions 
of cause and effect cannot be applied outside 
experience or to anything beyond the realm 
of sensible nature. But he offers an additional 
reason for denying validity to all a posteriori 
reasoning concerning God’s existence. “It im- 
poses upon us,” he says, “an old argument in a 
new dress, and appeals to the agreement of two 
witnesses, the one with the credentials of pure 
reason, and the other with those of empiricism; 
while, in fact, it is only the former who has 
changed his dress and voice.” 

The principle of the argument from the con- 
tingency of the world or its parts Kant states 
as follows: “If something exists, an absolutely 
necessary being must likewise exist.” One 
premise in the argument, namely, that con- 
tingent things exist, has its foundation in e.x- 
pcrience and therefore Kant admits that the 
reasoning “is not completely a priori or onto- 
logical.” But in order to complete the proof, he 
thinks it must be shown that an ens realissiintim, 
or most perfect being, is the same as an abso- 
lutely necessary being, in order for the obtained 
conclusion (a necessary being exists) to be trans- 
lated into the conclusion desired {God exists). 

That “znensrealissinmm must possess the ad- 
ditional attribute of absolute necessity” — or, 
in other words, that a perfect being is identical 

556 THE GREAT IDEAS 

with one which necessarily exists — is, according 
to Kant, “exactly what was maintained in the 
ontological argument.” Hence he maintains 
that the argument from contingency is invalid 
because it cannot avoid including what is for 
Kant the invalid premise of the ontological 
argument as “the real ground of its disguised 
and illusory reasoning.” 

The controversy concerning the proof of 
God’s existence raises issues in logic, in meta- 
physics and physics, and in the theory of knowl- 
edge. Philosophers are opposed on the ques- 
tion whether a valid demonstration is possible. 
Those who think it possible differ from one 
another on the way in which the proof should 
be constructed. Those who think it impossi- 
ble do not always go to the opposite extreme 
of making the affirmation of God’s existence 
a matter of faith; or of denying with the skep- 
tic that we can have any light on the ques- 
tion at all. Pascal and Kant, for example, reject 
the theoretic arguments as inconclusive or 
untenable, but they do not think the problem 
is totally insoluble. They offer instead practical 
grounds or reasons for accepting God’s exist- 
ence. 

“The metaphysical proofs of God are so re- 
mote from the reasoning of men,” Pascal as- 
serts, “and so complicated, that they make 
little impression.” He will “not undertake,” he 
tells us in his Pensees, “to prove by natural 
reasons . . . the existence of God.” In his view 
“there are only three kinds of persons: those 
who serve God, having found Him; others who 
are occupied in seeking Him, not having found 
Him; while the remainder live without seeking 
Him, and without having found Him.” Since 
he regards the first as “reasonable and happy,” 
the last as “foolish and unhappy,” he addresses 
himself to the middle group whom he regards 
as “unhappy and reasonable.” 

He asks them to consider whether God is or 
is not. “Reason can decide nothing here,” he 
says. If a choice is to be made by reason, it must 
be in the form of a wager. “Which will you 
choose then ? Let us see. Since you must choose, 
let us see which interests you least. You have 
two things to lose, the true and the good; and 
t^vo things to stake, your reason and your will, 
your knowledge and your happiness; and your 

nature has two things to shun, error and misery. 
Your reason is no more shocked in choosing one 
rather than another, since you must of necessity 
choose. This is one point settled. But your 
happiness ? Let us weigh the gain arid the loss 
in wagering that God is. Let us estimate these 
two chances. If you gain, you gain all, if you 
lose, you lose nothing. Wager then, without 
hesitation, that He is.” 

We are incapable of knowing either that 
God is or what God is, according to Pascal, be- 
cause “if there is a God, He is infinitely incom- 
prehensible” and “has no affinity to us.” Never- 
theless, proceeding on the practical level of the 
wager, reason may lead to Christian faith, yet 
not in such a way as to give adequate reasons 
for that belief, since Christians “profess a re- 
ligion for which they cannot give a reason.” 

Kant also makes the affirmation of God a 
matter of faith, but for him it is 'a “purely 
rational faith, since pure reason ... is the sole 
source from which it springs.”' He defines a 
rnatter of faith as any object which cannot be 
known through the speculative use of reason, 
but which “must be thought a priori, either as 
consequences or as grounds, if pure practical 
reason is to be used as duty ‘ commands . . . 
Such is the sutnmttm boniim," he says, “which 
has to be realized in the world through free- 
dom . . . This effect which is commanded, 
together with the only conditions on which its 
possibility is conceivable by us, namely, the exist- 
ence of God and the immortality of the soul, 
are matters of faith and are of all objects the only 
ones that can be so called.” 

For Kant, then, the existence of God is a 
“postulate of pure practical reason ... as the 
necessary condition of the possibility of the 
summum boniim^ The moral law commands 
us to seek the highest good, with perfect happi' 
ness as its concomitant; but Kant thinks that 
“there is not the slightest ground in the moral 
law for a necessary connexion between morality 
and proportionate happiness in a being that 
belongs to the world as a part of it.” Since man is 
a part of the world or nature, and dependent 
on it, “he cannot by his will be a cause of this 
nature, nor by his own power make it thorough- 
ly harmonize, as far as his happiness is con- 
cerned, with his practical principles.” The only 
possible solution lies in “the existence of a 

Chapter 29: GOD 557 

cause of all nature, distinct from nature itself, 
and containing the principle of this connexion, 
namely, of the exact harmony of happiness 
with morality.” That is why, Kant explains, 
“it is morally necessary to assume the existence 
of God.” 

In the tradition of the great books, the com- 
mon ground shared by reason and faith is 
marked by the convergence of the contribu- 
tions made by pagan, Jew, and Christian — and 
by poets, philosophers, and theologians— to the 
problem of God’s existence and the understand- 
ing of the divine nature, the essence of God 
and His attributes. 

Certain attributes of God, such as simplicity, 
immateriality, eternity, infinity, perfection, 
and glory, are usually regarded as so many dif- 
ferent ways in which the human understanding 
apprehends the divine nature in itself. Other 
attributes, such as the divine causality, omni- 
potence, omnipresence, omniscience, love, jus- 
tice, and mercy, are usually taken as ways of 
considering God’s nature in relation to the 
world or to creatures. But to divide the at- 
tributes in this way, as is done in the


Outline 
of Topics, is to make a division which cannot 
be fully justified except in terms of convenience 
for our understanding. God’s will, for example, 
no less than God’s intellect, can be considered 
in relation to Himself. God’s intellect, no less 
than God’s will, can have the world for its 
object. So, too, the divine goodness can be con- 
sidered with reference to things, even as God’s 
love can be considered with reference to Him- 
self. 

The difficulties we meet in classifying or 
ordering the attributes of God confirm the 
opinion of almost all theologians, that our 
understanding is inadequate to comprehend the 
essence of God. The fact that we employ a 
multiplicity of attributes to represent to our- 
selves what in itself is an absolute unity is 
another indication of the same point. The one 
attribute of simplicity would seem to deny us 
the right to name others, unless tve take the 
plurality of attributes to signify something 
about man’s understanding of God rather than 
a real complexity in the divine nature. 

“He that will attribute to God,” Hobbes 
writes, “nothing but what is warranted by 

natural reason, must either use such negative 
attributes, as infinite, eternal, incomprehensible', 
or superlatives, as most high, most great, and the 
like; or indefinite, as good, just, holy, creator, 
and in such sense, as if he meant not to declare 
what He is ffor that were to circumscribe Him 
within the limits of our fancy), but how much 
we admire Him, and how ready we would be 
to obey Him; which is a sign of humility and of 
a will to honor Him as much as we can: for 
there is but one name to signify our conception 
of His nature, and that is, I AM: and but one 
name of His relation to us, and that is GOD; in 
which is contained Father, King, and Lord.” 

Even when they are discussed by the philos- 
ophers and'reflected, on by the poets, certain 
matters belong especially to theology because 
they constitute the dogmas of religion — articles 
of religious faith based- solely on divine revela- 
tion, not discovered by human inquiry or 
speculation. That God created the world out 
of nothing and of His free will; that the world 
had a beginning and will have an end are, for 
example, dogmas of traditional Judaism and 
Christianity. Philosophers may argue about 
the freedom or necessity of the creative act, or 
about the possibility of a beginning or an end 
to time and the world, but Jewish and Christian 
theologians find in Sacred Scripture the war- 
rant for believing that which may not be thor- 
oughly intelligible to reason, much less demon- 
strable by it. What is true of creation applies 
generally to the religious belief in divine provi- 
dence and the positive commandments of God, 
to the gift of grace which God bestows upon 
men, and to the performance of miracles. 

Judaism and Christianity share certain 
dogmas, though the degree to which Jewish 
and Christian theologians commonly under- 
stand what is apparently the same dogma varies 
from great similarity of interpretation (as in 
the case of creation and providence) to differ- 
ences so great (as, for example, with regard to 
grace) that, there may be some doubt whether 
the dogma in question is really the same. The 
line of demarcation between these faiths would 
seem to be more easily determined than their 
common ground; yet even here such matters 
as the resurrection of the body — even when we 
take differences of interpretation into account 
— may be regarded as a dogma shared by both. 

THE- GREAT IDEAS 

The basic differences between Jewish and 
Christian theology center, of course, oh the 
issue between a Unitarian and a trinitarian con- 
ception of the Godhead, with immediate con- 
sequences for disbelief or belief in Christ as the 
incarnate second person of the Trinity — the 
Word become flesh. This in turn has conse- 
quences for doctrines of salvation, and of the 
nature and mission of the church, its rituals 
and its sacraments. Even within Christianity, 
however, there have been and still are serious 
doctrinal differences on all these matters. The 
most fundamental heresies and schisms of early 
Christianity concerned the understanding of 
the Trinity and the Incarnation. The great 
modern schism which divided Christendom 
arose from issues about the sacraments, the 
organization and practices of the church, and 
the conditions of salvation. 

It would seem to be just as easy to say what 
beliefs are common to religious Jews and 
Christians, as to articulate the faith common 
to all sects of Christianity. If all varieties of 
Protestant doctrine are included, little remains 
in common except belief in the God of Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob— creator and provider, 
governor and judge, dispenser of rewards and 
punishments. 

One book stands out from all the rest be- 
cause, in our tradition, it is — as the use of 
“Bible” for its proper name implies — the 
book about God and man. For those who 
have faith. Holy Writ or Sacred Scripture is 
the revealed Word of God. Its division into 
Old and New Testaments represents the his- 
toric relation of the Jewish and Christian 
religions. 

Without prejudice to the issue between be- 
lief and unbelief, or between Jewish and Chris- 

tian faith, we have attempted to organize the 
references to specifically religious doctrines 
concerning God and His creatures according 
to their origin and foundation in either the 
Old or in the New Testament, or in both. On 
certain points, as we have already seen, the line 
of distinction can be clearly drawn. For exam- 
ple, the doctrines of God’s covenant with Is- 
rael, of the Chosen People, of the Temple and 
the Torah, are indisputably drawn from the 
Old Testament; and from the New Testament 
come such dogmas as those concerning Christ’s 
divinity and humanity, the Virgin Birth, the 
Church as the mystical body of Christ, and the 
seven sacraments. 

Under all these topics we have assembled 
passages from the Bible, interpretations of them 
by the theologians, and materials from the 
great books of poetry and history, philosophy 
and science. Since the criterion of relevance 
here is the reflection of sacred or religious 
doctrine in secular literature, the writings of 
pagan antiquity are necessarily excluded, 
though they are included in the more philo- 
sophical topics of theology, such as the existence 
and nature of one God. 

Despite its length, this chapter by no means 
exhausts the discussion of God in the great 
books. The long list of


Cross-References, which 
follows the seventy-three topics comprising the 
Reference section of this chapter, indicates the 
various ways in which the idea of God occurs 
in the topics of other chapters. The reader will 
find that list useful not only as an indication 
of the topics in other chapters which elaborate 
on or extend the discussion of matters treated 
here, but also as a guide to other Introductions 
in which he is likely to find the conception of 
God a relevant part of the examination of some 
other great idea. 

OUTLINE OF TOPICS 

I. The polytheistic conception of the supernatural order 561 

la. The nature and existence of the gods 

ih. The hierarchy of the gods: their relation to one another 562 

JC. The intervention of the gods in the affairs of men: their judgihent of the deserts 
of men 

Chapter 29 : GOD 559 

• pagd 

2. The existence of one God 

2a. The revelation of one God 

2b. The evidences and proofs of God’s existence 55^ 

2c. Criticisms of the proofs of God’s existence: agnosticism 

2d. The postulation of God: practical grounds for belief 565 

3. Man’s relation to God or the gods 

3a. The fear of God or the gods 

3^. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods 

31:. The love of God or the gods ^55 

3d. Obedience to God or the gods 

y. The worship of God or the gods: prayer, propitiation, sacrifice 568 

3/! The imitation of God or the gods: the divine element in human nature; the 

deification of men; man as the image of God jgp 

4. The divine nature in itself: the divine attributes 570 

4a. The identity of essence and existence in God: the necessity of a being whose 

essence involves its existence 571 

ifi. The unity and simplicity of the divine nature 

4c. The immateriality of God ^^2 

4d. The eternity and immutability of God 

4(f. The infinity of God: the freedom of an infinite being 57^ 

4/. The perfection or goodness of God 

4g. The intellect of God 57^ 

4/1. The happiness and glory of God 

5. The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures 57^ 

5a. God as first and as exemplar cause: the relation of divine to natural causation 
<jb. God as final cause: the motion of all things toward God 576 

5c. The power of God : the divine omnipotence 577 

5^. The immanence of God: the divine omnipresence 578 

55. The transcendence of God: the divine aseity 

5/1 God’s knowledge: the divine omniscience; the divine ideas 57p 

5g. God’s will : divine choice 580 

5/1. God’s love: the diffusion of the divine goodness 

5?. Divine justice and mercy: divine rewards and punishments 581 

6 . Man’s knowledge of God 583 

6a. The names of God: the metaphorical and symbolic representations of God; the 

anthropomorphic conception of God 584 

6 b. Natural knowledge: the use of analogies; the evidences of nature; the light ofreason 

6c. Supernatural knowledge 585 

(1) God as teacher: inspiration and revelation 

(2) The light of faith . 586 

(3) Mystical experience 587 

(4) The beatific vision 

7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian conceptions of God 

and His relation to the world and man 588 

ja. Creation 

yb. Providence 

yc. Divine government and law 589 

yd. Grace 550 

ye. Miracles 591 

yf. The Book of Life 592 

yg. The resurrection of the body 

yh. The Last Judgment and the end of the world 

8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and His people 593 

8a. The Chosen People; Jew and gentile 

Zb. God’s Covenant with Israel: circumcision as sign of the Covenant 

8c. The Law: its observance as a condition of righteousness and blessedness 594 

8d. The Temple; the Ark of the Torah 

8e, The messianic hope jpj 

9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human destiny 

9a. The Trinity 

gb. The Incarnation: the God-man 596 

(1) The divinity of Christ 

(2) The humanity of Christ - ^97 

(3) Mary, the Mother of God , 

gc. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of original sin and salvation 

gd. The Church; the mystical body of Christ; the Apostolate 598 

ge. The sacraments 999 

gf. The second coming of Christ 

10. The denial of God or the gods, or of a supernatural order; the position of the atheist 

11. The denial of God as completely transcending the world or nature: the position of 

the pantheist goo 

12. The denial of a revealed and providential God; the position of the deist 

13. God as a conception invented by man; its emotional basis 

14. The worship of Hlse gods: deification and idolatry , 

?6I 

REFERENCES 

To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type, which are the volume and page 
numbers of the passages referred to. For example, in 4 Homer: 7/;W, bk ii [265-283] I2d, the 
number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the number J2d indicates that the pas- 
sage is in section d of page 12. 

Page Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a and b refer to the 
upper and lower halvesofthepage. For example, in 53 James :P/yc/:o/o^y,116a-119b, the passage 
begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is 
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the left- 
hand sideofthepage, theletters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side of 
thepage. Fore.xample, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half 
of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. 

Author’s Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, 
sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are given in cer- 
tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. 

Bible References: The references arc to book, chapter, and verse. When the King James 
and Douay versions differ in title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King 
James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a {D), follows; e.g.. Old Testa- 
ment: Nehemiah, 7:45— (D) // Esdras, 7:46. 

Symbols: The abbreviation “esp” calls the reader’s attention to one or more especially 
relevant parts of a whole reference; “passim” signifies that the topic is discussed intermit- 
tently rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 

For additional information concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation of 
Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 

1. The polytheistic conception of the super- 
natural order 

\a. The nature and existence of the gods 

4 Homer: Iliad, bk v [330-351] 33c-d; [ 814 - 
909] 38b-39a,c / Odyssey, bk vin [266-366] 
224d-225d 

5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / 
Agamemnon [158-183] S3d-54a 

5 Sophocles : Oedipus at Colonus [607-614] 120a 
/ Antigone [780-792] 138a 

5 Euripides: Hc/cn [1137-1150] 309a / Bacchan- 
tes 340a-3S2a,c esp [272-327] 342b-c / Heracles 
Mad [815-874] 371d-372c; [1302-1353] 376c-d 
/ Iphigenia Among the Tauri [354-391] 414a-b; 
[570-57514163 

5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp [263- 
428] 491a-493d, [813-833] 498c-d, [1462-1477J 
506c / Birds 542a-563d esp [684-736] S51b- 
5S2a, [1492-1765] 560c-563d / Plutus [87-93] 
630a 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, lOa-lld; 31a-b; 
48c; BK 11, 58b-60d; 7Sa-b; 79d-80c; 86c; 
BK III, 95a-c; bk iv, I34a; 140c-d 

7 Plato: Cralylus, 9Ic-d / Phaedrus, 124c-125b/ 
Symposium, 152b; IS3b-c; IS9d-161a; 163a- 
164c / Euthyphro, 193a-c I Apology, 204c- 
205c; 209a-b / Republic, bk ii, 313d-314d; 

BK ii-iii, 320c-328a / Timaeus, 4Sld-4S2b; 
46Sd / Statesman, S87a-S89c / Laws, bk vii, 
730a-d; bk x, 757d-769d; bk xii, 787d-788a 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [ 27 o'’i- 26 ] 
361c-362a; bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a / Meta- 
physics, bk III, CH 4 [iooo“ 8 -i 8 ] 518d-S19a; 
BK XII, CH 8 lio74'>i-i4] 604d-605a 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8 [ii 78 ’’ 8 - 23 ] 
433b-c / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 23 [i 397 '’i 2 -i 4 ] 
645d: [i398“I5-i7] 646c; [i 398 '’ 27 - 28 ] 647b; 
[i 399 '’ 5 - 8 ] 648a-b; bk hi, ch i 8 [i 4 I 9 '' 6 -i 3 ] 
673d-674a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [ 646 - 651 ] 
23b; [J 090 - 1104 ] 29a; bk hi [ 14 - 24 ] 30b; bk 
V [ 14 ^ 173 ] 63a-b; [ 306 - 310 ] 6 Sa; [ 1161 - 1193 ] 
76b-c; BK VI [ 56 - 78 ] 81a-b 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; 
CH 12 , 118d-119b; bk hi, ch 13 , I88b-I89a: 
BK IV, cH 4 , 227d-228a; ch ii, 240d-241a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 2S8a-b 

14 Plutarch: Pericles, 140d / Coriolanus, 191d- 
192b / Pelopidas, 239d-240c 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d-60a 

17 Plotinus; Third Ennead, tr v, ch 2-3 101c- 
102c; CM 6 103b-104a: cii 8-10 10Sa-106b / 
Pifih Ennead, tr i, ch 7 , 212 b-c; tr viii, 
CH 3 , 241a; ch jo 244c-245a / Sixth Ennead, 
TR VIII, ch I 342d-343c; CK 3 344a-b 

(1. The polytheistic conception oj the supernatural 
order, la. The nature and existence of the 
godsi^ 

18 Adgustine: City of God, bk i-x 129a-322a,c 
passim, esp bk vi, ch 5-9 234d-241b 

19 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica, part i, q 11, 
A 3, REP I 49a-c; q 63, a 7, ans 331c-332b; 
Q 115, A 3, REP I 588c-589c 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part i, 79a-b; 79d-80a; 
81a-b 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity la'7b / Lycidas 27b- 
32a / Comus 33a-56b / Paradise Lost, bk i 
[ 331-621] 100b-107a / Samson Agonistes [896- 
902] 359a / Areopagitica, 384b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, 
SECT 15 116c-d 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 
103-110, 498b'501b 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 152a-c 

40 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 12b-c; 98a-c;345b- 
347a; 461b'c; 584a; 600d-601a 

41 GiBBon-. Decline and Fall, 226a-227a 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 224a-b; 
237a-239c; 244c-245a; 251b-257c; part ii, 
263d-265c; 268b-271c; part hi, 290b-292a 

lb. The hierarchy of the gods: their relation to 
one another 

4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [ 493-611] 8a-9a,c; bk viii 
[ 1-52] 51a-c; BK XV [184-217] 10Sd-106b; bk 
xvin [356-367] 133d; bk xix [74-144] 137d- 
138c; BK XX [1-160] 142a-143d/ Odyssey, bk i 
[11-79] 183a-d; bk v [ 1-147] 208a-209c; bk 
XIII [125-158] 256b-d 

5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [22-28] Ib; 
[524-600] 7c-8d; [882-894] 12b; [1008-1073] 
13d-14a,c / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / 
Agamemnon [158-183] S3d-54a / Eumenides 
81a-91d 

5 Euripides: Heracles Mad [1302-1353] 376c-d 
/ Iphtgenia Among the Tauri [1234-1283J 
422b-c 

5 Aristophanes: Peace [403-426] 530d / Birds 
542a-563d esp [684-736] 551b-552a, [1195- 
1266] 557c-558b, [1494-1693] 560c-562d / 
Pltitus [111-146] 630b-d 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21d-22a; bk ii, 
58a-60d; 79d-80c; 82d-83b; bk iv, 134a; 15Sc- 
156a; bk viii, 269a 

7 Plato: Cratylus, 91c-d / Phaedrus, 124d'12Sa 
/ Symposium, lS2b; 153b-c; lS9d-161a; 163a- 
164c / Etithyphro, 193a-c / Timaeus, 452b / 
Laws, BK IV, 683b; bk viii, 731d-732a 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4 [iooo“8- 
18] 518d-519a 

9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 liz^ 2 ^ig- 2 y] 
446a 

12 Epictetus; Discourses, bk i, ch 3, 108b; ch 
14, 121a-b 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk 1 [1-156] 103a-107a; bk x 
[ 1-117] 302a-305a; [606-632] 318b-319b 

lb to [f 

14 Plutarch: Pelopidas, 239d-240b / Pompey, 
525b 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 293b-294a 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 9, 71b c 
/ Third Ennead, tr v, ch 6 103b-104a / Fifth 
Ennead, tr i, ch 7, 212b-c 

18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 17 
645d-646a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, 
A 3 , ans 130d-131c; Q 63, A 7, ANS 331c-332b 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi 46a-47c 

22 Chaucer: Troilusand Cressida, bk hi, stanza 
1-7 54b-55b 

27 Shakespeare: Tempest, act iv, sc i [60-133] 
542b-543a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20b-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [ 331-621] 100b- 
107a 

38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 435b-c 

40 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 12b-d; S9c-60a' 
346b-d;461b-c 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of History, part i, 224a-b; 
228a-b; 252a-253c; part ii, 262b-c 

Ic, The intervention of the gods in the affairs 
of men: their judgment of the deserts of 
men 

4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk i [33-317] 3b- 
6b, [493-611] 8a-9a,c, bk iv [1-140] 24a-2Sb, 
BK V [311-519] 33b-3Sc, [711-909] 37b-39a,c, 
BK VIII Sla-56d, BK xiv-xv 98a-llld, bk xvi 
[431-461] 117a-b, [843-867] 121c-d, bk xvih 
[356-367] 133d, BK XIX [74-144] 137d-138c, bk 
xx-xxi 142a-154d, bk xxiv [507-551] 176c- 
177a / Odyssey 183a-322d esp bk ii 188a-192d, 
BK IX [16-38] 229a-b, [67-81] 229d-230a, bk 
XVIII [124-150] 285b-c, BK XX 296a-300a,c, 
BK XXIV [438-548] 321c-322d 

5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [79-175] 2a- 
3a; [1008-1073] 13d-14a,c / Persians [535-547] 
20d; [738-842] 23a-24b / Seven Against Thebes 
27a-39a,c esp [790-801] 35d-36a / Prometheus 
Bound 40a-51d esp [227-243] 42c, [436-502] 
44c-45a, [564-891] 45d-49c / Agamemnon S2a- 
69d esp [355-475] 55d-57b, [1200-1222] 64d- 
65a, [1485-1488] 67d, [1559-1570] 68c / Clio- 
r/’Aoroe 70a-80d esp [269-314] 72d-73a, [1021- 
1076] 80a-d / Eumenides 81a-91d 

5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp 
[1297-1415] lllb-112b / Oedipus at Colonlts 
114a-130a,c esp [229-253] 116b-c, [939-1015] 
123a-d, [I^/^S-l666]127b-129b / Antigone 131a- 
142d esp [100-162] 132a-c, [1348-1353] 142d / 
Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [394-459] 146c-147a, 
[733-783] 149b-d / Electra 156a-169a,c esp [516- 
576] 160a-c / Trachiniae 170a-181a,c esp [94- 
140] 171a-b, [247-3o6]I72b-d, [izy^-izySJlSlc 
/ Philoctetes 182a-19Sa,c esp [169-200] 183d- 
184a, [446-452] 186a, [1408-1471] 194d-195a,c 

5 Euripides: Rhesus 203a-211d esp [594-674] 
208b-209a, [890-996] 210d-211d / Medea 
[1415-1419] 224c / Hippolytus 22Sa-236d esp 

Ic to 2a 

[1-55] 225a-c, [520-568] 229C'd, [1202-1466] 
234d-236d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp [1-76J 
237a'238a, [1159-1163] 247c / Heracleidae 
[750-1055] 2S4d-257a,c / Suppliants 2S8a- 
269a, c esp [113-283] 259a-260d, [1183-1234] 
268c-269a,c / Trojan Women 270a-281a,c esp 
[1-97] 270a-271a, [914-1032] 277d-278d / Jon 
282a-297d esp [1-81] 282a-d,[ 429-451] 286b-c, 
[1470-1622] 296a-297d / Hefen 2g8a-314a,c 
esp [1-67] 298a-d, [711-715] 304d-30Sa, [1644- 
1692] 313d-314a,c / Andromache [1225-1288] 
32Sc-326a,c / Electra 327a-339a,c esp [1233- 
1359] 338b'339a,c / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / 
Hecuba [488-500] 357a / Heracles Mad 365a- 
377d esp [1260-1390] 376a-377b / Phoenician 
Maidens 378a-393d esp [1-87] 378a-379a, 
[930-959] 386c, [1758-1763] 393d / Orestes 
394a-410d esp [317-357] 397a-b, [1625-1693] 
410b-d / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a'424d 
esp [1-41] 411a-b, [939-986] 419b-d, [1435- 
1499] 424a-d / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d 
esp [1185-1194] 435d'436a, [1526-1629] 439a-d 

5 Aristophanes: 7’eaee526a-541d esp [195-220] 
528b-c / Thesmophoriaztisae [655-687] 607c- 
608a / Plutus 629a-642d esp [86-92] 630a, 
[489-498] 634c-d, (653-747] 637a-d 

6 Herodotus: History, bk 1, 7b-10a esp 9d-10a; 
20b-22a; bk ii, 54d-55a; 77a-b; 78d-79c; bk 
III, 98b-c; BK IV, 124d-l25a: 144c-d; 150b- 
d; 151b-153d: 155b-c; 158d-159d esp 159d; 
BK VI, 190c-d; 198b-d; ig9d-200a; 200c- 
201a; 201d-202c; 20Sc-d; 211b-d; bk vii, 
216d-217c esp 217c; 218b-220a; 224d-22Sa; 
226d-227a; 239c-240d; 246b-247a; 250a-d; 
BK vin, 262b-c; 266a-d; 269c-270a; 270c- 
271a; 274b-c; 276b-d; 279d-280a; 283d; 
284d-285a; bk ix, 302c; 308a-c; 309d-310a 

6 Tvivcxmsszs'.Peloponnesian War, isKi,355b-c; 
378a-b; bk 11, 407a-b; 415d-416c; bk v, 
506b-c; BK VII, 559d-560a 

7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Symposium, 
152d-153b / Apology, 211d / Republic, bk ii, 
313b-314d; 322a-324c; bk vi, 378a-b; bk x, 
436c-437a; 437c-438c / Critias 478a-485d / 
Statesman, 587a- 589c / Laws, bk iv, 679a-b; 
681b-683b; bk ix, 757a; bk x, 765d-768d; 

BK XII, 787d-788a 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9 [1099 9-18J 
345a; bk x, ch 8 [ii79“23'33] '^34a / Rhetoric, 
BK II, CH 5 [i383''3-8] 62gd; ch 17 [i39i“3o- 
'>3] 638d 

10 Hippocrates; Sacred Disease, 154a-lS5d 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [logo- 
1104] 29a; BK V [1194-1240] 76d-77b; bk vi 
[43-79] 80d-81b; [379-422] 85b-d 
12 Epictwvus: Discourses, bk i, ch 12 118d-120b; 

ch 22, 128a-b; bk 11, ch 8 146a-147c 
12 Aurelius; Meditations, bk i, sect 17 2S5d- 

256d; bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; bk hi, sect ii 
262a-b; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; bk vi, sect 
40-46 277d-278d; bk x, sect 5 296d; bk xii, 
SECT 5 307d-308a 

13 Virgil: Aeneid 103a-379a esp bk i [223-417] 
109a-114b, [657-722] 121a-123a, bk ii [162- 
200] 128b-129b, [588-633] 140b-142a, bk hi 
[84-120] 149b-150b, bk iv [90-128] 169b-170b, 
[173-278] 171b-174b, BK V [604-699] 202b- 
205b, [779-871] 207b-210a, bk vi [42-101) 
212a-213b, bk vii [286-600] 243b-2S2b, bk 
vni [369-453] 269a-271a, [608-731] 275a-278b, 
bk IX [1-24] 279a-b, [77-122] 281a'282a, 
[638-663] 296a-297a, bk x [1-117] 302a- 
305a, [606-688] 318b-321a, bk xi [532-596] 
342b-344b, [762-867] 349a-351b, bk xh [134- 
160] 357b-358a, [405-440] 365a-b, [766-886] 
374b-377b 

14 Plutarch: Romulus, 27d-29c / Numa Pom- 
pilius,S(ii-51c; 57b-58a/ 5o/on, 6Za/ Camillus, 
104b-d; 107b-d / Fabitis, 142d-143b / Corio- 
lanus, 185b-186a; 188d-191b / Aristides, 268a- 
273c / Lysander, 365a-366a / Sulla, 370c- 
371b / Lucullus,‘i0^<iA05a/ Alexander,S53h- 
554b / Caesar, 602c-604d esp 604b-d / Pho- 
cion, 615b-d / Cato the Younger, 639d / De- 
mosthenes, 698a-699a / Dion, 781 d- 782a 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d-60a; bk vi, 
91b-d; BK XVI, 179d; 183d / Histories, bk i, 
189d-190a; bk 11, 235a-c; bk iv, 284b; 292c- 
294a 

17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 9, 71a / 
Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, 
A 3, ANS 130d-131c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xiv [43-72] 
20a-b; paradise, iv [49-63] 111b; viii [1-12] 
116d 

22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk 1, stanza 
30-35 5a-b; bk hi, stanza 89 66a / Knight's 
Tale 174a-211a esp [1303-1333] 181b-182a, 
[2663-2699] 203b-204a, [3099-3108] 211a / 
Merchant's Tale [10,093-230] 335a-337a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 81b-c 

27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act iv, sc i [33-39] 
269d; [69-74] 270b; sc ii [38-50] 270d-271a; 
SC VI [35-40] 273d; act v, sc hi [166-174] 
281a / Antony and Cleopatra, act h, sc i [1-8] 
317d / Cymbeline, act v, sc iv [1-151] 481a- 
482c; sc V [425-485] 488b-d 

38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 43Sa-436a 

47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [8582-8590] 209a; 
[8610-8637] 209b-210a 

2. The existence of one God 

7.a. The revelation of one God 

Old Testament: Genesis, 17:1-14 / Exodus, 3 
esp 3:6, 3:14-16; 6:1-8; 19:9-20:6 esp 2 o;i-6; 
20:18-22 / Deuteronomy, 4:39; 5:1-10: 6 esp 
6:4-5; 32 •■1-47 esp 32:36-43 / 7 Kings, 8:22-62 
esp 8:23, 8:60 — (D) III Kings, 8:22-62 esp 
8:23, 8;6o / 7 Chronicles, 16:7-36 — (D) 7 Para- 
lipomenon, 16:7-36 / Psalms, 18 esp 18:30-32 
— (D) Psalms, 17 esp 17:31-33 / Isaiah, 37:15- 
20: 43-45 passim, esp 43:3, 43:10-13, 44:6, 

THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 2f 

(2. The existence oj one God. 2a. The revelation 
oj one God.) 

44:8, 44:24, 45:5-7, 45:18, 45:21-22; 48:12 
—(D) Isaias, 37:15-20; 43-45 passim, esp 43:3, 
43:10-13, 44:6,-44:8, 44:24, 45:5-7, 45:18, 
45:21-22; 48:12 / Jeremiah, 10 esp 10:6, 
10:10— (D) Jeremias, 10 esp 10:6, io:io / 
Daniel, 6 esp 6:20, 6:26-27/ Hosea, 13:4 — 
(D) Osee, 13:4 / Joel, 2:27 / Zecliariah, 14:9 
— (D) Zacharias, 14:9 / Malachi, 2:10 — (D) 
Malachias, 2:10 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 12:13 — (D) 
OT, Boo,^ of Wisdom, 12:13 / Ecclesiasticus, 
1:8— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:8 / 7/ Macca- 
bees, 1:24-29— (D) OT,nMachabees,i:2^-2g 

New Testament: Matthew, 23:9 / Marb, 12:28- 
34 / John, 1:1-2; 10:30; 17:3 / 

17:22-29 / Romans, 1:14-32 / 7 Corinthians, 
8:4-6; 12:4-6 / Ephesians, 4:5-6 / 7 Timothy, 
2:5-6; 4:10; 6:14-16 / 7 John, 5:5-9 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 16 48c- 

49a / 0/ Go(7, bk viii, ch 11, 272c / 

Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 12 627c-d; ch 32 
633c-d 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, 
A 2, REP 1 lld- 12 c; Q II, A 3, CONTRARY and 
REP 1 49a-c; q 13, A 11, contrary 73C'74b 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 74, 
A 10, REP 3 136c-137c; Q 102, a 5, rep i 283c- 
292c; PART ii-ii, Q 1, a 5, REP 3 383b-384b; 
A 8, ANs and rep 1 387a'388c 

21 Dante: D/w'ne Comedy, paradise, xxiv [115- 
147] 143d- 144a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38 a; 41b-d 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk viii [267-318] 
238a-239a; bk xii [106-151] 321b-322b; 
[223-248] 324a-b / Samson Agonistes [472-478] 
3S0a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 242-290 217b-225a; 428 
244b; 557 272b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 245d- 
247b passim 

2b, The evidences and proofs of God’s exist- 
ence 

New Testament: Romans, 1:14-32 esp 1:18-21 

7 Plato: Laws, bk x, 758b-765c 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch i 326a-327b; 
BK VIII, CH 1-6 334a-346b; ch 10 [267“2i-*’27] 
354d-35Sd / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2 512b- 
S13b; BK IX, CH 8 57Sb-577a; bk xii, ch 6-7 
601b-603b; ch 8 [i074''33-bl] 604d; ch io 
[io75*’33-io76‘5] 606d 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; 
ch 12 118d-120b; ch 16 12ld-122d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par lo 3b-c; 
BK V, par I 27a-b; bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c; 
BK X, par 8-38 73b-81a; bk xi, par 6 90c-d / 
City of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c; bk x, 
CH 14 307c-308a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, 
CH 8 626c-627a 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, qj 
10c-14a esp A 3 12c-14a; q 3, a 4, rep 2 16d- 
17c; Q 8 34c-38c; q ii, a 3 49a-c; q 19, a 5, 
REP 3 112d-113c; q 44, a 1, rep i 238b-239a; 
q 65 339a'343c esp a i, rep 3 339b-340b; q 
' 75, A I, REP 1 378b-379c; q 79, a 4, ans 417a- 
418c; Q 104, AA 1-2 534c-537b; part i-ii, q i, 
A2 610b-611b 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [3003-3016] 209 a-b 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part 1, 78d-79a; 79d-80a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38a; 41b-d 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv 51b-54b / 
Meditations, 71d-72a; iii 81d-89a; v93a-96a/ 
Objections and Replies, 108a-115a,c passim; 
120c-123a; 126b-127c; def viii 130d; postu- 
late v 131b-c; axiom i 131d; axiom ix-x 
132b; PROP i-iii 132b-133a; I37d-138a; I58b- 
162a; 168d-169a; 211c-212a; ‘213a-d; 217d- 
218a 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 1, def i 35Sa; def 
3,6 355b; PROP 7 356c; prop 11 358b-359b; 
PROP 14, DEMONST and coROL I 359d-360a; 
prop 20, DEMONST and COROL 1 363d-364a 

32 Milton: Psalm 136 8a-10a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 242-244 217b-218a; 469 
256a; 557 272b 

34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, general scnoi, 
369b-370a / Optics, bk hi, 528b-529a; 542a- 
543a passim 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, chxvii, 
SECT 17 172b-c; sect 20, 173a; bk iv, ch x, 
SECT I-II 349c-352a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, pref, 404a; 
sect 6-7 414b-c; sect 25-33 417d-419a esp 
SECT 29-33 418c-419a; sect 146-156 442a- 
444 d passim 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi 497b- 
503c passim 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d'188a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 143a'b [thesis]; 177b- 
192d; 236b-240b esp 239a-240b / Practical 
Reason, 353a-3S4d / Judgement, 593c-d; 607d- 
609b 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 401a-b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 280 
94d-95a 

47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3431-3468] 84a-b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196b-d; 

217c-d 

2c. Criticisms of the proofs of God's existence: 
agnosticism 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, a i, 
REP 2 lOd-lld; A 2 lld-12c 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, llOa-llla; 
112d-114c; 137d-138a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 242 217b-218a; 428 244b; 
543 266a; 547-549 266b-267a 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi 497b' 
503c passim, esp div 115 S03b-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 33a-d; 143a'145c; 152a- 
153c; 177b-192d esp 177b-179c, 190a-192d; 

2d to 3b 

200c-203d esp 202a-203b; 20Sa-208d esp 
208a-b; 218d-223d; 234c-240b esp 239a-c; 
241d-242c / Practical Reason, 291a-292c; 348b- 
349b; 351b-352c//n/ro. Metaphysic of Morals, 
384a, c / Judgement, S67b; 568c-570a; 588a- 
613a, c esp S88a-S93d, 596c-S99b, 600d-603d, 
607d-613a,c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 280 
94d-95a 

49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 593c 
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
120d-121c; BK X, 292d-293a; bk xi, 337a- 
346a esp 341c-342c 

2 d. The postulation of God: practical grounds 
for belief 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 20Sa-217b esp 233, 
214b-216a; 425-427 243b-244b; 430 245a- 
247b; 436-438 25Ia 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236b-243c esp 239a-240b, 
241d-242c / Practical Reason, 29Ia-292a; 
314c-d; 344c-349b esp 345a-c; 3SIb-352c; 
353a-354d / Science of Right, 432c-433a / 
Judgement, 588a-607c esp 593d-596c, 606d- 
607c; 608c-6nd 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
120b-121c; BK XI, 313c-314a 

53 James: Psychology, 6S3a 

3. Man’s relation to God or the gods 

3«. The fear of God or the gods 
Old Testament: Leviticus, 19:14,32; 25:17 / 
Deuteronomy, 6:1-2,12-15; 8:6; 10:12-13,20- 
22; 31:10-13 / Joshua, 24:14-16— (D) Josue, 
24:14-16 / II Samuel, 23:3— (D) 11 Kings, 
23:3 / Nehemiah, 5:7-13— (D) II Esdras, 
5:7-13 / Job, 28:12-28 / Psalms, 2:10-12; 19:9; 
25:12-14; 34 esp 34:9-11; 111:5,10; 112; 128— 
(D) Psalms, 2:10-13; iS:io; 24:12-14; 33 esp 
33:10-12; 110:5,10; in; 127 / Proverbs, 1:7, 
22-33; 2:3-5; 8:13: 9=1°: to\z-]-, 14:26-27; 
15:16,33; i6:6; 19:23; 22:4; 23:17-18; 24:21 / 
Ecclesiastes, 5:2-7; 8:10-13; 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 
8:11-14; 33-6~(^) Itttias, 8:11-14; 

11:1-5; 33=6 / Jeremiah, 2:19; 5:19-31— (^) 
jeremias, 2:19; 5:19-31 / Jonah, 1:1-16— (D) 
Jonas, I 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiosticus, 1-2; 10:19-24; 15:1, 
13; 19:20-24; 23:18-28; 25:10-12; 34:13-17; 
40^26-27— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1-2; 10:23- 
27; 15:1,13; 19:18-21; 23:25-38; 25:13-16; 
34:14-20; 40:26-28 

New Testament: Acts, 10:34-35 / Colossians, 
3:22 / I Peter, 2:17 / Revelation, 14:6-7— (D) 
Apocalypse, 14:6-7 

4 Homer: Odyssey, bk v [282-312] 210d-211a; 
BK XVIII [124-150] 285 b-c 

5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [419-5®°! 6^' 
7b / Agamemnon [901-954! 6Ic-62b / Cho- 
ephoroe [269-301] 72d-73a; [885-1076] 78d- 
80d / Eumenides [490-565] 86b-87a 

5 Sophocles : Oedipus the King [863-910] 107 b-c 
/ Oedipus at Colonus [258-291] 116 c-d; [1448- 
1485] 127 b-c / Electro [221-250] I 57 d- 158 a 

5 Euripides: Orestes [251-316] 396 c- 397 a 

6 Herodotus: Hiiror^, bk ii, 78 d;BKVi, 211 b-c; 
BK VII, 216 d- 218 a; 218 c- 220 a 

6 Thvcydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 400 d- 
40 Ia 

7 Plato; Laws, bk ix, 7 S 7 a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [62-158] 
ld- 3 a; bk hi [1-93] 30 a- 31 b; [978-1023] 42 d' 
43 b; bk V [1161-1240] 76 b- 77 b; bk vi [43-95] 
80 d- 81 c 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv [259-282] 174 a-b; bk 
VII [445-459] 248 b- 249 a 

14 Plutarch: Pericles, 123 c- 124 a / Nicias, 
43 Sb-d / Crassus, 445 d- 446 b / Alexander, 
575 a- 576 a / Phocion, 615 b-d 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 292 c- 294 a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 2 27 b-c / 
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628 b-c; bk 11, 
CH 7 638 d- 639 c 

19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part i-ii, q 42, 
a I, ANs 80 Ic- 802 a; a 3, rep 1 802 d-S 03 c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i~ii, q 67, 
A 4, rep 2 84 d- 8 Sd; q 68, a 4, rep 4 91 b- 92 c; 
Q 69, A 3, REP 3 98 c- 100 c; Q 99, A 6 250 a- 2 Sla; 
PART ii-ii, Q 7, A 1 415 c- 416 b; q 19 465 a- 474 d; 
Q 22, A 2 481 d- 482 c; q 25, A l, rep i 501 b- 502 a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi [100-136] 
Sa-b; purgatory, xiii [103-129] 73 a-b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 79 d- 80 a; 82 b-c; 
90 b-d 

29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part 11, 267 b'C 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [561-566] 331 b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 262 22Ia 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 155-156 
444 b-d , 

42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 
278 b-c / Science of Right, 432 c- 433 a / Judge- 
ment, S 02 d-S 03 a; 504 b- 505 ai 

43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 4 S 8 a-b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 264 c; 
PART III, 304 b 

54 Freud: Group Psychology, eSSa-b 

ib. The reproach or defiance of God or the 
gods 

Old Testament: Genesis, 4:4-9; 11:1-9 / Exodus, 
5; 7-12; 14:10-15; 16:1-30 / Numbers, ii; 14; 
20:1-13; 21:4-9 / Deuteronomy, 1:26-46; 9 / 
Joshua, 22 — ip) Josue, 22 / / Samuel, 12:14- 
15; 15:22-23— (D) I Kings, 12:14-15; 15:22- 
23 / II Kings, i9'^2-23 — (D) IV Kings, 19212- 
23 / Job / Psalms, 2; 5:8-10; 22:1-2; 44; 74; 
79:12; 107:10-12— (D) Psalms, 2; 5:9-11; 
21:2-3; 43; 73; 78:12; 106:10-12 / Proverbs, 
14:31; 17:5 / Isaiah, 1:2-4; 3:8-9; 30-31; 36- 
37: 45 ’- 9 : 48 :J- 9 ; 59 = 1 - 15 : 63:10; 65:2-7— 
(D) Isaias, 1:2-4; 3:8-9; 30-31; 36-37; 45:9; 
48:1-9; 59:1-15; 63.T0; 65:2-7 / Jeremiah pos- 
sitn— (D) Jeremias passim / Lxsmentations, 

THE GREAT IDEAS 33/o3r 

(3. Man’s relation to God or the gods. 36. "The 
reproach or defiance of God or the gods^ 

i:i8; 3:42 / Ezekiel, 2:3; 5:5-8; 12-15; 17; 
20; 22-23; 28— (D) Ezechiel, 2:3; 5:5-8; 
12-15; 171 20; 22-23; 28 / Hosea — (Z?) Osee 
/ Jonah— {D) Jonas 

ApocRypHA: Judith, 5; 7:20-8:27 — (Z?) OT, 
Judith, 5; 7:11-8:27 / Wisdom of Solomon, 
12 : 12 — {D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 12:12 
New Testament: Matthew, 27:46 / Mark, 15:34 
/ 9:1-6; 11:17 / Romans, 8:7; 9:19-21 / 

James, 4:4 

4 Homer: Z/iW, bk 1 [1-120] 3a-4b; [428-487] 
7c-8a; bk v [431-549] 34c-3Sd; bk xxi [114- 
148] 149b-c; [200-382] I50b-152a / Odyssey, 
BK IX [475-535] 234a-d 

5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [151-175] 2d- 
3a; [882-894] 12b / Persians [679-842] 22a- 
24b / Agamemnon [901-954] 61c-62b; (1200- 
1222] 64d-65a 

5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King]^ 6 i\-gto\ 107b'C 
/ Antigone [988-1090] 139c-140b / Ajax 143a- 
15Sa,c esp [1-133] 143a'144c, [430-459] 146d- 
147a, [748-783] 149c-d / Electra [516-576] 
160a-c / Trachiniae [1264-1278] 181c / Philoc- 
tetes [446-452] 186a 

5 Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp [1-55] 
22Sa-c / Heracleidae 248a'257a,c / Suppliants 
258a-269a,c esp [113-283] 259b-260d / Tro- 
jan Women [1-98] 270a-271a / Ion 282a-297d 
esp [429-451] 286b-c / Helen [255-305] 
300c-d / Andromache [994-1045] 323c-324a 
/ Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Heracles Mad 
365a-377d esp [339-347] 368a, [750-760] 371c, 
[1258-1347] 376a-d / Iphigenia Among the 
Tattri [570-575] 416a 

5 Aristophanes; Clouds [263-428] 491a-493d; 
[813-833] 498c-d; [1462-1477] 506c / Birds 
542a-563d / Thesmophoriazusae [655-687] 
607c-608a 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 20d-22a; 39a-b; 
BK n, 77a-b; bk in, 9Sa-c; bk iv, 140c-d; 151b- 
lS2a; BK vii, 222c-d; 226d-227a; bk viii, 
283d 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 400d- 
401a 

7 Plato: Laws, bk ix, 757a 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 1, ch 6 110c-112b; 
ch 12 118d-120b; ch 27, 132c-133a; bk hi, ch 
22, 19Sc-d; 198a-b 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [i-ii] 103a; bk xii [500- 
508] 367b 

14 Plutarch: Agesilaus, 483a-b / Dion, 801b-c 

15 Tacitus; Histories, bk iv, 292c-294a 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 78, 
A 1, contrary 152b-153b; q 84, a 2, ans and 
rep 2 175b-l76a; part ii-ii, qq 13-14 444b- 
452a; part hi, q 64, a 6, ans 874d-875d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi [100-136] 
5a-b; xi [16-90] lSb-16a; xiv [1-72] 19c-20b; 
XXV [1-15] 36b-c; xxxi [82-96] 46d-47a 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [1303-1333] igib- 
182a / Monk’s Tale [14,149-188] 437a-b 
2 $ Montaigne: Essays, lOb-llb 
27 Shakespeare; King Lear, act iv, sc i [30-37] 
269d 

32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [667-709] 354a- 
355a 

42 Melville; Moby Dick, 30a-34a; 123a-b; 
370b-371b; 380a-381a 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
121d-127b passim 

3 c. The love of God or the gods 
Old Testament: Exodus, 20:5-6 / Deuteronomy, 
6:4-9; 7‘9~i^i io;i2-ii:i; 11:13-25; 13:1-3; 
19:9; 30:6,15-20 / Joshua, 22:5; 23:11— (D) 
Jostte, 22:5; 23:11 / Psalms, 5:11-12; 18:1-2; 
31:23; 42:1-2; 63; 97:10; ii6:i; 119:132; 
122:6; 145:20 — (D) Psalms, 5:12-13; 17:2-3; 
30:24; 41:2-3; 62; 96:10; 114:1; 118:132; 

121-.6; 144-.20 / Isaiah, 26-.8-9’, 

Jsaias, 26:8-9; 56:6-7 / Jeremiah, 2:1-3— 
(D) Jeremias, 2 : 1 -^ 

Apocrypha: Tobit, 13:12-18 — (D) OT, Tobias, 
13:14-23 / Ecclesiasticus, 2 :i§-i 6 ; 13:14; 25:11- 
12 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:18-19; 13:18; 
25:14-16 

New Testament: Matthew, 10:37-38; 22:35-38 
/ Mark, 12:28-33 / Luke, 7:37-47; 10:25-27; 
11:42 / John, 5:40-42; 8:42; 14:15-31; 16:26- 
27; 17:23-26; 21 :i5-i7 / Acts, 20:22-24; 21:7- 
15 / Romans, 5:5; 8:28-39 / Z Corinthians, 2:9; 
8:1-3; 13:1-14:1; 16:14,22 / II Corinthians, 
5:14-15 / Ephesians, 1:3-6; 3:14-21; 6:24 / II 
Thessalonians,y.’y/ 1 Timothy, 1 : 5 / II Timothy, 
I :i3-i4; 3 :i-5 / James, i ;i 2 ; 2 : 5 / 1 Peter, 1:7-8 
/ Z John, 2:5,15-17; 3:17; 4:7-5:3 / II John, hj 
Jude, 20-21 

4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xiii [217-351] 257b- 
2S8c 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16, 158b-d; 

CH 22, 168d; BK IV, ch 1, 219a-b 
l2 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 13 258c 
16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, SlOa-b ' 

16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1050b; 
1080a-b 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 5-6 2b-c: 
par 28 7d-8a; bk ii, par 15 12b'c; bk hi, par 15 
17a-b; bk iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; bk v, par 1-2 
27a-c; bk vii, par 6 44d-4Sa; par 23 50b-c; bk 
viH, par 9 S5a-c; bk ix, par 3 62a-b; bk x, 
par 8-40 73b-81c; bk xi, par 1-4 89b'90b; bk 
XII, par 10 101c; par 23 104b-c / City of God, 
BK X, CH I 298b,d'299d; ch 3 300b-3qia; bk 
XIV, CH 28 397a'd / Christian Doctrine, bk i. 
CH 3-5 625b-626a; ch 10 627b; ch 15 628b-c; 
CH 22-23 629b-630c; cii 26-27 b37h-d; cH 29' 
30 632a-633b; ch 33 633d-634b; CH35 634c-ti; 
CH 37-40 63Sb-636a,c; bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c; 
CH 38, 654c; ch 41 656a-c; bk hi, ch 10-24 
661c-666d passim 

Zc to Zd Chapter 29: GOD 567 

19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, 
REP 5 14b-15b; q 8, a 3, ans and rep 4 366- 
37c; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; q 82 , a 3, ans and 
REP 3 433c-434c; q 95, a 4, ans 509b-510a; 
PART i-n, Q I, A 8 615a-c; q 2, a r, rep 3 615d- 
616c; Q 26, A 3, REP 4 735c-736b; q 28, a 2, 
CONTRARY 741a-742a; a 4, ans 742d-743c; 
Q 35, A 5, REP I 775d-777a 

20 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, 
A 5, ANS and REP I 74c-75a; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; 
Q 68, A 2, ans 89 c- 90 c; a 8, rep 2 95c-96c; q 
69, A 4, ANS lOOc-lOlC; Q 70, A 3, ANS 103b- 
104d; Q 73, A 4, rep 3 122b-123a; a 5, ans 
123a-d; q 77, a 4, contrary and rep i 148b- 
149a; Q 78, a 2, rep i 153b-lS4a; q 84, a 1, 
REP I 174b-175a; q 88, a 2, rep i 194b-19Sb; 
A 6, REP 2 198a-d; q 89, a i, rep 3 199a-c; a 2, 
ANS 199c-200d; q 99, a i, rep 2 24Sc-246b; q 
100, A 6, rep i 257 c- 258 c; a 10 262b-263b; a 
II, REP I 263c-264d; q io2, a i, rep i 270 c- 
271b; Q log, A3340c-341b; partii-ii, q i, a i, 
REP 3 380b-381a; a 3, rep i 381d-382c; q 3, 
A 2, REP I 401a-d; q 7, a 2 416b-d; q 19, a 4, 
REP 3 467c-468b; a 12, ans 473d-474d; Q 22, 
A 2, ANS 481d-482c; qq 23-27 482c-527b; Q 
180, A I, ANS and rep 2 607d-608c; a 2, rep 1 
608c-609c; a 7, ans 614d-616a; Q 182, a 2, ans 
621d-623a; a 4, rep i 623d-624d; q 184, a 2, 
ans 629d-630d; a 3, ans and rep 3 630d- 
632c; A 7, REP 2 636a-637a; q 185, a 2, rep i 
641c-643a; a 4, ans 644a-64Sc; Q 186, a 2, rep 
2 6Sld-652d; a 7, rep 2 658cl-660a; q 187, a 2, 
ANS 66Sa-666a; q 188, a 2, ans 675d-677a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv [40- 
81] 75d-76a; svn [gil-xvni [75] 79b-80c; 
PARADISE, I [94-142] 107b-d; in 109b-110c; v 
[1-12] 112a-b; vi [112-126] 114d-115a; xx [94- 
138] 137d-138a; xxi (52-102] 138d-139b; xxvi 
[i-8i] I4Sd-146c; xxxii [t3g]-xxxni [145! 
lS6a-lS7d 

22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 
263-267 154b-155a / Second Nun’s Tale 463b- 
471b / Parson's Tale, par 6, 497a; par 21 
509a-b; par 31 517b-518b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part m, 240d 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 210d-211a 

27 Shakespeare : Henry VIII, act in, sc ii [435- 
457]573c-d 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 

31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 88d-89a/ Ohjec- 
tions and Replies, 227b-228a 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 14-16 456b-c; 
prop 18-20 4S6d-458a: prop 32-34 460b-d; 
prop 36-37 461a-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xn [561-566] 331b 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 
430 24Sa-247b: 463 255a; 468 255b-2S6a; 
471 2S6a-b; 476 256b-2S7a; 479 257b; 482- 
483 2S8a-b; 485 258b; 487-489 258b-259a; 
491 259a; 544 266a; 821 331b-332a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch vii, 
SECT 5-6 132c-d 

42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 21 Sb- 
279d / Practical Reason, 321b-329a esp 326b- 
327a 

43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 4S8a-b 

47 Goethe: Faust, part 1 [1178-1185] 29b 

48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 318b 

51 Tolstoy; IVar and Peace, bk xv, 631a-c 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 
S4a-b; bk v, I27b-137c passim; bk vi, 164d- 
16Sa; BK XI, 313c-314d 

Sd. Obedience to God or the gods 

Old Testament: Genesis, 2:15-17; 3; 22:1-18 esp 
22:18; 26:4-5 / Exodus, 3:4-4:17; 24:1-8 / 
Deuteronomy, 4-n passim; 27-30 passim / 
Joshua, 22; 24:1-28— (D) Josue, 22; 24:1-28 / 
I Samuel, 12:14-15; 15 esp 15:22-23— (D) 
I Kings, 12:14-15; 15 esp 15:22-23 / I Kings, 
8:54-62— (D) III Kings, S:^h-62 / 1 Chronicles, 
28:9— (D) I Paralipomenon, 28:9 / Ezra, 7:23 
— (D) I Esdras, 7:23 / Job / Ecclesiastes, 5:1; 
12:13— (D) Ecclesiastes, 4:17; 12:13 ! itaiah, 
I :i9-2o— (D) Isaias, 1:19-20 / Jeremiah passim, 
esp 3, 7, II, 35, 42-44— (Z7) Jeremias passim, 
esp 3, 7, 11,35,42-44 / Daniel, 7:27 / Micah, 
6:8- (D) Micheas, 6:8 

New T estament: Matthew, 6 :io ; 7 :2i ; 12 146-50; 
26:36-39 / Marl^, 14:32-36 / Lukp, 22:40-45 / 
John, 5:30; 18:10-11 / Acts, 5:29-32; 21:8-15/ 
Romans, 5:19 / II Corinthians, 10:5-6 / Philip- 
pians, 2:1-18 esp 2:7-8 / II Thessalonians, 
1:7-9 / Hebrews, 5:8-9; 11:8 

4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [188-222] Sa-b 

5 AzscmLVs: Suppliant Maidens [410-434] 6a-b 
/ Choephoroe [269-301] 72d-73a; [883-1076] 
78d-80d / Eiimenides [490-565] 86b-87a 

5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King [86^-^io] I07b-c 
/ Antigone 131a-142d esp [374-378] 134b, [443- 
465] 134d-135a, [1351-1353] I'lZd/ Ajax [666- 
676] 148d / Electro 156a-169a,c esp [23-37] 
156b 

5 Euripides: Suppliants [513-563] 262d-263b / 
Helen [1644-1692] 313d-314a,c / Iphigenia 
Among the Tatiri [67-122J 411d-412b 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 39c-d; bk it, SSa; 
BK IV, 124d-125a; 126d-l27a; ISOb-d; 151b- 
152a; BK VI, 201d-202c; bk vn, 218c-220a; 
bk IX, 308a'C 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian JVar, bk i, 35Sb-c; 
382c-d 

7 Plato: Apology, 206b-d / Laws, bk iv, 681b- 
683b 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 11, cii 16-17, 158a- 
161a; BK III, cH 24, 204c-d; 208d-210a; bk rv, 
CH 1 213a-223d passim, esp 218b-219a; ch 3 
224b-d; ch 7, 234b; ch 12, 242d-243c 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 13 262c; 
BK V, sect 27 272d; bk vi, sect 10 274b-c; 
BK IX, sect I 291a-c 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi (S 4-120] 149b-150b; bk 
IV [259-282] 174a-b; [356-361] 176b-177a 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 292c-294a 

THE GREAT IDEAS Se 

( 3 . Man's relation to God or the gods. hd. Obedi- 
ence to God or the gods.) 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c 

19 Aquinas: Sttmma Theologica, part i-ii, q 19, 
A 5, REP 2 70Sd-707a; a 6, aNs and rep 2 707a- 
708a 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 88, 
A I, REP 2 193a-194b: q 96, a 4 233a-d; q 97, 
a 3, REP I 237b-238b; part ii-ii, q 2, a 9, 
ANS 398c-399b; q 4, a 7, rep 3 407d-409a; q 
33, A 7, REP 5 S56a-S57d; q 186, a 7, rep 3 
658d-660a ; part hi, q 7, a 3, rep 2 747b-748a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, parapise, hi [i]-v 
[87] 109b-113a; vii [19-120] 115b-116b 

22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [5240-5253] 
249b / Clerics Tale 296a-318a esp [9018-9038] 
316b-317a / Tale of Melibeus, par 17 407b- 
408a / Parson's Tale, par 24 Slla-b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 1, 82b-d; part 11, 
137b-138b: lS4b-155c; 159d-160a; 162a; part 
HI, 199b-204a: 240a-241a; 244d-246a 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 213a-21Sa; 233a-234a; 
238c-239c 

26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act n, sc ii [77- 
95] 120b-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk iv 
[411-439] 161b-162a, [720-749] 168a-b, bk v 
[506-543] 186a-187a, bk vi [164-188] 199b- 
200a, bk vii [449-518] 227a-228b, bk vin 
[31 1-333] 239a-b, [630-643] 246a, bkix [366- 
375] 25Sb, [647-654] 261b, bk x [ioi3]-bk xi 
[44] 296b-300a, bk xi [133-161] 302a-b, bk 
xii [386-410] 327b-328a, [561-566] 331b / 
Samson Agonistes [373-419] 347b-348b / Are- 
opagitica, 394b-395b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 460 254b; 476 256b-257a; 
482 258a; 489,491 259a; 531 264b; 539 265b 

35 Locke: Toleration, lSd-16a; 16c / Civil Gov- 
ernment, CH II, SECT 6 26b-c / Unman Under- 
standing, bk I, CH II, SECT 5-6 lOSa-c 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 2a-b; 
BK XII, 85d-86a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 259b-260a 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 321b-329a; 345c-d / 
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / 
Judgement, 504b-505a; 509a-c; 593a-d; 611a-c 

43 Mill: Liberty, 296b'd 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 394a 

48 Melville: Afo^5'Z)/V/^,30a-36b 

52 Dostoevsky : Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 64 c- 
67a; bk v, 127b-137c passim; bk vii, 177b-180a 

54 Freud: General Introduction, S82a / Civiliza- 
tion and Its Discontents, 776b 

3e. The worship of God or the gods: prayer, 
propitiation, sacrifice 

Old Testament: Genesis, 4:3-7; 15:7-21; 22:1- 
18 / Exodus passim, esp 12, 13:11-16, 15:1-21, 
23:18-19 / Leviticus passim, esp 2, 4-7, 16-17, 
22:1-24:9, 27:1-34 / Numbers, 5-8; 15; 18-19; 

28-30 / Deuteronomy, 10-12; 14:22-17:1 / 
Joshua, 22:10-34— (D) Jostle, 22:10-34 / I 
Samuel, 15 esp 15:22-23— (D) / Kings, 15 esp 
15:22-23 / I Kings, S', 18:21-39 — (D) III Kings, 
8; 18:21-39 / II Chronicles, 5-8; 29-31— (D) II 
Paralipomenon, 5-8; 29-31 / Nehemiah, 10:29- 
39— (D) II Esdras, 10:29-39/ Psalms j Prov- 
erbs, 15:8; 21:3 / Isaiah, 1:11-20; 58— (D) 
Isaias, 1:11-20; 58 / Lamentations, 5 / Ezekiel, 
43:18-27; 45:13-46:24— (D) Ezechiel, 43:18- 
27; 45:13-46:24 / Hosea, 6 esp 6:6; 8— (B) 
Osee, 6 esp 6:6; 8 / Joel, 2:12-18 / Amos, 4 / 
Micah, 6:6-8- (D) Micheas, 6:6-8 / Malachi, 
1:6-14 — iP) Malachias, 1:6-14 
Apocrypha: Tobit, 13 — (D) OT, Tobias, 13 / 
Rest of Esther, 13:12-14— (D) OT, Esther, 
13:12-14 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:22-23; 35— (B) 
OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:22-23: 35 
New Testament: Matthew, 6:1-18: 9:9-13; 
26:36-44 / Mark, 9:14-29 esp 9:29; 12:32-33 
—(D) Mark, 9:13-28 esp 9:28; 12:32-33 / 
Lukp, 11:1-13; 18:1-14 / John, 17 / Colossians, 
4:2-4 / I Thessalonians, 5:17 / Hebrews, 10:1- 
22; 13 :i 5 -i 6 / Revelation, 5 — (D) Apocalypse , 5 

4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [428-487] 7 c- 8 a; bk ii 
[394-431] 14 a-b; bk ix [485-526] 62 a-b / 
Odyssey, bk hi [1-68] 193 a-d 

5 Aeschylus : Suppliant Maidens [1-175] la-Sa; 
[525-600] 7c-8d; [1018-1073] 13d-I4a,c / 
Seven Against Thebes [80-320] 2Sa-30d 

5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King [151-2151 100c- 
101 a; [863-910] 107 b-c / Oedipus at Colontts 
[465-509] llSb'd / Electro [516-576] 160 a-c / 
Philoctetes [1440-1444] 195 a,c 

5 Euripides : Trojan Women [1277-1283] 280d 
/ Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp [200-209] 341c, 
[337-433] 342c-343b / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a- 
439d 

5 Aristophanes: Peace [173-195] S28a; [922- 
1126] 536c-539a / Birds 542a-563d 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6a; lOa-lld; 20d- 
22a; 31a-c: 40d-41b; 48c; BK 11, 57b-60a: 
79a-c; 86c; bk hi, 95a-c; bk iV, 126d-127a; 
134a; 140c-d; 142b-c: 155c-156a; 156d-157a; 
bk V, 175d-176a; bk vi, 196d-197a; 199d- 
200a; 200d; 205c-d; bk vii, 226 c; 23Sa; 
248b-c; 250b-d; bk viii, 267a: 270b-c; 282b-c 

6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 
407a-b; bk vi, S17d-S18a 

7 Plato: Phaedrus, I27c-128a / Symposium, 
156d-157a / Euthyphro, ig7d-198c / Phaedo, 
251d / Republic, bk i, 29Sa-d', 297a-b; bk 
II, 313d-314d; bk iv, 345d-346a / Timaetis, 
447a / Laws, bk iv, 683a-b; bk vii, 721a-c; 
BK vHi, 731d-732d; bk x, 768d-769c; bk 
XII, 791d-792a 

8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 11 [i05“2-6] 148c 
/ Heavens, bk 1, ch 1 [268“i2-i5] 359a-b 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 12 347 a-b; bk rv, 
ch 2 [ll22''l8-23] 369 c; BK VIII, CH9 [iifioMp- 
29] 412 b-c / Politics, bk vii, ch 9 [i329“26-34] 
533d 

3e to 3f 

12 Lucretius; Nature of Things, bk i [1-43] 
la-d; [80-101] 2a-b; bk n [589-660] 22c-23b; 
BK III [41-58] 30c'd; BK V [1194-1240] 76d- 
77b; BK VI [68-79] 81a-b 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 16 121d- 
, 122d 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 7 269d; 
BK IX, SECT 40 295b; bk xii, sect 14 308 c 

13 Virgil: Eclogues, v [62-80] 18a-b / Aeneid 
103a-379a passim, esp bk ii [108-125] I27a-b, 
BK HI [84-120] 149b-150b, [543-550] 162a, bk 
IV [54-67] 168b-169a, [198-221] 172b-173a, 
BK VI [42-76] 212a-213a, bk vni [558-584] 
274a'b, BK IX [621-631] 295b-296a, bk xi 
[783-798] 349b 

14 Plutarch; Theseus la-15a,c passim / Numa 
Pompilitis 49a-61d esp 56d-57b / Camillus, 
104b-d; 107b-d / Fabitis, 142d-143b / Corio- 
lantis, 185b-186a / Aemilius Patilus, 214b-d / 
Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Marcellas, 247c-249d / 
Lucullus, 404d-405a / Agesilaus, 483a-b / 
Alexander, 541a-d 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d-60c; bk xii, 
n2d-113a / Histories, bk ii, 214d-215a; bk iv, 
282d-283b: 292c-294a; bk v, 296a 

16 Kepler; Harmonies of the World, 1009a; 
1011a; 1050b; 1080a-b; 1085b 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk i, par i la-b; 
BK xni, par i llOd-llla / City of God, bk vn, 
CH 27-31 259c-262a; bk x 298b,d-322a,c / 
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 6 626a-b 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 30, 
A i, REP I 749a-d 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, 
A 3 247a-248a; a 4, rep 2 248a-d; qq 101-103 
265d'304a; part ii-n, q 30 , a 4, rep 1 536a-d; 
Q 32, A 2, ANS 541a-542c; qq 179-189 606a- 
700d esp Q 181, A 3, REP 3 618c-619b, q 182, 
A 2, REP 3 621d-623a, Q 186, a 4, ans 655 c- 
656b, A 5, REP 5 656c-657d, a 6, rep 2 6S7d- 
658d, Q 188, A I, REP I 674d-675d; part hi, 
QQ 21-22 823d-833a; q 25 839c-845a; q 60, a 
5, ANS 850b-851b; q 62 , a 5, ans 862b-863a; 
Q 63, A 2, ANS 865c-866c; a 4, rep 1,3 867d- 
868b; A 5, ANS 868c-869b; a 6, ans 86gb- 
870b; part hi suppl, QQ 71-72 900d-922b; 
Q 99, A 3, REP 2 10Sld-1083a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [133- 
145] 57b-c; IV [127-135] 58d; vi [25-48] 61a-b; 
XI [1-36] 68d-69a; paradise, v [13-84] 112b- 
113a; XIV [67-108] 127c-128a; xx [31-138} 
137a-138a passim; xxxiii [1745] lS6b-c 

22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 
263-267 154b-lS5a / Knight's Tale [2209-2437] 
196b-200a / Stimmoner’s Tale [7455-7529] 
288a-289a / Franklin’s Tale [11,176-206] 353b- 
3S4a; [11,340-398] 356b-357a / Prioress's Tale 
391a-395b / Parson's Tale, pat 93-94 547b- 
548a 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part i, 80c; 81c-d; part 
II, 154d-155a; 161b-163d; part hi, 182d-183b; 
PART IV, 261a-c 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 
117c-118a; bk iv, 265b-c 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 91b-c; 152b-156d; 
246b-d; 300c-d 

26 Shakespeare: Henry V, act iv, sc viii [g6- 
131] 561c-d 

27 Shakespeare; Hamlet, act hi, sc hi [36-96] 
53d-S4b 

31 Spinoza: El/ii«, part i, appendix, 369b-571d 
passim 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk hi [185-197] 139b; 
BK IV [720-735] 168a-b; bk v [136-208] 178a- 
179b; bk VII [550-640] 229a-231a; bk x [1086]- 
BK XI [71] 298a-300b / Areopagitica, 402a-b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 431 247b; 476 256b-2S7a; 
487-489 258b-259a; 491 259a; 499 260b; 504 
261a; 513-514 262a-263a 

35 Locke; Toleration, 3b-5c; 10c-15a 
35 Hume; Human Understanding, sect v, div 41, 
468a-b 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d-188a 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxv, 
209a-b; 209d-210a; 211a-c 

38 Rousseau; Social Contract, bk iv, 437a-c 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, S9c-60a; 81d-82a; 
93b-c; 98a; 121a-b; 180d-182c esp 181b-c; 
184d-185d; 208a-211a passim, esp 209a; 327d- 
328b; 349c-350b; 356d-358a; 457b,d-467d 
passim; S47a-b; 583d-584b 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, llOb-c; 195a'198d; 
207a-208c; 226a-228a; 232c-233c 

42 Kant: Judgement, 504b-50Sa; 509a-c 

43 Mill; Liberty, 307d-309a 

44 Boswell; Johnson, 52c-53a; 394a; 481d-482d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 224a- 
225a; 227c-228a; 234d-235c; 245b-247b; 
253c-254b; part hi, 291d-292b; part iv, 
322a-c 

47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3587-3619] 87b-88a; 
part h [8568-8603] 208b-209b 

48 Melville: Moby Dick, 30a-36b; 39a-b; 
I30b-131a; 370b-371b 

51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk hi, 122b-c; bk 
VH, 281d-282a; bk vhi, 323b; bk ix, 373b- 
377b; BK X, 435c-436c; bk xh, 544b-S4Sa; 
553c-5S4a; bk xih, 585b-d 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim; bk vi, 164d-16Sa; 167b-c 

53 James: Psychology, 203a-204b 

3/. The imitation of God or the gods: the divine 
element in human nature; the deification 
of men; man as the image of God 
Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27; 3 esp 3:4-5, 
3:22; 5:1-2; 9:6 / Exodus, 7:1 / Leviticus, 
11:44-45; *9-2! 20:7-8 / Psalms, 82:6-7— (D) 
Psalms, 81:6-7 I Isaiah, 40:10-31; 42:8; 46 — 
(P) Isaias, 40:10-31; 42:8; 46 / Ezekiel, 16:17- 
19; 28:1-19— (D) Ezecbiel, 16:17-19; 28:1-19 
/ Daniel, 6:7-9 

Apocrypha: Judith, 3:8; 533-6:4 — (Z?) OT, Ju- 
dith, 3:12-13; 5:27-6:4 / Wisdom of Solomon, 

(3. Ma7t's relation to God or the gods. 3/. The 
imitation of God or the gods: the divine 
elemetit in human tiature; the deification 
of men; man as the image of God.) 

2:23; 13-15— ( 77 ) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 2:23; 
13-15 / Ecclesiaslicus, 17:1-3 — {D) OT, Eccle- 
siasticus, 17:1-3 

New Testament: John, 10:34-35 / Acts, 12:21- 
23; 14:7-18: 17:27-29; 28:3-6 / Romans, 1:14- 
32 / / Corinthians, 11:7; 15:49 / 7/ Corinthians, 
3:18 / Colossians, 3:8-10 / 11 Thessalonians, 
2:3-4 ! Jttmes, 3:9/7 Eeter, 1:15-16 / 77 Peter, 

1:3-4 

6 Herodotus: History, bk 1, Ta-b; 12d'13b; 
14a-d; bk il, 79d-80a; bk iv, 140c-141a; bk v, 
168d-169a; 183d-184a; bk vii, 217c: 23Sb-c 

7 Plato: Phaedrus, 127c-128a / Ion, 144b'145c 
/ Republic, bk ii-m, 320c-328a / Timaeus, 
452c-d;466a-b;476a-b/ T/iMf/c/«i,530b'531a 
/ Laws, BK IV, 681b-683b; bk v, 686d'687c 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 2 [982*’28- 
983''ii] SOla-b; bk xn, ch 7 [io72‘’i4-29] 
602d-603a; ch 9 60Sa-d / Soul, bk ii, ch 4 
[4I5®22-*’8] 64Sc-d 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 1, ch 9 [io99*’9-i8] 
345a; CH 12 347a-b; bk vii, ch i [1145*15-33] 
39Sa'b; bk x, ch 8 [ii78'‘8-27] 433b-c 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [1-54] 
61a-d 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 
6 110c-112b; ch 9 114c-116b; ch 13-14 120b- 
121c; ch 17 122d'124a esp 123d; bk ii, ch 7-8 
14Sb-147c; ch 14, 153d-154c; bk hi, ch 13, 
188b-d; BK IV, CH 11, 240d-241a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; 
SECT 13 258c; bk hi, sect 12-13 262b-c; bk 
V, SECT 27 272d; bk xii, sect 2-3 307b-d 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [283-290] llOb-llla; 
[586-593] 119a-b 

14 Plutarch: Romulus, 27d-29c / Numa Pom- 
pilius, 50d-51c; 52b-53c / Alexander, 541a- 
542a; 553b'554b / Dion, 784d-785a 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 4c-d: bk iv, 73b-d; 
80c-d / Histories, bk iv, 285d-286a; 287b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 849a-b / Harmonies 
of the World, 1038a; 1048a 

17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr 11 6b-10a / Second 
Ennead, tr ix, ch 15 74d-75b / Fourth Ennead, 
TU HI, CH 12, 148d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 14 12a-b; 
BK IV, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, 
par 4 36a-b; bk xiii, par 32 119a-b / City of 
God, BK VIII, CH 8 270a-d; bk xi, ch 26-28 
336d-338d; bk xii, ch 23 357d-358a / Chris- 
tian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22 629b-630a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 
I, rep 2 14b-15b; Q 14, a 2, rep 3 76d-77d; 
Q 26, A 4 151c-152a,c; q 27, a i, ans 153b- 
154b; Q 59, A I, CONTRARY 306c-307b; q 72, 
A 1, rep 3 368b-369d; q 77, a 2, ans and rep 
r 401b-d; q 88, a 3, rep 3 472c-473a; q 91, a 

3 / 7 o 4 

4, REP 1-2 487d-488c; q 92, a 2, ans 489d- 
490c; Q 93 492a-501c; Q 106, a i, rep 3 5456- 
546d; PART i-ii, Q 1, A 8, 615a-c; q 2, a 4, rep 
I 618a-d; q 3, a 5, rep i 626b-627a 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, 
A 2, REP 3 27a-d; q 87, a 8, rep 2 191d-192d; 
Q 93, A 3 217b-218a; a 6, ans 219d-220d; q 
no, A 4, ANS 350d-351d: part ii-h, q 2, a 9, 
REP 3 398c-399b: q 10, a ii, ans 435d-436b; 
Q 19, A 3, REP I 466d-467c; q 31, a 3, rep 2 
538b-539c; part hi, q 4, a i, rep 2 730d- 
731d; PART HI SUPPL, Q 71, A 12, CONTRARY 
914c-915c; Q 75, a i, rep 4 935b-937a; q 91, 
A 2, CONTRARY 1017C'1020c; Q 92, A 3, REP 9 
1034b-1037c; q 93, a i, rep i 1037d-1039a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi [85- 
90] 77d; XXV [58-78] 92a; paradise, v [19- 
24] 112b; vii [64-84] 115d'116a; xiii [52-78] 
126a-b 

22 Chaucer: Franhjin's Tale [ 11 , 189 - 192 ] 353b- 
354a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 82b-c; part iv, 
263a-d 

25 Montaigne : jBrrfljr, 215a; 233b-234a; 248a-c; 
256c-d; 294a-b; 541d-543a,c 

27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [ 314 - 322 ] 
43d; ACT IV, sc iv [ 33 - 66 ] 59a-c 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428b-c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41b-d; 80b- 
81a 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 214a-d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [ 345 - 353 ] 118b- 
129a; bk vii [ 150 - 173 ] 220b-221a; [ 519 - 528 ] 
228b: bk XI [ 466 - 522 ] 309b-310b / Areopa- 
gitica, 384a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 430-431 245a-247b; 434-435 
248a-251a; 485 258b; 537 265b; 555 270a 

35 Locke: Civil Government, ch 'll, sect 6 26b-c 
37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d-188a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 12 b-c; 28b-d; 
547a-c 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 136b; 379b-d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, go, 
I30d / Philosophy of History, intro, 168b-d; 
PART I, 224a-228a; 234d-235c; 24Sa; partii, 
266d-267a; 268b-271c esp 270c-271c; parthi, 
306a-d; 308a-b; part iv, 339b-d; 349c-350c 

47 Goethe: Faust, part i [ 614 - 736 ] 17a-19b; 
[ 1566 - 1569 ] 38a 

48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 84b-85a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 525c-526b 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
121d-122c; bk xi, 313c-314d; 345a-c 

54 Freud: Group Psychology, 692a-693a esp 693a 
/ Civilization and Its Discontents, 778d-779a: 
790d 

4 . The divine nature in itself: the divine attri- 
butes 

7 Plato: Phaedrus, 126a / Symposium, 167b-d 
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8 [ii 78 '’ 8 - 23 ] 
433b-c 

4« to ^h 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 8, 146a; bk 
in, CH 13, 188b-c 

17 Plotinus ; Fifth Ennead, tri-vi 208a-237d pas- 
sim /,S'r*'i'/i Etinead, tr vii-ix 32Ib-360d passim 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 4 2a; bk 
IV, par 29 26b; bk vii, par 1-8, 43b-4Sd / City 
of God, BK VIII, CH 6 268d-269c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part j, qq 3-11 
14a-50b; Q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxxni 
[76-145] 157a-d 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162a-163b; part 
IV, 271b-c 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, S2b'd / 
Meditations, m 81d-89a / Objections and Re- 
plies, PROP III 132d-133a; 2Hc-212a; 232b 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp det 4,6 
35Sb, PROP 5 356b, prop 8-13 356d-359d, 
PROP 14, COROL 2-PROP 15 360a-361d, prop 
19-20 363c-364a; part ii, prop 1-2 373d-374a 

34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, general scuol, 
369b-371a / Optics, bk hi, 542a-543a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 1, ch hi, 
SECT 15 116c-d: bk II, CH xvii, sect I 167d- 
168a; ch xxiii, sect 33-35 212d'213c; bk hi, 
CH VI, SECT II-I 2 271b-272b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 146 
442a-b 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 229c-230b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187a-c; 190c; 236b-240b 
esp 239a-c / Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 
325d-326a; 344b-c; 34Sa-c; 347d-348b; 350c- 
3Sla: 352a-c / judgement, 592a-c; 608c-611d 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of Right, additions, 161 
143a- b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, ig6b-d 

4a. The identity of essence and existence in 
God: the necessity of a being whose 
essence involves its existence 

Old Testament: Exodus, 3:13-14 
8 Aristoile: Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 7 [1072’* 
4-14I 602c-d 

17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vhi, ch 14 349d- 
350c; ch 18-21 351d-3S3d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 23, 50c / 
City of God, BK VHI, CH ii, 272c / Christian 
Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, 
ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a 4 16d-17c; a 7, ans and 
REP 1 19a-c; Q 4, A I, REP 3 20d'21b; a 2, ans 
and REP 3 21b-22b; a 3, rep 3 22b-23b; q 6, 
A 3 2gc-30b: Q 8, A I, ANS 34d-35c; q io, a 2, 
ANS and REP 3 41d-42c; q 11, a 4, ans 49d- 
50b; Q 13, A II, ans 73c-74b; q 14, a 13, rep 
1 86d-88c; q 19, a 3, Rep 6 llOb-lllc; q 44, 
A I, ANS 238b-239a: Q 50, a 2, rep 3 270a- 
272a; Q 54, a i, ans 285a-d; a 3, rep 2 2S6c- 
287b; Q 75, A 5, REP 4 382a-383b; part i-ii, 
Q 3, A 7, ANS 628a-d 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 3, 
A 2 , REP 3 724a-c 

31 Descartes: Meditations, iii 81d-89a; v 93a- 
96a / Objections and Replies, 110a-112a; I12d- 
114c; 126b-127c; postulate v 131b-c; axiom 
I I3Id; AXIOM X 132b; prop i 132b-c; 158b- 
162a; 217d-218a 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def i 355 a; def 6-8 
355 b-c; prop 6-8 356 b- 357 d; prop 11 358 b- 
359 b; PROP 20 363 d' 364 a; prop 24 365 a; 
r PROP 34 369 a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 469 2S6a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 143a-145c; lS3a; 177b- 
192d esp 177b-179c, 187a-c, 192c-d; 205a-b; 
239a-c / Practical Reason, 344c-35Sd esp 353a- 
3S4d / Judgement, 570b'571c; 606d-609b esp 
608b-609a 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 280, 
95a / Philosophy of History, part hi, 305c- 
306c 

46. The unity and simplicity of the divine nature 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vhi, ch io 353b-3SSd 
/ Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1073*2-11] 603a-b; 
CH 8 [1074*32-39] 604d; ch 9 [1075*5-11] 
605c-d 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [1154^20-31] 
406 c 

17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr ix 3S3d-360d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 10 3b-c; 
par 12 4a; bk iv, par 24 25b-c: par 29 26b; bk 
vii, par 2 43c-44a; par 16 48c-49a; par 21 49d- 
50a; BK XHi, par 4 111c; par 19 115c-d / City 
of God, BK viH, ch 6 268d-269c; ch ii, 272c; 
BK XI, ch 10 327d-328d / Christian Doctrine, 
BK 1, ch 5 62Sd-626a; ch 32 633c-d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part r, q 3 
14a-20c; q 4, a 2, rep 1-2 21b-22b; a 3 22b- 
23b; Q 6, A 3 29c-30b; q 7, a 2 31d-32c; q 8, 
A 2, rep 2-3 35c-36b; a 4 37c-38c; q ii 46d- 
SOb; Q 13, A 1, REP 2-3 62c-63c; a 4, rep 3 
65c-66b; q 14, a i, rep 2 75d-76c; a 4 78b- 
79a; Q 26, a i, rep i 150b-c; q 27, a i, rep 2 
153b-154b; q 28, a 2, rep 1 158d-160a: q 30, 
A I, REP 3-4 167a-I68a; a 3 169b-170c; q 40, 
A I, REP I 213b-214b; q 44, a i, ans 238b- 
239a; q 47, a i 256a-257b; Q 50, a 2, rep 3 
270a-272a; a 3, rep 2 272a-273b; q 54, a 1, 
ANS 28Sa-d; a 3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 57, a 1, 
ANS 29Sa-d; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 3 442b- 
443c; Q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; part i-h, 
Q l8, A I, ANS 694a-d 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, 
A 4, ans 5a'6a; q 50, a 6, ans lla-12a; q 73 , a 
I, REP 3 ligc-120c; part hi, q 2, a 2, ans and 
REP 1 711d-712d; q 3 , A 2, rep 3 724a-c; 
A 3 724c-725b; q 6, a 5, rep 2 744a-d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xhi [52- 
66] 126a: xxiv [115-154] 143d-144fa; xxix 
[127-145] 151c-d: XXXIII [76-145] lS7a-d 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part ii, 151d 

31 Descartes; Diseourse, part iv, 52a-d / 
Meditations, iii, 86a-88b esp 88b / Objections 
and Replies, 122b-c; 232b 

572 THE GREAT IDEAS ^cioM 

(4. The divine nature in itself: the divine at- 
tributes, 4b. The unity and simplicity of the 
divine nature f ^ , , 

31 Spinoza: 'Ethics, part i, prop 2-8 355d- 
357d; prop iz-14 3S9b-360a: part ii, prop 
4 374c; prop 7,"schol, 375b 
35 Locke: Human 'Understanding, ,bk i.'ch hi, 
SECT 15 116c-d; BK II, CH XXIII, SECT 35 
213b-c ’ '■ 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307b-c 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 229c-230b , 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 176b-c; 192c-d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 224 a-b; 
227 d- 228 a; part hi, 306 a; part iv, 322 a-c 

4c. The immateriality, of God 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6 [loyi** 
2-23] 601 b-c; CH 8 [1074^31-39] 604 d 
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [146-155] 
63 a ' 

14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, S3b-c 

15 Tacitvs: Histories, bk v, 296a 

17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 26, 266 a; 
CH 27, 266 c 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk iv, par 29 26b; 
par 31 26c-27a; bk v, par 19-20 32b-33a; 
BK VI, par 4 36a'b; bk vii, par 1-2 43b-44a / 
City of God, bk viii, ch 5-6 267d-269c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 

2 15 c- 16 a; A 3, ANS lOa-d; a 8, ans and rep 

3 19d-20c; Q 7, A I, ANS and rep 2 31a-d; q 14, 
A I, ANS 7Sd-76c; a 11 84c-8Sc; q 40, a i, rep 
I 213b-214b; q 50, a i, rep i 269b-270a; a 2, 
REP 3 270a-272a; Q 54, A i, ans 285a-d; a 3, 
REP 2 286c-287b; Q 75. a 5, rep 1,4 382a-383b; 
Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c; a 4, rep i 444d- 
446b; Q 86, a 2, rep i 462a-463a; q 91, a 2, 
ANS 485b'486b; q 105, a 3, ans 540c-541b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, 
A I, ANS and rep 2 710a-711c; a 2, ans 711d- 
7l2d; Q 25, A 3, REP I 841c-842d; part hi 
SUPPL, Q 92, A I, REP 12 102Sc-1032b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 172d-173a 
28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk v, lOSa 
31 Descartes; Objections and Replies, 122b-c 
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 12-15 3S9b- 
361d; PART 11, DEF I 373a; prop 1-2 373d- 
374a; prop 5-7 374C'375c 

34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, S29a 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, 
SECT i 7117 a-c; bkh, ch xxhi, sect 28 211 b- 
d; BK HI, CH VI, SECT II, 271 b-c; bk iv, ch 
X, SECT 8-17 351 a- 353 c 

42 I^nt: Practical Reason, 334b-335b 

4d. The eternity and irnmutability of God 

Old Testament: Exodus, 15:18 / Deuteronomy, 
32:39-40 / I Chronicles, 16:34-36— (D) I Para- 
lipomenon, 16:34-36 / Psalms, 9:6-7; ro;i6; 
29:10-11; 33:10-11; 45:6; 48 esp 48:8, 48:14; 
66:7; 90 esp 90:1-4; 93:1-2; 102 esp 102:11-12, 

102:26-27; 103:13-18; 136; 145:10-13: 146:5- 
lo— (D) Psalms, 9:7-8;,9:i6; 28:10;, 32:10-11; 
44:7: 47 esp 47:9, 47:15; 65:7; 89 esp 89:1-4; 
92:1-2; lor esp 101:12-13, 101:27-28; 102:13- 
18; 135; 144:10-13; 145:5-10 / Isaiah, 40:8,28; 
43:10-13; 57:15— (Z 7 ) ZennH-,' 40:8,28; 43:10- 
* 3 ! 57'*5 / Jeremiah, 40:10— (D) Jeremias, 
10:10 / Lamentations, 5:19 / Daniel, 6:26 / 
Micah, 5:2— (Z)) Micheas, 5:2 / Malachi, 3:6 
r-{p) Malachias, 3:6 > t 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 36:17; 39:20; 42:21— 

, (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 36:19; 39:25; 42:21-22 

New Testament: Matthew, 24:35 / Romans, 
, 1 :2o-25 / Colossians, i :i6-i7 / 1 Timothy, 1:17; 
6:15-16 / Hebrews, 1:8-12; 7:23-25; 13:7-8 / 
James, 1:17 / Revelation, 1:17-18; io;6; 11:15- 
17— (Z)) Apocalypse, 1:17-18; 10:6; 11:15-17 

7 Plato: Republic, bk h, 322 d- 323 c;’ 324 a-b 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 6 [258'’io- 

259’’3i] 344b-34Sd / Heavens, bk i, ch 9 
[279“23-’^4] 370c-d; bkh, CH3 [286“8-i3]377c 
/ Generation and Corruption, bk ji, ch 10 
[337'*J5-23] 439a-b / Metaphysics, .,bk xii, 
CH I [io69“3o-''2] 598b'C; ch 6-7 601b-603b; 
ch 9 60Sa-d esp [io75'*5-ii] 60Sc-d / Soul, 
bk II, CH 4 [4I5“22-'’8] 645c-d , 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [ii54'’2o-3i] 

406 c . , 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 296 a > 1 

16 Kepler: Harmonies of the JKor/d,, 1071b 

17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 2-6 119c- 
122 d esp CH 5 121c-122a / Sixth Ennead, 
TR VIII, CH II 348b-c; ch 18-21 351d-353d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 10 3 b-c; 
bk IV, par 26 25 c-d; par 29 26 b: bk vh, par 
1-7 43 b- 45 d; par 16-18 48 c- 49 b; par 21 49 d- 
50 a; par 23 50 b-c; par 26, 51 c; bk xi, par 12- 
16 92 b- 93 a; bk xii, par ii lOld; par 18, 103 a-b; 
par 40 109 b- 110 a; bk xih, par 44 122 d/ City 
of God, BK VII, CH 30 261 b-d; bk viii, ch ii, 
272 c; BK XI, CH io 327 d- 328 d: cH 21-22 333 a- 
334 c esp CH 22, 334 c; bk xii, ch 1-3 342 b,d- 
344 b; CH 14-17 350 d- 354 a esp ch 14 350 d- 
351 b, ch i 7353 a' 354 a/ Christian Doctrine, bk 
I, CH 5-6 625 d- 626 b; ch 8 626 c- 627 a; ch 10 
627 b; ch 22-23 629 b- 630 c; ch 32 633 c-d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, 
REP 4 14 b- 15 b: QQ 9-10 38 c- 46 d; Q 14, a 9, 
ANS 83 b-d; a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; a 15 
89 b- 90 b; q 18, a 3 106 b- 107 c; q 19, a 7 114 d- 
115 d; Q 22, A I, REP 2 127 d- 128 d; q 26, a 1, 
REP 2 150 b-c; Q 42, A 2 225 d- 227 a; q 43, a 2 
230 d- 231 c; Q 51, A 3, REP 3 277 ff- 278 c; Q 61, 
A 2, ANS 315 c- 316 a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, Q 61, 
A 5, ANS 58 b- 59 d; q 91, a i 208 b-d; part hi, 
Q I, A I, REP 3 701 d- 703 a; a 5, rep 3 707 a- 
708 c; Q 2, A 1, ANS 710 a- 7 Ilc 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, paradise, ,vii [64- 
72] 115d: XIII [52-66] 126 a; xxiv [130-141] 
144 a; xxix [13-36] 150b-c; xxxiii lS6b- 
lS7d 

4e to 4/ Chapter 29: GOD 573 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part i, 79d-80a; part ih, 33 Pascal; Pensees, 231-233 213b-2I6a; 469 2S6a 
173a 34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, general schol, 

25 Montaigne; Ewaj’x, 293d-294a 370a • - 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, 

31 Descartes; Discourse, part iv, S2b-c / Medi- sect 2-4 162c-163b; sect 12 16Sb-c; ch xvii, 

tations, iii, 84a-b; 86a; v, g4d-95a sect i 167d-168a; sect 16-17 172a-c; sect 20 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 6 35Sb; def 8 172d-173c; ch xxiii, sect 33-36 2I2d-213d; 

355c; PROP 6 356b-c; prop n-13 358b-359d; bk hi, ch vi, sect ii 271b-d 

prop 17 362b-363c; prop 19-20 363c-364a; 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect iiy ‘iSea 

PROP 33, scHOL 2, 367d-368c esp 368b-c; 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 188c; 192c-d; 201b-c; 

PART II, PROP 44, COROL2-PROP 47390a-391a; 205a-b / Practical Reason, 325d-326a; 344b-c 

PART V, PROP 17 4S6c-d ' / Judgement, 590b-d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk in [1-12] 135b: 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 237d- 

[372-382] I43b . 238a; 246b-c 

33 Pascal; 469 2S6a ^ r • j , 

34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, general schol, perfection or goodness of God 

370a-371a New Testament: Matthew, 5:48 / Lu\e, 18:19 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk ii, cm xv, 7 Plato; Republic, bk it, 32Id-323a / Timaeus, 

sect 3-4 162d'163b; ch xvii, sect 16-17 
172a-c; sect 20 172d-173c; ch xxiii, sect 21 
209c; BK IV, ch x 349c-354c esp sect 3-5 
349d-350b, sect 8-11 351a-352a 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect ti7 436a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 176b-c; 190c; 192c-d / 
Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 344b-c; 352a'b 
/ Judgement, 592a-c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d- 
157b; part III, 306a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 608a-b; 
epilogue ii, 684C'd 

4e. The infinity of God: the freedom of an 
infinite being 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1073“ 
3-10] 603a-b 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk v, par ig-20 32b- 
33a; BK VII, par 7 45a-d; par 20-21 49d-50a; 
BK xiii, par 12 113b-d 

19 Aquinas ; Summa Theologica, part i, q z, a 3, 
REP 1 12c-14a; q 7 31a-34c; o 14, a i, ans 7Sd- 
76c; A 3 77d'78b; q 25, a 2, ans and rep i 
144c-145b; Q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 75, a 
5, REP 1,4 382a-383b; q 79, a 2, ans 414d- 
416a; q 86, a 2, rep i 462a'463a; part i-ir, 
Q I, a 4, REP I 612a-613a 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, 
A 4, REP 3 69b-70a; q 87, a 4, rep 2 188b-d; 
PART n-n, Q 20, A 2, REP 2 475d-476c; q 24, 
A 8, ANS 495b-496a; part in, q i, a 2, rep 2 
703a-704d; Q 2, A i, ans 710a-7llc; Q 3; a i, 
REP I 723b-724a; part hi suppl, q 92, a i, 
rep 6,12 1025c-1032b 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part ii, 162b-c 

31 Descartes; Meditations, iii, 86a-88d / Ob- 
jections and Replies, 112a-d; 123c-d; prop hi 
132d-133a 

31 Spinoza; Ethics, part 1, def 2 3SSa; def 6-7 
355b; PROP 8-14 356d-360a; prop 15, schol- 
pnop 17 360b-363c; prop 21, demonst 364a-c; 
PROP 29 366b-c; PROP 32-35 367a-369a; part 
II, PROP 1-4 373d-374c 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bk viii [411-421] 24Ia 

447d-448a / Theaetetus, 530b-531a 

8 Aristotle; Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 602a' 
603b 

9 Aristotle; Ethics, bk i, ch 12 347a-b 

12 Epictetus; Discourses, bk ii, ch 8 146a-147c 

16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1009a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 12 4 a; bk 

' in, par 12 16b; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; bk v, par 

19-20 32b-33a; BK VII, par 1-7 43b-45d esp 
par 4-7 44b-4Sd; par 16-23 48c-50c; bk x, 
par 38 81a; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk xii, par 
18, 103b; bk xiii, pat 1-5 llOd-llld; par 53 
ia4d'12Sa,c / City of God, bk xi, ch io 
327d-328d; bk xii, ch 1-3 342b,d-344b; ch 
8-9 346d-348b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, 
cm 5-7 625d-626c; ch 31-32 633b-d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, 
A T, REP 2 lOd-lld; A 3, ANS and rep I 12c- 
14a; Q 3, A I, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c-16a; 
A 7, rep 2 19a-c; q 4 20c-23b; q 6 28b-30d; q 
13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; a'ii, rep 2 73c-74b; q 
18, A 3 106b-l07c; Q 19, A I, rep 1-3 I08d- 
109c; Q 21, A I, pEP 4 124b-125b; q 51, a 1, 
REP 3 275b-276’j; q 61, a 3, rep 2 316a-d; q 
'62, A 8, ANS and REP 1-2 323c-324a; q 66, a i, 
CONTRARY 343d'345c; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 
3 442b-443c,'Q 91, A I, ANS 484a'485b; q ioo, 
A 2, aNs 521c-522b; q 103 528a-534b passim; 
Q 104, A 3, REP 2 S37b-d; a 4, ans 538a-c; q 
105, A 4, ANS 541c-542a; a g, ans S42a'S43b; 
PART i-ii, Q I, a 4, REP I 612a-613a; q 2, a 4, 
REP i 618a-d; q 9, a 6 662a'd; q 18, a i, ans 
694a-d; Q 19, A 4 70Sb-c; q 22, a 2, rep i 721c' 
722c: Q 24, A 3, rep 2 728c-729c 

20 'Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, 
A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 64, a 4, ans and rep 3 
69b-70a; part ii-ii, Q 9, a 4, rep 1 425d-426c; 
Q 13, A I, ANS 444b-445a; q 17, a i, ans 
457a-d; q 23, a 4, ans 485d-4S6b; q 34, a 1, 
ANS 559a-c; q 39, a 2, rep 3 57Sb-576b; Q 
184, A 2, ANS 629d-630d; part iii, q i, a i, 
ANS 701d-703a; q 23, a i, ans 833a-d; part ill 
SUPPL, Q 91, A 2, REP 4,10 1017c-1020c; Q 99, 
A 2, REP3l081a-d 

THE GREAT IDEAS 4^/o4^ 

(4. The divine nature in itself; the divine at- 
tributes. 4/. The perfection or goodness of 
God.) 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxviii 
[gi- 93 ] 97a; paradise, vii { 64 - 66 ] llSd; xix 
[ 40 - 90 ] 135c-136a 

25 Montaigne: £'s^iyT,300c-d 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, S2a-d; 53d / 
Meditations, i, 76d-77c; iii-iv, 86a-93a / Ob- 
jections and Replies, 123d-124c; def vin ISOd; 
142c 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 33, schol 2 
367d'369a; part v, prop 17, demonst 456c-d 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 580 276b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
370a-371a passim 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, 
SECT 11-12 271b-272b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 
78-81 485c-487a; sect xi, div 106-107 499b- 
500b passim; div 113 , S02a-b 

40 Gmnoiv. Decline and Fall, 81b-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 20 Sa-b / Fund, Prin. 
Metaphysic of Morals, 263a-b / Practical Rea- 
son, 307a-d; 32Sd-326a; 342c; 345a-c; 3Slb- 
3S2c / Judgement, S92a-c 

Ag, The intellect of God 

8 Aristotle : Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 (1072*’ 
14 - 29 ] 602d-603a; ch 9 60Sa-d 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8 [ii78'’8-23] 
433b-c 

12 Evtcrzrvs'. Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120d-121c; 
BK II, CH 8, 146a 

17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 1 65d-66d 
/ Fifth Ennead 208a-251d esp tr v-vi 228b- 
237d,TRix246c-251d 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d- 
269c; BK XI, CH2I 333a-d; bkxh, ch 17 353a- 
354a; bk xxii, ch 29, 614b / Christian Doc- 
trine, bk I, CH 13 627d 1 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theoldgica, part i, q 3 , a 1, 
REP 2-3 14b-15b; Q 14 , aa < 1^4 75d-79a; q 18 , 
A 3 106b-107c; q 19 , a i, an^ 108d-109c; a 2 , 
REP 4 109c-110b; A 3 , REP 6 IlOb-lllc; a 4 , 
ANS and REP 4 lllc- 112 c; q 26 , a 2 150c-151a; 
Q 27 , A 3 , REP 3 155c-156a; q 46 , a 2 , rep 3 
253a-255a; q 50 , a i, ans 269b-270a; q 54 , 
A 2 , ANS 285d-286c; Q 55 , a i, ans and rep 3 
289a-d; a 3 , ans 291a-d; q 57 , a i, ans 295a-d; 
A 2 , ANS 295d-297a; q 59 , a 2 , ans 307c-308b; 
Q 79 , A I, ANS 414a-d; a 2 , ans 414d-416a; a 4 , 
ANS 417a-418c; a 10 , rep 2 423d-424d; q 84 , 
A 2 , ANS 442b-443c; q 85 , a 5 , ans 457d- 
458d; Q 87 , A I, ANS 465a-466c; a 3 , ans 467b- 
468a; q 89 , a 1, ans 473b-475a; q 105 , a i, 
REP 2 538d-539c; a 3 , ans 540c-541b; q 116 , 
A I, ANS 592d-593d; part i-ii, q i, a 4 , rep i 
612a-613a; q 19 , a 4 , ans and rep 3 70Sb-c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, 

A 1, REP 2 12b-13c: Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; 
Q 93, A I 215b,d-216c; part hi, q 6, a 2, ans 
741c-742a 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii.aph 15 149a 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-c 

31 Spinoza : Ethics, part i, prop 17, schol 362c' 

363 c; PROP 21 364 a-c; prop 32, corol 2 367 b; 
PROP 33, SCHOL 2, 368 b-c; part 11, prop i 
373 d- 374 a; prop 3-6 374 a- 375 a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, 
SECT 10, 123b; CH x, sect 9 143a-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 33 a-d; 52 c- 53 b / Practi- 
cal Reason, 303 b- 304 a; 344 b-c; 350 c- 351 b/ 
Judgement, S 90 b-d; 592 a-c; 600 d- 601 c; 610 b- 
613 a, c • , 

4 A. The happiness and glory of God 

Old Testament: Exodus, 15:1-21; 33:13-23 / 
I Chronicles, 16:23-27; 29:11-13— (D) I Par- 
alipomenon, 16:23-27; 29:11-13 / Psalms, 
8; 19; 24; 57:5-11; 96:3-6; 104:1; 113:4; 
138:5; 145:11-12— (Z)) Psalms, 8; 18; 23; 
56:5-11; 95:3-6; 103:1; 112:4; '377: 144=”- 
12 / Isaiah, 6:1-4; 42:8— (^) Isaias, 6:1-4; 
42:8 

Apocrypha: Judith, 16:13— (Z?) OT, Judith, 
16:16 / Rest of Esther, 13:12-14— (Z 7 ) OT, 
Esther, 13:12-14 / Song of Three Children, 28- 
31— (D) OT, Daniel, 3:51-53 

New Testament: Marl^, 8:38 / John, 5:44; 8:54 
/ Hebrews, 2:10 / I Peter, 4:7-11 / II Peter, 
1:16-18 / Revelation, 5:9-14; 7:9-12; 21— (D) 
Apocalypse, 5:9-14; 7:9-12; 21 

8 Aristoti.e: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1072’’ 
13-29] 602 d- 603 a 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [ii54'’2o-3i] 
406c; BK X, CH 8 {ii78*’8-23] 433b-c 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 4 111c/ 
City of God, bk v, ch 14 220a-d; bk vin, 
CH 6 268d-269c; bk xii, ch 17 353a-35^a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 26 
150 a- 152 a,c; q 62, a 3, rep 3 319 c- 320 b; A 4, 
ANS 320 b- 321 b; q 63, a 3 327 b- 328 b; q 65, A 
2, ANS 340 b- 341 b; q 70, a 2, ans 364 b- 36 Sa; 
Q 73, A 2, REP 3 371 b-d; part i-ii, q 2, a 2, 
REP 2 6 I 6 d- 617 b; a 3, ans and rep i 617 b- 
618 a; q 3, a i, rep i 622 c- 623 a; a 2, rep 1,4 
623 a- 624 b; a 8, rep 2 628 d- 629 c; Q 5, a 3, 
REP 2 638 b- 639 a; a 7, ans 642 a-d 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi, Q 8, 
A 4, ANS 759 b-d; q 16, a 4, rep 2 799 b- 800 b; 
q 26, A I, rep 2 845 b- 846 a; part hi suppl, 
Q 71, A 8, REP I 909 d- 910 d; q 92, a i, rep 5 
1025 c- 1032 b 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [1-9] 
106 a; xxxiii [46-145] 156 c- 157 d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 17 456c-d; 
PROP 35-36 460d-461c 

32 Milton: Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / 
Paradise Lost, bk hi [56-415] 136b-144b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 233, 216a 

5 to 5a 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 347d-348b / Judge- 
ment, 594d [fn t] 

5 . The divine nature in relation to the world or 
creatures 

7 Plato: Republic, ek h, 321d-322d / Timaeits, 
447b-458b;465d-466a 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch i 326a-327b; 
BK VIII, CH 1-6 334a-346b 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [ii54*’2o-3i] 
406c; BK X, CH 8 [ii78’’8-27] 433b-c 

12 Epictetus : Discourses, bk hi, ch 22, 195a-b; 
BK IV, CH II, 240d-241a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 4 257b; 
BK V, SECT 8 269d-270b; bk vi, sect 40-46 
277d-278d 

16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1017b- 
1018a; 1071b 

17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 13 
149b-d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk 1, par 4 2a; par 
10 3b-c; BK IV, par 25 25c; bk iv, par 31-BK v, 
par I 26c-27b; bk vii, par 1-8, 43b-45d; par 
16-23 48c-S0c; BK X, par 38 81a; bk xi, par 6 
90c-d; BK XIII, par 19 115c-d / City of God, 
bk vii, ch 29-31 261a-262a; bk viii, ch i-io 
264b,d-271d; bk x, ch 1-2 298b,d-300a; bk 
XI, CH 24 335c-336a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, 
CH 9-10 627a-b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 14- 
25 75c-150a; Q 84, a 2 , ans 442b-443c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [ 1-3] 
106a; [97-142] 107b-d; ii [112-148] 109a-b; x 
[1-27] 120b-c; XIII [52-87] 126a-b; xix [40-90] 
135c-136a; xxvn [100-120] 148b-c; xxvin 
148d-150b; xxxiii [76-145] 157a-d 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c-d 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38a 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d / Ob- 
jections and Replies, 123c-d; 214a-d; 229c-d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii [412-436] 
241a-b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
369b-371a / Optics, bk hi, 542a-543a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvh, 
SECT I 167d-168a; bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12 
271b-272b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 57 423d- 
424a 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 
106 499b-c; mv 113 502a-d 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d; 187d-188a 

38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 439a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81b-c; 183c;307b-c; 
346b-347a 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 321b-c; 
325d-326a; 327d-328b; 342c; 344b-c; 345a-c; 
347d-348b; 350c-351a; 352a-c / Judgement, 
592a-c 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
120d-121c 

5 a . God as first and as exemplar cause: the re- 
lation of divine to natural causation 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1-2; 7:4 / Nehemiah, 
9:6— (D) II Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 9:1-9; 12; 
26:7-14; 28:24-27; 36:24-42:2 / Psalms, 8:3; 
33:6-9; 65:5-13; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 95:4-5; 
96:5; 102:25-27; 104; 107:23-30; 115:3; 
119:73; 121:2; 136:5-9; 146:5-6; 147-148— (D) 
Psalms, 8:4; 32:6-9; 64:6-14; 73:16-17; 88:12- 
13: 94:4-5; 95:5; 101:26-28; 103; 106:23-30; 
113:3; 118:73; 120:2; 135:5-9; 145:5-6; 146- 
148 / Proverbs, 3:19 / Isaiah, 40:26-28; 42:5; 
44:24; 45:7-12,18; 48:13; 51:13; 65:17— (D) 
Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5; 44:24; 45:7-12,18; 
48:13; 51:13; 65:17 / Jeremiah, 10 : 12 ; 27:5; 
31:35; 51:15-16— (D) Jeremias, 10:12; 27:5; 
31:35; 51:15-16 / y.% ! Zechariah, 12:1 

- 0 ) Zacharias, 12:1 / Malachi, 2:io-(D) 
Malachias, 2:10 

Apocrypha 16:14— (D) OT, Judith, 16:17 
/ Rest of Esther, 13:10— (D) OT, Esther, 13:10 
/ Wisdom of Solomon, 1:14; 2:23; 9:1-2; 11:17 
— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 1:14; 2:23; 9:1-2; 
ii:i8 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:1; 24:8-9; 33:10-13; 
39:16-35; 43— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:1; 
24:12-14; 33:10-14; 39:21-41; 43 / Bel and 
Dragon, 5 — (D) OT, Daniel, 14:4 / II Macca- 
bees, 7:23,28— (D) OT, II Machabees, 7:23,28 
New Testament: John, 1:1-3 ! 7=49-50; 

14:14-17; 17:22-28 / Colossians, 1:16-17 / 
Hebrews, 1:10-11; 2:10; 3:4; 11:3 / II Peter, 
3:5-7 / Revelation, 4:11; 10:6; 14:7— (D) 
Apocalypse, 4:11; 10:6; 14:7 

7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 427c-429c / Timaeits, 
447a-448b / Sophist, 577d-578b / Statesman, 
587a'589c / Laws, bk x, 758b-76Sc esp 762b- 
765c 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 1-6 334a- 
346b / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10 
[336'’25-34J 438d; [337“i5-23] 439a-b / Meta- 
physics, BK I, CH 2 [983*7-9] 501b; BK xn, ch 4 
[io7o’’22-35] 600b; ch 5 [1071*30-36] 601a 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 3 [699*11]- 
CH 4 [700*5] 234a-235a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [ 146-194] 
63a-c 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120d-121c 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-b 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 8S3b-854a / Har- 
monies of the World, 1017b-1018a; 1025a-b; 
1049b-1050a; 1061a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 10 3b-c; 
par 12 4a; bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c; bk xi, 
par 4-11 90a-92b; bk xii, par 2-9 99c-101c; 
par 14-40 102b-110a esp par 38 108d-I09a; bk 
xiii, par 6-48 112a-124a / City of God, bk vii, 
ch 29-31 261a-262a; bk viii, ch i 264b,d- 
265b; c:i 4-6 266d-269c; ch 9 270d-271a; bk 
XI, ch 4-24 324a-336a; bk xii 342b,d-360a,c; 
BK XIX, ch 13 519a-520a; bk xxi, ch 4 562a- 

THE GREAT IDEAS 5a to 5b 

(5. The divine nature in relation to the world or 
creatures, 5a. God as first and as exemplar 
cause: the relation of divine to natural 
causation!) 

563c; CH 7-8 56Sd-S68d; bk xxn, ch 2 S87b- 
588a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d; 
CH 34 634b-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, 
ANS and REP 2 12c-14a; 03, a i, ans 14b-lSb; 
A 2, ans lSc-16a; a 4, ans 16d-17c; a 5, rep 2 
17c-18b; a 6, ans 18c-19a; a 7, ans and rep i 
19a-c; A 8, ANS and rep 1-2 19d-20c; Q 4 20c- 
23b esp A 3 22b-23b; Q 18, aa 3-4 106b- 
108c; Q 26, A 4 lSlc-lS2a,c; Q 51, a i, rep 3 
275b-276b; q 52, a 2 279b-280a; q 56, A 2, 
ANS 292d-294a; q 60, a i, rep 2-3 310b- 
311a; Q 65 339a-343c; q 74, a 3, rep i 375a- 
377a, c; q 75, a i, rep i 378b-379c: q 76, a 5, 
rep I 394c-396a; q 83, a i, rep 3 436d-438a; 
Q 84, A 2, ANS and rep 3 442b-443c; a 4, rep i 
444d-446b; q 88, a 3, rep 2 472c-473a; q 89, 
A I, REP 3 473b-475a; q 92, a i, rep i 488d- 
489d; A 2, REP 2 489d-490c; a 4, ans 491b-d; 
Q 93 492a-501c; q 94, a 3, ans 504a-S0Sa; qq 
103-105 S28a-545b; q 116 S92d-S9Sc; part 
i-n, Q I, A 2 610b 611b; q 2, a 3, ans 617b- 
618a; q 6, a i, rep 3 644d-646a; q 9, a 6 
662a-d; q 10, a 4 665d-666a,c; q 12, a 5, ans 
672a-c; q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, 
A 3, ANS 72d-73d; q 66, a i, rep 3 7Sb-76b; 
Q 68, A I, ANS 87c-89c; q 79, a i, rep 3 lS6b- 
157b; A 2, ANS and rep i lS7b-lS8a; q 80, a i, 
ANS and rep 2-3 lS9d-160c; q 85, a 6tl82d- 
184a; q 93, a i 215b,d-216c; q ioo, a 6, rep 2 
257c-2S8c; q 102, a 3, ans 272b-276c; Q 109, 
A I, ANS 338b-339c; q no, a i, rep 2 347d- 

, 349a; q hi, a 2, ans 352d-353d; part ii-ii, 

Q 18, A 4, ANS 464c-465a; part hi, q 2, a 5, 
REP 3 715a-716b; q 5, a 3, rep 2 737d-739a; 
Q 13, A 3, contrary 782b-783b; part hi 
suppE, Q 74, A 2, REP 3 926c-927c; Q 75, a 3 
938a-939d; q 88, a i, ans lOOQd-lOOld 

21 Dante : ZJ/w'ne Comedy, paradise, i [103-108] 
107b; H [112-148] 109a-b; xxvu [100-120] 
148b-c; XXIX [10-36] ISOb-c 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2987-3040] 209a- 

210a *' 'I 

23 Hobbes: part i, 78d-79a; 79d-80a; 

PART II, 113b-c; 149d; part hi, 185d; 241c- 
242a; part iv, 272b-c , , 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
245b'C 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 390d-391a; 
406b-407b; 415b-417a esp 416b-c; 426a-429b; 
443a-c; 490d-493a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-d; 4b-c 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 5Sd-56a / 
Meditations, iii 81d-89a esp 84b-85a, 87b- 
88c / Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 158b- 
161d; 213b-214d; 229c-d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 16-18 362a- 
363c; prop 24-29 365a-366c; prop 33, schol 
2 367d-369a; part h, prop 7 375a-c; prop io, 

' SCHOL 376d-377a ' 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a- 
138a; [630-735] 149a-151b; bk v [46S-474] 
185b; BK VII 217a-231a esp [162-169] 220b, 

‘ [601-640] 230a-231a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 77 186a , 1 

fi 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
369b-370a / Optics, bk hi, S28b-529a 
’35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, chxxi, 
SECT 2 178c; ch xxiii, sect 28 211b-d; bk iv, 
CH HI, sect 28-29 322a-323a 

, 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 25-33 
417d-419a esp sect 32 418d-419a; sect 36 
419c-d; sect 51-53 422d-423a; sect 57 423d- 
424a; sect 60-75 424b-427d; SECT'105-109 
433b-434b; sect 141 441a-b; sect 146-153 
442a-444a esp sect 150 442d-443b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
54-57 474b-475d ' 

. 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 140b,d-14Sc; 177b-179b; 
187a-191d; 205a-209a; 236b-240b esp 239a-c 
/ Practical Reason, 332d-337a,c esp 334b- 
335c / Judgement, 569a-S70a; S81b-582c; 
592c-596c; 597d-599d; 600d-601c; 608b-609a; 
610b-613a,c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, lS6d- 
157b; part i, 245d-246c; part iv, 368d-369a,c 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239d; 243c-d 

5b, God as final cause: the motion of all|things 
toward God 

Old Testament: Exodus, 33:13-23 / Deuteron- 
omy, 4 :29 / / Chronicles, 28 :9— (D) IParalipom- 
cnon, 28:9 / II Chronicles, 15 :2-4,i2-i5— (Z?) 
II Paralipomenon, 15:2-4,12-15 / Psalms, 24:6; 
27:4-9; 42; 63; 70:4; 73:25-28; 84; 119:10- 
(p) Psalms, 23:6; 26:4-9; 41: 62; 69:5; 72:25- 
28; 83; 118:10 / Proverbs, 16:4 / Isaiah, 26:8- 
9: 437! 58:2— (D) Isaias, 26:8-9; 437! 58:2 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1; 13:1-7— 
(Z?) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 1:1; 13:1-7 ’ 

New Testament: Romans, 3:10-11 / Colossians, 
1:16-17 / Hebrews, 2:10 f Revelation, 4:11— 
(Z?) Apocalypse, 4:11 

t 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1072“ 
23-'’4] 602b-c 

17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr ii, ch 2 41a-c / 
Fifth Ennead, tr vhi, ch 7, 243b-c 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bki, par i, la; par 5, 
2b; bk,iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; bk v, par 1-2 
27a-c: BK X, par 29-33 78d-80b; bk xiii, par 3 
lllb-c / City of God, bk vhi, ch 4 266d-267c; 
ch 8-9 270a-271a; bk x, ch 1-3 298b,d-301a; 
BK XII, ch 1 342b,d-343c:,BK xix, chi 3 519a- 
520a / Christian Doctrine, bk i 624a-636a,c esp 
ch 3-5 625b-626a, ch 9-11 627a-c, cii 22-23 
629b-630c, ch 34 634b-c 

19 Aquinas: Theologica, part i, q i, a 4, 

ANS 5a-b; q 2, a i, rep 1 lOd-lld; a 3, ans 

> 5c 

Chapter' 2«): GOD 577 

12c-14a; q 6, a 3, ans 29c'30b; a 4‘30b-d; 
Q 12, A 1, ANS SOc'Slc; Q 13, A u, REP 'a 73c- 
74b; Q 19, A I, REP I 108d-109c; q 26, a 3 
151a-c; Q 44, A 4 241a-d; q' 60, A 5 313b-314c; 
Q 62, A 1, ANS 317d-318c; q 65, a 2 340b-341b; 
Q 103, A 2 529a-S30a; part i-ii, <3 i, a 8 
• 615a-c;Q2, A 4, rep i 618a-d; a 5, REP3618d- 
619c; Q 9, A 6 662a-d; q ii, a 3, rep 3 667d- 
668d; Q 12, A 3, REP I 670d-671b; Q 16, a 3, 
CONTRARY and REP 3 685b-686a; Q 34, A3, 
ANS 770C-771C ' ' 

20 Aquinas : Siimma Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, 
A 2, REP 3 27a-d; q 70, a 1, rep 2 101d-102d; 
Q 72, A 4, Ans 114a-115a‘, a 5, ans IISa-116b; 
Q 73, a 3, ans 121c-122b; a 9, ans" 126d-128a; 
Q 79, A I, ANS 156b-157b; q gi, a i, rep 3 
208b-d; q 99, a 3, ans 247a-248a; a 4, 'ans 
248a-d; q 100, a 6, ans 2 S 7 c- 258 c; qq ioi-!-io3 
265d-304a passim; part ii-ii, q 5, a i, ans 
410a-411b; q 19, a 2, rep 2 465d-466d; q 20, 
A I, REP I 474d-47Sd; q 24, a 4, ans 491d- 
492b; Q 26, A 13, REP 3 519d-S20d; q 34, a i, 
rep 3 559a-c; q 44, a 2, rep 2,4 S93d-594c; 
part III, Q 2, A n, ANS 721c-722b; q 6, a i, 
REP I 740b-741b; part hi suppl, q 91, a 3, 
REP 6 I020d-1022c; q 96, a i, rep 4 1050a- 
10S2a 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, paradise, i (94-142] 
107b-d; iv[i24-i32]112a;xxvi [i6-5ill46a-b; 
xxviii 148d-150b; xxxii [i39]-xxxni [145I 
lS6a-lS7d 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c 

32 Mieton; Paiadtse Lost, bk v [468-474] 185b; 
BK XII [451-465] 329a; [537-551] 331a 

33 Pascau: Pensees, 314 229a; 425-426 243b- 
244b; 430 245a-247b; 438 251a; 487-489 
258b-259a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 107-109 
433d-434b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236b-240b / Practical 
Reason, 337a-348b esp 340c-341a, 344a-347d 
/ Judgement, 584c-d; 587a-c 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of History, part 111, 306 a-c 

5c. The power of God; the divine omnipotence 

Old Testament: Genesis, 18:13-14 / Exodus, 
15:1-21; 19:5 / Deuteronomy, 10:14; 32:39 / I 
Samuel, 2:6-8— (D) I Kings,2:6-^ / II Samuel, 
22— (D) ll Kings, 22 / 1 Chronicles, 29:10-19— 
(D) / Paralipomenon, 29:10-19 / ll Chronicles, 
20:6; 25:8— (D) II Paralipomenon, 20:6:25:8 / 
Job esp 9, 12, 26, 34, 36:1-42:3 / Psalms, 29; 
33; 47; 50:7-12; 62; 65:5-13; 66:1-7; 76’> 78; 
89:8-13; 95-96; 104; 107:23-41; 135; 147:1-11 
—(D) 28; 32; 46; 49:7-12; 61; 64:6- 

14; 65:1-7; 75: 77; 88:9-14; 94-95; 103; 
106:23-41; 134; tsf ! Proverbs, 16:33 I Isaiah, 
2:10-22; 26:4-6; 40:9-31; 43:13; 44:24-28; 
33:10-11— {D) Isoias, 2:10-22; 26:4-6; 40:9- 
31; 43:13: 44:24-28; 55:10-11 / Jeremiah, 
10:12-13: 18:1-10; 27:5; 32^-7— (D) Jeremias, 
10:12-13; 18:1-10; 27:5; 32:27 / Eze/^iel, 18:4 

^ . ,~(iy) Ezechiel, 18:4 / Daniel, 2 esp 2:19-23, 
' ‘2:36-47; 4-5— (D) Daniel, 2 esp 2:19-23, 
'• ■ ‘2:36-47; 3;98-5;3i/jF/oiefl, 5:7-14— (D) Oiee, 
5:7-14 / Amos, 9 

/Apocrypha: Judith, 16:13-17— (D) OT, Judith, 
16:15-217 Pert of Esther, 13:9-11— (D) OT, 
'Esther, i3:^-ii'/ Wisdom of Solomon, 7I16; 
' ^111:17-22; 12:8-18— (D) OT, Bool^of Wisdom, 
7:16; 11:18-23; 12:8-18 / Ecclesiasticiis, 10:12- 

- "17; 15:18; 16:18-19; 18:1-7— (D) OT, Ecclesi- 

asticus, 10:15-21; 15:19; 16:18-19; 18:1-6 / 
-i ‘Bel and Dragon, 5— (D) OT, Daniel, 14:4 / 7/ 
• , Maccabees, 8:18— (D) OT, 77 Machabees, 8:18 
New Testament: Matthew, 3:9; 19:16-26 esp 
19:26 / Mar^, 10:17-27 esp 10:27 ! 1:26- 

38 esp i:37;T8:i 8-27 esp 18:27 / 17:15- 

34 / Romans, 9:19-23 / Ephesians, 1:15-23; 
6:10-11 / Revelation, 19:6— (D) Apocalypse, 
' 19:6 ^ 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 465d / Lfliw, bk iv, 682d- 
683a; bk x, 766d-767c ' 

‘ 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1073*3- 
lo] 603a-b 

14 Plutarch; Coriolonus, 191d'192b ' 

18 Augustine : Confessioni, ek i, par 12 4a; bk v, 
par 20 32d-33a; bk vit, par 6-7 44d-45d / 

■ City of God, bk V, ch 10 215c'216c; bk vii, ch 
30 261b-d; BK xii, CH 25 358b-359a; bk xiv, 
CH 27 396c-397a; bk xxi, ch 5-8 563d-S68d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, 

- REP 1 12c-14a; Q 3, A I, REP 1,4 14b-15b; q 25 
143c-150a; q 26, a 4, ans 151c-152a,c; q 45, 
A 2 242d-244a; a 5 245c-247a; q 52, a 2 279b- 
280a; q 63, a 3 327b-328b; q 65, a 3, rep 3 
341c-342b; Q 75, a 5, rep i 382a-383b; a 6, 
REP 2 383c-384c; q 76, a 5, rep i 394c-396a: 
Q 77, A I, ans 399c-401b; a 2, ans 401b-d; 
Q 91, A 1, REP I 484a-485b; a 2 48Sb-486b; 
Q‘92, A I, REP 3 488d-489d; a 2, rep 2 489d- 
490c; Q 104, A 3 S37b-d; a 4, ans and rep 1-2 
538a-c; q iio, a 2, ans 565d-566d; q 112, a i, 
ANS 571d-573a; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 
6I2a-613a; q 2, a 4, rep i 618a-d; q 5, a 7, 
ANS and REP I 642a-d; q 6, a 4, rep 1 647b- 
648a; q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c; q 19, a 5, rep 2 
705d-707a 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-it, q 64, 
A 4, ANS 69b-70a; q 68, a 4, ans 91b-92c; q 
80, A 3, REP I I61d-162b; q 88, a 1, ans 193a- 
194b; q 113, A 9 368d-369c; part ii-ii, Q i, 
A 8, rep 2 387a-388c; q 23, a 2, rep 3 483d- 
484d; part hi, q i, a 3, rep 2 704d-706a; q 3, 

’ A 7, ANS 728a-729a; q 7, A 7, rep 2 7S0a-d; 
A 12, REP 2 7S4c-755c; q 13 779d-784a; q 15, 
A 8, REP 3 794a-c; a 9, rep 3 794c-795b; q 20, 
A I, ANS 821b-822c; Q 60, a 5, ans 8S0b-851b; 
PART HI SUPPL, Q 71, A 13, REP 3 9I5d-916c; 
Q 72, A 2, REP I 919a-920c; q 74, a 3, ans and 
REP 2-3 927c-928d; a 8, rep 3 933b-934a; q 
76, A 1, REP 1-2 939d-941a; Q 82, a 1, ans 
968a-970c; q 83, a 2, rep 3 976c-978c: a 3, 
ANS 978c-980d; q 87, a 2, rep 2 998d-999d 

THE GREAT 

( 5 . "The divine nature in relation to the world or 
creatures. 5c. The power of God: the divine 
omnipotence^) 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 160c-161a: 162c 
28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17c; 81a 

31 Descartes: Objections and RepUes,llQh-\\ 2 a; 
158 b- 159 a; 229 a-d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17 362 b- 363 c; 

PROP 33, scHOL 2-PROP 35 367 d- 369 a 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [106-225] 413 b- 
116 a; BK III [372-415] 143 b- 144 b; bk vii [139- 
173] 220a-221a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 654 292 b 
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, 

sect 12 165b-c; ch xxi, sect 2 178c; ch 
XXIII, sect 28 211b-d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 
11-12 271b-272b; bk iv, ch x, sect 4 350a 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 33 419a; 

SECT 36 419c-d; sect 152 443c-d 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
56 475a-b 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 334a-b 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 186 c-d 
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 180 b-c; 181 b; 192 c-d / 

Practical Reason, 351b'352c / Judgement, 
504b-d; 592a-c; 594d [fn i]; 600d-601c 
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d- 
lS7b 

54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790 d 

5 d. The immaaence of God: the divine omni* 
presence 

Old Testament: Genesis, 28:15 / Exodus, 20:24; 

25:8; 29:45-46 / Leviticus, 26:11-12 / Num- 
bers, 5:1-3 / Joshua, 3:10-11— (D) Josue, 3:10- 
II / II Samuel, 7:1-13— (D) II Kings, 7:1-13 / 

I Kings, 6 :i 1-13 ; 8 :i2-i3,26-3o— (D) III Kings, 
6:11-13; 8:12-13,26-30 / I Chronicles, 17:1-12 
— (D) I Paralipomenon, 17:1-12/ Psalms, 6 B:'j- 
8,16-18; 119:151; 139 esp 139:7-12; 145:18-19 
—(D) Psalms, 67:8-9,17-19; 118:151; 138 esp 
138:7-12; 144:18-19 / Proverbs, 15:3 / Isaiah, 
50:7-9— (D) Isaias, 50:7-9 / Jeremiah, 23:24 — 

(D) Jeremias, 23:24 / Amos, 9:1-4 / Zechariah, 

8:3 — (D) Zachariah, 8:3 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:7; 12:1 — (D) 

OT, Booh^of Wisdom, 1:7; 12:1 
New Testament: John, i :io / Acts, 7:49; 17:22- 
< 29 / Romans, 11:36 / 7 Corinthians, 6:15-20 / 

II Corinthians, 6:14-18 / Ephesians, 4:6 / 
Colossians, 1 :i6-i9; 2 :8-i3 / II Timothy, 1 :i4 / 
Hebrews, 13:5/7 John, 4:4-16 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120 d- 121 c 
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256 b,d; 

BK VII, sect 9 280b-c 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 16, 75 c-d 
/ Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch 7 242 d- 243 c 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; 

BK HI, par 10 15 b-d; par 18 18 b; bk iv, par 26 

I 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk 

IDEAS 5dto5e 

ivii, par 1-2 43b-44a; par 7 45a-d; par 21 49d- 
50a; bk X, par 8-10 73b-74a; bk xh, par 7 
lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of God, bk 
VII, CH 6, 248a; ch 30 261b-d; bk x, ch 14 

- 307 c- 308 a; bk xh, ch 25 358 b- 359 a / Chris- 
tian Doctrine, bk i, ch 12 627 c-d 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 8 34 C' 
38 c; Q 51, A 3, REP 3 277 a- 278 c; q 52, a 2 
279 b- 280 a; q 90, a i 480 d- 481 d; part i-ii, 
Q 17, A 8, rep 2 692 a-c 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part h-h, q 26, 
A 2, REP 3 511 a-d; part hi suppl, q 84, a 2 
rep I 984 c- 985 d 

21 Dakte: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxxiii [76- 
93] 157 a 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428 c-d 

31 Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99 c 

31 Spinoza : Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp def 3-5 
355b, AXIOM 1-2 355c-d, prop 2-8 355d-357d, 
prop 10, SCHOL 358a-b, prop 13, corol-prop 
18 359d-363c, prop 22-23 364d-365a, prop 25 
365b, PROP 28-31 36SC'367a, prop 33 367b- 
369a; part ii, prop i-ii 373d-377c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [334-346] 306 b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
370a-371a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h, ch 
XIII, sect 18 152 a-c; ch xv, sect 2-4 162 c- 
163 b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 149-150 
442d-443b; sect 155 444b-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 192c-d / Practical Reason, 
334b-335b; 3Slb-352c / Judgement, 580c-d; 
592a-c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d- 
lS7b; part i, 224a-b; 227d-228a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 217c-218a; bk 
xiv, 608a-b; bk xv, 631a-c 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 
153b-d 

5 e. The transcendence of God: the divine aseity 

Old Testament: Exodus, 15:11/7 Samuel, 2:2— 
(D) 7 Kings, 2:2/7 Chronicles, 17:20— (D) 
7 Paralipomenon, 17:20 / Job, 11:7-9: 33:12; 
35:6-7; 36:22-42:3 / Psalms, 89:6-8; 97:9: 
99:2; 113:4-5— (D) Psalms, 88:7-9; 96:9; 98:2; 
112:4-5 / Isaiah, 29:16; 40:12-26; 45:9; 46:5,9: 
55:8-9— (D) Isaias, 29:16; 40:12-26; 45:9; 
46:5,9: 55:8-9 / Daniel, 4:35— (D) Daniel, 
4:32 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 11:22; 12:12— 
(D) OT, Boott_ of Wisdom, 11:23; 12:12 / 
Ecclesiasticus, 16:20-21; 18:4-7— (D) OT, 
Ecclesiastiais, 16:20-21; 18:2-6 

New Testament: John, 3:31 / Acts, 7:47-50 / 
Romans, 9:19-21 / Ephesians, 1:19-23; 4:6 / 
7 Timothy, 6:15-16 

8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 10 [1075* 
12-16] 605d 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, cii 3 [699“ii]- 
ch 4 [7 oo“ 5] 234a-235a 

5f Chapter 29: GOD 579 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; 
BK III, par 10, ISc-d; bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk 
vn, par 17 49a; bk x, par 8-10 73b'74a / City 
of God, BK VII, cH 30 261b-d; bk xii, ch 17 
353a'354a 

19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, parti, q 3 , a x, 
REP 1 14b-lSb; A 8 19d-20c: q 8 , a i, ans and 
REP 1,3 34d-35c: Q 18 , A 4 107d-I08c; q 51 , 
A 3 , REP 3 277a-27Sc; q 6r, a 3 , rep 2 316a-d; 
Q 90 , A I, ANS 480d-481d; q 103 , a 2 S29a- 
530a; part i-ii, q 17 , a 8 , rep 2 692a-c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, h [112- 
148] 109a-b; xiii [52-66] 126a; xix [40-66] 
135c-d; XXVIII 148d-lS0b; xxix (127-145] 
151c-d 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, \\Qh-\Vla‘, 
123c-d; 158bd59a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, 
SECT 11-12 271b-272b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vn, div 
56 475a-b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 192c-d / Practical Reason, 
334b-335b; 342c / Judgement, 566c'd; 580c-d 

5/. God’s knowledge: the divine omniscience; 
the divine ideas 

Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 31 :i9-2i / 1 Sam- 
uel, 2:3; 16:7— (D) I Kings, 2:3; 16:7 / 
I Chronicles, 28:9— (Z)) 7 Paralipomenon, 28:9 
/ Job, 12:12-25; 21:22; 22:12-14; 24:1; 
28:3,10-28; 34:21-25; 42:2-3 / Psalms, 33:3- 
15; 44:20-21; 69:5; 73:11; 94:7-12; 113:4-6; 
139; 147:4-5,15-18— (D) Psalms, 32:3-15; 
43:21-22; 68:6; 72:11; 93:7-12; 112:4-6; 138; 
146:4-5; r47;i5-i8 / Proverbs, 3:19-20; 5:21, • 
15:3,11; 16:2; 24:12 / Isaiah, 29:15-16; 40.13- 
14,27-28; 46:9-10; 47:10-11— (Z7) Isaias, 

29:15-16; 40:13-14,27-28; 46:9-10; 47:10-11 
/ Jeremiah, 1:3; 16:14-17; 17:9-10; 20:12; 
23:23-24— (D) Jeremias, 1:5; 16:14-17; 17:9- 
10; 20:12; 23:23-24 

Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 13:12; 14:14-19— (D) 
OT, Esther, 13:12; 14:14-19 / Wisdom of 
Solomon, i: 6 -ii—(D) OT, Booh^ of Wisdom, 
i:6-ii / Ecclesiasttcus, 15:18-19; 16:17-19; 
17:15,17-20; 23:18-20; 39:19-20; 42:18-21 — 
(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:19-20; 16:16-20; 
17:13-17; 23:25-29; 39:24-25; 42:18-22 / 
Susanna, 42-44— (D) OT, Daniel. 13:42-44 

New Testament :/ o/w, 1:1-3:6:64,70-71; 14:6/ 
Romans, 8:27; 11:33-36 / 1 Corinthians, 1:25; 
2:6-16; 3:18-20 / Colossians, 2:2-3 / Hebrews, 
4:12-13 / 7 John, 3:18-20 
7 Plato: Phaedrus, I40d / Timaeus, 465d / 
Parmenides, 489d-490d / Laws, bk x, 766d- 
7G7c 

S Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 2 [9S2'’28- 
983“ii] 501a-b; bk xii, ch 7 [io72'’i4-29] 
602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d; ch lo [io75'’i9-24] 
606c 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120d-12Ic 

12 Aureuus: Meditations, bk vi, sect 44, 278 b 

17 Ploti.nus: Third Ennead, tr ix 136a-I38a,c / 
Pifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4 209d-2I0c; ch 6-7 
211a-212c; tr hi, ch 8-13 219d'224b; tr iv, 
CH 2-TR IX, CH 14 227b-251d 

18 Augustine : Confessions, bk xii, par 18 , 103a-b; 
BK XIII, par 19 115c-d / City of God, bk v, ch 
9-10 213b-2I6c; BK VH, ch 30 261b-d; bk xi, 
ch 10 327d-328d; ch 21 333a-d; bk xii, ch 
17-18 353a-354d; bk xx, ch 15 543d-544b; 
BK XXII, CH 2 587b-588a / Christian Doctrine, 
BK 1 , CH 9-10 627a-b; ch 13 627d; ch 34 
634b-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti, Q3, a i, 
REP I 14b'15b; A 6 , rep i 18c-19a; q 4 , a 2 , 
REP 3 21b-22b; qq 14-15 75C'94a; q 18 , a 4 
107d-108c; q ip, a 3 , rep 6 llOb-lIlc; q 34 , 
A 3 , ANS and REP 3-4 188b-189a; q 44 , a 3 
240b-241a; q 55 , a i, ans and rep 3 289a-d: 
A 2 , ANS and REP I 289d'290d; a 3 , ans and 
REP I 291a-d: Q 56 , A 2 , ANS 292d-294a; q 57 , 
a I, ANS 295a'-d; a 2 , ans 29Sd'297a: a 3 , ans 
297b-298a; A 4 , ans 298a-299a; q 62 , a 9 , ans 
324a-325b; q 63 , a 7 , rep 2 331c-332b; q 79 , 
A 10 , REP 2 423d-424d; q 84 , a 2 , ans 442b- 
443c; A 4 , REP I 444d-446b; a 5 446c-447c; 
Q 85 , A 4 , ans 457a-d: Q 86 , a 4 , ans 463d- 
464d; Q 87 , A I, A^is 465a-466c; a 3 , ans 467b- 
468a; Q 89 , a i, ans 473b-47Sa; Q 93 , a 4 , 
ANS 494c-495b; a 8 , ans 499b-500c; q 105 , 
A 3 540c-541b; q 107 , aa 2-3 5S0b-5Slc; part 
i-H, Q I, A 4 , REP 1 612a-613a: q 2 , a 3 , ans 
617b-6I8a; Q 3 , a 5 , rep i 626b-627a; q 14 , 
A 1 , rep 2 677b-678a; q 40 , a 3 , rep i 794c- 
795a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, 
A I, REP 2 12b-]3c: Q 61 , A 5, ans 58b-59d; 
Q 79 , A I, ANS 156b-157b; q 91 , a 3 , rep i 
209d-210c: Q 93 , A 1 215b,d-216c; q ioo, a 9 , 
ANS 26Ib-262b; Q 102 , a i, ans 270c-271b; 
Q no, A 2 , REP 2 349a-d; part h-ii, q 2 , A 6 , 
REP 3 395b-396a: q 9 , a i, rep i 423c-424b; 
Q II, A 4 , REP I 441b-442b; q 33 , a 7 , rep i 
556a-557d; part hi, q 3 , a 8 . ans 729b-730b; 
Q 5, A 4 , ANS 739a-740b; q 7 , a 12 , ans 754 c- 
755c; Q 13 , A 1 , REP 2 780a-781b; q 18 , a 4 , 
REP I 813a-d: Q 21 , A I, REP 2 823d-824d; q 
60 , A 4 , ANS 849c-8S0b; part hi suppl, q 72 , 
A I, ANS and REP 5 917c-919a; a 2 , rep 4 919a- 
920c; Q 84 , A 2 , ANS 984c-98Sd; q 88, a 3, ans 
1002d-1004b; q 91 , a 3 , ans 1020d-1022c: Q 
92 , A I, REP 2 1025c-1032b; q 94 , a 1, rep 2 
1040d-1041b 

21 Da.nte: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii [94- 
112] n8a; XV [49-63] 128 d- 129 a: xvn [13-45] 
132 b-c; XXVI [103-108] 146 d- 147 a 

22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 
138-154 106h-10Sb/ Nun’sPriest's Talc[i^, 2 .-^ 6 ~ 
256 ] 4S6b-457a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part h, 162 c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17b-c / 
Novum Organum, bk i, .\ph 23 108c; aph 124 
133c-d; BK II, Apii 15 149a 

THE GREAT 

(5. The divine nature in relation to the world or 
creatures, 5/. God's knowledge: the divine 
omniscience; the divine ideas.) 

31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 86a / Objections 
and Replies, 122a-b 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17 362b-363c; 

PROP 21, DEMONS! 364a-C; prop 33, SCHOL 2 
367d-369a; part ii, prop i 373d-374a; prop 
3-4 374a-c; prop 7, schol-prop 8 375b-376a; 

PROP 32 385c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [188-193] 115b; 

BK III [56-134] 136b-138a; bk x [1-16] 274b 

3 S Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, 

SECT 9 143a-c; ch xv, sect 12 165b-c; bk iii, 

CH VI, SECT 3 268d; sect ii 271b-d; bk iv, 

CH X, SECT 5-6 350a-c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 
78, 485d-486a 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 344a-c; 351b-352c / 
Judgement, 592a-c 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 173c; 392d-393a 

5 g, God’s will: divine choice 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1-2 / Psalms, 135:6 — 

(D) Psalms, 134:6 / Isaiah, 14:24-27; 46:9-11 
— (D) Isaias, 14:24-27; 46:9-11 / Jeremiah, 

4128; 51:29— (D) Jeremias, 4:28; 51:29 

New Testament; Matthew, 18:14; 20:1-16 / 
John, 5:21; 6:38-40 / Remans, 8:27-29; 9:11- 
19; 12:1-2 / I Corinthians, 12 / Ephesians, 1:8- 
12; 3:10-11 / I Thessalonians, 4:3-6; 5:18 / 

II Timothy, 1 :8-io / James, i :i8 
5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b 
S Euripides: Bacchantes [1388-1391] 352a, c 
V Plato; Timaeus, 452c 

12 Epictetus; Discourses, bk iv, ch 3, 224d; 

CH 7, 232d-233a 

12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iii, sect 11 262a-b 

17 Plotinus; Sixth Ennead, tr viii 342d'353d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 6-7 44d- 
45d; BK XI, par 12 92b; bk xii, par 18, 103a-b; 

BK XIII, par 5 Hid; par 19 115c-d / City of 
God, BK V, ch 9-10 213b-216c; bk x, ch 7 
302d-303a; bk xii, ch 14 350d-351b; ch 17 
353a-354a; bk xxi, ch 7-8 565d-568d; 

BK XXII, ch 2 587b-588a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14 , a 
8 , ANS 82c-83b; q 19 108d-119d; q 20 , a i, rep 
3 120a-121b; A 4 , ANS 122c-124a; q 23 , a 4 
135a-d; q 25 , a 5 , ans and rep i 147d-149a; 

Q 26, A 2, REP 2 150c-151a; q 50, a i, ans 269b- 
270a; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 57, a 5, ans 
299b-300b; q 59, a 2, ans 307c-308b; q 60, 

A I, REP 2 310b-311a; q 61, a 2, rep 1,3 315c- 
316a; Q 62, a 6, rep i 322a-d; Q 63, a i, ans 
325c-326c; q 104, aa 3-4 537b-S38c; q 105, 

A I, REP 2 538d-539c; part i-ii, q i, a 2, rep 3 
610b-611b; q 10, a i, rep 2 662d-663d; q 19, 

AA 9-10 709d-711d; q 39, a 2, rep 3 790d-791b 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, 

A 4, REP 1 218b-d; q 97, a 3, rep 1 237b-238b; 

IDEAS 5gto5h 

PART III, Q 18, A I, REP 1,4 810a-811c; Q 21, 
A I, ANS 823d-824d; a 4, ans 826b-827c; q 61, 
A 4, REP 3 857c-858b; Q 64, a 7, ans 875d- 
876c; PART III suppL, q 72, a 3, ans and rep 5 
920c-922b; q 74, a 4, ans 928d-929d; q 91, 
A 1 , REP 2 1016b-1017c; a 2, ans 1017c-1020c; 
Q 92, A 3, REP 6 1034b-1037c 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, paradise, hi [64-90] 
llOa-b; XIX [85-90] 135d-136a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 11 , 113b-c; 162c; 
PART IV, 271b 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk iv, 
265b 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38a 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-c; 
229c 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17 362b-363c; 
PROP 32 367a-b; prop 33, schol 2 367d-369a; 
appendix, 370c-371a 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iii [80-134] 137a- 
I38a; bk vii [139-173] 220a-221a / Samson 
Agonistes [300-329] 346a-b 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk 11, ch xxi, 
SECT 50-51 191b-c 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect 25-33 
417d-419a esp sect 29-30 418c 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c-151b 

42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 
265b-c esp 265b,d [fn 1]; 276b-277a; 278b-c/ 
practical Reason, 303b-304a; 321b-c; 324b- 
325a; 325d-326a; 328b / Intro. Metaphysic of 
Morals, 393c-d 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b; bk 
XII, 553b; BK XIII, 563a-b; bk xv, 631c; 
epilogue II, 67Sa-677b; 680b-c; 684b-d 

5 h. God’s love: the diffusion of the divine good- 
ness 

Old Testament: Exodus, 33:19; 34:6 / Dett- 
teronomy, 4:37-38; 7:7-8; 10:15,18; 32:4 / 
I Chronicles, 16:7-34 — iP) ^ Paralipomenon, 
16:7-34 / Job passim, esp 2:10 / Psalms / 
Proverbs, y.iz / Song of Solomon— (D) Can- 
ticle of Canticles / Isaiah, 43; 45:7; 63:7-9— 
ip) Isaias, 43; 45:7; j Jeremiah, 31:1-6; 

32:17-44; 33:1-16 — (D) Jeremias, 31:1-6; 
32:17-44; 33:1-16 / Lamentations, 3:25,38 / 
Ezeljel, 16:1-15 — iP) Ezechiel, 16:1-15 / Ho- 
sea, 1-3; II— (D) Osee, 1-3; ii / Joel, 2:12- 
3:21 / Micah, 1:12 — (D) Micheas, 1:12 / Zech- 
ariah, 9:17 — (D) Zacharias, 9:17 / Malachi, 
1:1-3 — (D) Malachias, 1:1-3 

Apocrypha: Tobit, 13:10— (D) OT, Tobias, 
13:12 / Wisdom of Solomon, 7:28; 11:22-26; 
12:13-16; 16:20-29— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wis- 
dom, 7:28; 11:23-27; 12:13-16; 16:20-29 / 
Ecclesiasticus, 4:14; 11:14-17; 16^29-30; 17:8- 
18,29; 33:10-15; 39:16,25-34— (D) OT, Eccle- 
siasticus, 11:14-17; 16:30-31; 17:8-18,28; 
33:10-15; 39:21,30-40 

New Testament: Matthew, 6:25-34; 7:7-1*! 
10:29-31 / Luke, 11:1-13; 12:6-7,1^33 //oM 

5h to 5i Chapter 29: GOD 581 

3:16-21; 13:31-35; 14:21; 15:9-16; 17:21-26 / 
Romans, 2:4; 5:5; 8:28-39 / Corinthians, 
13:11 / Galatians, 2:20 / Ephesians, 3:14-21; 
5:1-2 / J Timothy, 1:14 / Titus, 3:3-7 / He- 
brew!, 12:6 / I John, 3-4 / Revelation, 3:19-21 
— (D) Apocalypse, 3:19-21 

7 Plato: Republic, bk 11, 321d-322d/ Timaeus, 
447c-448a 

8 Aristotle: Generation and Corruption, bk ii, 
cH 10 [336’’25-34] 438d 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 11, ch 8 146a-147c 

14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 50d-51c 

16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1049b- 
1050b; 1071b 

17 Plotinus : Sixth Ennead, tr ix, ch 9 3S8d- 
3S9c 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 7 2c-d; par 
31 8d-9a; bk v, par 2 27b-c; bk vii, par 16-23 
48c-50c; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk xn, par 18, 
103a-b; bk xiii, par 1-5 llOd-llld / City of 
God, BK vii, CH 31 261d-262a; bk xi, ch 21-24 
333a-336a; bk xii, ch i, 343b-c: ch 9 347b- 
348b; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a; bk xxi, ch 
15-16 572c-574a; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-S87b; 
CH 24 609a-612a / Christian , Doctrine, bk i, 
ch 31-32 633b-d 

19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, 
REP I 12c-14a; q 3, a i, rep i 14b-15b; Q 6, 
A 4 30b-d; Q 13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; Q 19, a 2, 
ans and rep 2-4 109c-110b; a 4, ans and rep i 
lllc-112c; Q 20 119d-124a; q 21, a 3, ans 
126a-c; Q 27, AA 3-4 155c-156d; q 37 197c- 
200c; Q 44, A 4, ANS and rep i 241a-d; Q 49 
264d-268a,c; Q 50, A i, ans 269b-270a; a 3, 
ANS 272a-273b; Q 51, a 1, rep 3 275b-276b; 
Q 59, A I, ANS 306c-307b; a 2, ans 307c-308b; 
Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; Q 74, A 3, rep 3-4 37Sa- 
377a, c; q 75, a 5, rep i 382a-383b; q 82, a 5, 
REP I 435c-436c; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; 
Q 91, A 1, ans 484a-485b; q 93, a 4, ans 494c- 
49Sb; A 8, ans 499b-500c; Q 103 528a-534b 
passim; q 104, a 3, rep 2 537b-d; a 4, ans 
538a-c; q 105, a 4, ans S41c-542a; q 106, a 4, 
ANS S48b-549a; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 1 
612a-613a; Q 2, a 4, rep i 618a-d; a 5, rep 3 
618d-619c; Q 22, a 3, rep 3 722d-723b: q 28, 
A 3, CONTRARY 742a-d 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, 

A 4, ANS 69b-70a; q 65, a 5, ans and rep 3 
74c-7Sa; q 73, a lo, ans 128a-d; q 75, a 3, 
ANS 139b-d; q 79, a 1 156b-157b; a 3, rep i 
158a-d; a 4, rep 1 158d-159c; q 90, preamble, 
205a; Q 92, a i, rep i 213c-214c; q 93, a 6, 
REP I 219d-220d; Q 96, a 5, rep 2 233d-234d; 
Q no, A I 347d-349a; a 4* 350d'351d; 

Q 111, A 3, REP I 353d-354b; part 11-11, Q 6, 
A 2, REP 2 414c-415c; Q 19, a i, rep 3 46Sa-d; 
A 5, REP 3 468b-469a; q 23, a 2, rep 1-2 
483d-484d; q 24, a 2, ans 490b-d; a 3, ans 
491a-d; a 8, ans 495b-496a; a ii, rep i 498b- 
499c; A 12, ans 499c-500d; q 26, a 3, ans 
511d-512c; q 30, a 2, rep i 534b-535a; q 189, 

A 10, REP 1 699a-700d; part in, q i, a 3, rep 3 
704d-706a; q 4, a 5, rep 2 734b-d; q 23, a i, 
REP 2 833a-d; q 62, a 2, contrary 859d-860c; 
part hi suppl, q 71, a 3, rep i 903c-904d; 
Q 80, A 3, REP 3 958b-959c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i [37-40] Ib-c; 
PURGATORY, III [103-145] 57a-c;xi [1-30] 68d- 
69a; xv [40-81] 75d-76a; xxvin [91-96] 97a; 
paradise, ii [112-148] 109a-b; vii [64-75] 
llSd-II6a; x [i-27]120b-c;xiii [52-87]126a-b; 
XIX [86-90] 135d-136a; xxvi [i-^i] 145d-146c; 
XXVII [97-120] 148b-c; xxix [13-36] ISOb-c; 
[127-145] ISIc-d; xxxii [i39]-xxxin [145] 
156a-157d 

22 Chaucer: Troilusand Cressida, bk hi, stanza 
1-7 54b-SSb; stanza 250-253 87a-b; bk v, 
stanza 263-267 154b-155a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 

31 Descartes; Objections and Replies, 229c 

31 Spinoza; &/)/«, PART V, prop i7,coROL456d; 
PROP 19 457a; prop 35-36 460d-461c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-343] 137a- 
143a esp [135-166] 138b-139a; bk iv [411-439] 
161b-162a; bk vii [499-518] 228a-b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, 
SECT 12 115b-116a 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, intro, sect3 
40Sb-c; sect 154 444a-b 

37 Fielding; Tom Jones, 186c-d 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 34Sa-c / Judgement, 
592a-c 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 539d-540a 

48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 318b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272 a-b 

52 Dostoevsky; Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 
24a-c; bk v, 120d-137c; bk vi, lS3a-d; bk vii, 
189a-191a,c; bk xi, 313c-314d 

5/. Divine justice and mercy: divine rewards 
and punishments 

Old Testament; Genesis, 3;i-4;i6; 6-9; 11:1-9; 
i8:iy-ig:2g; 22:1-19 esp 22:15-18 / Exodus, 
7-12; 20:3-7; 32 esp 32:9-14; 33:19; 34:5-10 / 
Leviticus, 26 / Numbers, 11-14; 16; 21 :5-9; 25 / 
Deuteronomy, i-ii passim; 28-32 passim / I 
Samuel, 15— (D) / Kings, 15 / II Samuel, 6:6- 
8; 24— (Z?) II Kings, 6:6-8; 24 / / Kings, 8; 
13; 14:2-16— (D) III Kings, 8; 13; 14:2-16 / 
ll Kings, 9:1-10:11— (D) IV Kings, 9:1-10:11 / 

I Chronicles, 10:13-14; 21 — (Z9) I Paralipome- 
non, 10:13-14; 21 / II Chronicles, 6; 12; 19:6-7; 
21:12-20; 26:16-21— (D) II Paralipomcnon, 6; 
12; 19:6-7; 2i;i2-2o; 26:16-21 / Nehemiah, 
9:5-38— (D) II Esdras, 9:5-38 / Job J Psalms / 
Proverbs, ii :i,2o-2i; 20:22; 22:22-23 / Ecclesi- 
astes, 12:14 / Isaiah passim, esp i, 3-4, 10, 13- 
27. 30. 34-33. 40. 42. 47. 52-53. 59. 65-66— 
(D) Isaias passim, esp i, 3-4, 10, 13-27, 30, 
34-35. 4 °. 42. 47. 52-53. 59. ^5-66 1 Jeremiah 
passim, esp 3-8, 15, 19, 24-25, 29-31, 33, 46-52 
— (D) Jeremias passim, esp 3-8, 15, 19, 24-25, 
29-31. 33, 46-52 / Lamentations / Eze\icl 

THE GREAT IDEAS 5i 

( 5 . TAe divine nature in relation to the world or 
creatures. 5i. Divine justice arid mercy: 
divine retvards and punishments.) 

passim, esp 4-9, ii, 14-18, 25-33, 35-39— 
(D) Ezechiel passim, esp 4-9, ii, 14-18, 25- 
33. 35-39/ Daniel, 4:4-^:3 i-{D) Daniel, 4-5 
/ ]oel / Amos / Obadiah—{p) Abdias / Jonah 
— (D) Jonas / Micah — (Z)) Micheas / Nahum 
/ Habal^i\—{D) Habacuc / Zephaniah — (Z)) 
Sophonias / Zechariah — (D) Zacharias ! Mal- 
achi—{p) Malachias 

Apocrypha: Tobit, 2-3; 13 — (D) OT, Tobias, 
2-3; 13 / Judith, 5— (Z)) OT, Judith, 5 / Wis- 
dom of Solomon, 1-5; 11:23; 12— (D) OT, 
Boo\of Wisdom, 1-5; 11:24; 12 / Ecclesiasticus, 
16; 17:19-29; 18:1-14; 23:18-21; 35; 39:25-31 
— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 16; 17:16-28; 18:1- 
14; 23:25-31; 35: 39:30-37 / Susanna— {D) 
OT, Daniel, 13 / Bel and Dragon, 23-42 — (D) 
OT, Daniel, 14:22-42 / II Maccabees, 6:12-17 
— (Z)) OT, II Machabees, 6:12-17 

New Testament: Matthew, 5:1-22,29-30,45; 
9:9-13; 11:20-24; 12:36-37; 13:24-30,36-43; 
18:7-14; 19:16-20:16; 23 / Marl^, 9:37-47; 
10:17-31; 16:16 /L«^e, 1 :46-55 ; 6:36-38; 7:36- 
50; 10:25-28; 14:7-14; 15; 16:19-31; 18:1-8; 
19:1-10; 23:34,39-43 / John, 5:30; 8:i-ii / 
Acts, 12:18-23; 13:1-12 / Romans, 1:16-2:16; 
6:23; 9:14-18 / II Corinthians, 4 / Galatians, 
6:7-8 / Ephesians, 2 / II Thessalonians, 1:3-10; 
2:10-12 / // Timothy, 4:8 / TiVwi, 3:4-6 / 
Hebrews, 10:26-31 / / Pd/er, 3:18 / // Peier / 
/ /o/i«, 1 :5-io / Jude / Revelation passim, esp 
17-20— (Z)) Apocalypse passim, esp 17-20 

5 Aeschylus : Suppliant Maidens (1-175] la-3a / 
Agamemnon [636-781] 58d-60b; [1560-1566] 
68c / Eumenides 81a-91d 

5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp 
[1-275] 99a-101c, [703-738] 105d-I06a, [863- 
910] 107b-c, [1187-1285] lldh-llla / Antigone 
[279-2S9] 133c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a- 
130a,c esp [521-545] 119a-b, [93g-roi4]123a-d, 
[1254-1396] 12Sd-126d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp 
[430-459J 146d-147a, [748-783] 149c-d / Elec- 
tra [173-179] lS7c / Trachiniae [1264-1278] 
181c / Philoctetes [446-452] 186a 

5 Euripides : Suppliants [598-617] 263c-d / Hec- 
uba [1023-1033] Z5\c-d / Heracles Mad [772- 
780] 371c-d 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 20b-22a; bk ii, 
77a-b; bk iv, 158d-159d esp 159d; bk vi, 
199c-d; 201d-202c; 203a-b; bk viii, 278d- 
279a; 283d; bk ix, 308a-c 

6 Thucydides :P e/o/)onn«wn War, BKV,S06b-c; 
BK VII, 560a 

7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 437c-441a,c / Laws, 
BK IV, 682d-683a; bk ix, 757a; bk x, 765d- 
769d esp 767c-768c / Seventh Letter, 806a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [978- 
1023] 42d-43b; bk vi [43-79] 80d-81b; [379- 
422] 85b-d 

14 Plutarch: Romulus, 26b-27a / Camillus, 
107b-d / Aristides, 265c-d / Cato the Younger, 
639d 

15 Tacitvs: Histories, bk i, 189d-190a 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 15 12b-c; 
BK V, par 2 27b-c; bk vii, par 5 44c-d; bk ix, 
par 34-36 70c-71a / City of God, bk v, ch 10- 
11 215c-216d; ch 14-26 220a-230a,c; bk ix, 
ch 10 291a; bk xi, ch 23 334c-335c; bk xih, 
CH 1-8 360a-363c; ch 12-16 365d-367d; 
BK XIH, ch 21-BK XIV, ch 28 371a-397d esp 
BK XIV, CH 15 388d-390a, ch 26 395d-396c; 
BK XV, ch 24-25 418d-419b; bk xvi, ch 4 
425b-426a; bk xix, ch 10-13 516c-520a; ch 15 
521a-c; bk xx 530a-560a,c; bk xxi 560a- 
S 86 a,c esp ch 11-12 570b-571c, ch 18 574c- 
575b, ch 24 577b-579d; bk xxh 586b,d-618d 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c; 
ch 32 633c-d; bk ii, ch 23 648a-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1 , q 19 , 
A 6 113c-114d; a 9 , ans 116d-117d; q 21 124b- 
127c; Q 23 , A 5 135d-137d; q 62 317c-325b; 
Q 63 , A 8 , ans 332c-333b; q 64 , a 2 , rep 2 
335d-336d; q 65 , a 2 , rep 3 340b-341b; Q 66 , 
A 3 , ANS 347b-348d; q 95 , a 4 509b-510a; Q 96, 
A 3 , REP 3 512a-c; q 103 , a 5 , rep 2 S31b-532b; 
Q 105 , A 6 , REP 2 543b-544a; q 113 , a 7 , ans 
580b-581a: q 114 , a i, rep i 581d-S82c; part 
i-H, Q 5 , A I 636d-637c; a 4, ans 639a-640b; 
A 7 642a-d; q 17 , a 9 , rep 3 692d-693d; q 21 , 
A 4 719d-720a,c; q 39 , a 2, rep 3 790d-791b: 
Q 47 , A I, rep 1 819c-820b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, Q 61 , 
A 5, ans S8b-S9d; q 62 , a i 60a-d; Q 63 , a 3 
65a-d; q 68 , a 2 89c-90c; q 72 , a 5 115a-116b; 
Q 73 , A 9 , REP 3 126d-128a; a 10 , rep 2 128a-d; 
Q 79 , AA 3-4 158a-159c; q 81 , a 2 , rep i 164d- 
165c; Q 85 , A 5 , ANS 181d-182d; a 6 182d-184a; 
QQ 87-88 185c-198d; q 91 , a 6 212c-213c; q 94 , 
A 5 , REP 2 224d-225d; q 98 , a 2 , rep 3 240c- 
241b; A 4 242b-243c; q ioo, a 7, rep 3 258c- 
259c; A 8 , rep 2-3 259d-261a; a 12 264d-26Sd; 
Q 103 , A 2 299b-300d; q 106 , a 2 322b-323a: 
Q 112 , A 4 , REP I 358d-359c; qq 113-114 360d- 
378a,c; part ii-ii, q 13 , a 4 , ans 446c-447a: 
Q 14 , A 2 , ANS 448d-449d; q 18 , a 4 , rep 2 
464c-465a; q 19 , a i, rep 2 465a-d; q 20 , a i, 
ANS 474d-475d; q 21 , a 2 , ans 479a-c; Q 24 , 
A 10 , ANS 496d-498a; q 28 , a 3 528d-529c; Q 
182 , A 2 621d-623a; q 184 , a 4 , ans and rep i 
632c-633c; part in, q 2 , a ii 721c-722b; Q 9 , 
A 2 764c-765a; q 64 870b-879c; part hi 
SUPPL, Q 69 , A 2 886c-887d; q 70 , a 3 897d- 
900d; Q 71 900d-917b passim; q 72 , a 3 , rep 
4 920c-922b; qq 73-74 922b-935a,c passim; 
Q 75, A 1 935b-937a; q 78 , a i, ans 947d- 
949b; A 3 , REP 3 950b-951a; qq 82-99 96Sa- 
1085a,c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp hell, hi [1-18] 
4 a-b, XI 15 a- 16 b, purgatory, hi [103-145] 
57 a-c, VI [25-48] 61 a-b, xix [97-126] 82 c-d, 
PARADISE, HI [i]-v [87] 109 b- 113 a, VII [19-120] 

5/ to 6 Chapter 29; GOD 583 

lJ5b-116b, XIX [22-991 135b-136a, xxxii [37- 
84] 155a-c 

22 Chaucer: Prologue [653-662] 170b / Friar's 
Ta/e 278a-284a esp [7056-7085] 281a-b, [7227- 
7246] 284a / Physician’s Tale 366a-371a esp 
[12,212-220] 370b-371a / Pardoner's Tale 
[12,397-852] 374a-381b / Tale of Melibetis, 
par 42-45, 419b-420a; par 77-78, 431a-432a / 
MonI(s Tale 434a-448b / Parson's Tale 4953- 
550a esp par 10 498b'502a, par 56 S27b-528b, 
par 68 S33b-534a 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part i, 88c-89a; part ii, 
160c-161a; 163d-164a; part hi, 191b-198a; 
245b'C; part iv, 250c-25Ic; 253b-258b; 
260b-c; 272b-c; 276d-277a 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 98c-99a; 152d-153a-, 
250a-251c 

26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc iv [42- 
63] 115a-b; [186-225] 1160-1173 / Richard II, 
ACT I, sc H [1-44] 322d-323a / Merchant of 
Venice, act iv, sc i [184-202] 427c 

27 SiiAKtspcAKt.: Hamlet, act i, sc v [9-22] 37a; 
ACT HI, sc III [36-98] 53d-54b / Measure for 
Measure, act 11, sc ii [73-79] 182d / Cymbe- 
line, ACT V, sc IV [9-28] 481a-b 

29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part 1, 71c-d 

31 Descartes; Meditations, 69b 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 1, appendix, 369b-371a 
esp 370b 

32 Milton: Sonnets, xv 66b / Paradise Lost, bk 
HI [80-216] 137a-140a esp [i3i-i34]138a;[274- 
415I 141b-144b esp [397-411] 144a-b; bk v 
[224-247] 180a-b; bk x 274a-298b esp [i-i6] 
274b, [162-223] 278a'279a, [1046-1104] 297a- 
298b; BK XI [46-83] 300a-301a; bk xii [285- 
465] 325b-329a / Samson Agonistes [293-299] 
346a; [667-709] 354a-3S5a; [1156-1177] 364b- 
365a; [1669-1707] 376a-b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 497 259b- 
260a; 513 262a-263a: 562 273a; 584 276b- 
277a 

35 Locke; Toleration, 17a-b / Civil Government, 
CH III, sect 20 29c-d; ch xvi, sect 176 66a-b 
/ Human Understanding, bk i, ch 11, sect 5-6 
lOSa-c; SECT 12-13 107b-108c; cH in, sect 5 
113c; BK II, CH XXI, SECT 54, 192b-, sect 62 
194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c; cR xxviii, sect 8 
230a; bk iv, ch xiv, sect 2 364c 

35 Home: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 
108-109 500b-S01a 

37 I-ielding: Tom Jones, 2Qb-21a 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 8Sd- 
86a; BK XXVI, 219a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 237b-238b / Intro. Meta- 
physic of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / Science of 
Right, 432c-433a / Judgement, 592a-c; 594d 
[fni] 

43 Mill: Utilitariamsm, 458a-b 

44 Boswell; Johnson, 34Sb-c; 3943-c; 482a-d; 
539d-540a 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 234d- 
235a 

47 Goethe: Faust esp part ii [11,676-12,111] 
284a-294b 

48 Melville: Moby Dicl^, 30a-36b 

51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk xiv, 606a-607a 

52 Dostozvsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkiii,64c- 
67a; bk v, 125d-127d; bk vi, I51a-152a: 163b- 
164a; 169c-170b; bk vii, 177d-178b; 185a-c; 
189a-191a,c; bk viii, 217c-218c; bk xi, 313c- 
3l4d; 341c-342c 

54 Freud; New Introductory Lectures, 878a-b 

6 . Man’s knowledge of God 

OLDTESTAMENT-.ExorfllJ, 33:12-23/ Job, 11:7-9; 
26:14; 34:29; 36:23-33 / Proverbs, 2:1-5 / 
Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 8:16-17; / Isaiah, 40:12- 

14; 45:15; 55:8-9; 60:16— (D) Isaias, 40:12-14; 
45-''5; 55-8-9; 60:16 / Jeremiah, 24:7; 31:34— 
(D)7eri?»jwr, 24:7; 31:34 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:13-16; 15:3 
— (D) OT, Bool{ of Wisdom, 9:13-16; 15-.3 

New Testament; Acts, 17:22-30 / Romans, 1:18- 
21; 11:33-34 ! I Corinthians, 2:16; 15:34 

7 Plato; Cratylus, 93d-94a; 106b / Republic, 
BK II, 314c-d / Timaeus, 447c / Critias, 478b-d 
/ Laws, BK VII, 730a-c; bk x, 757d-761c 

8 Aristotle; Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982*” 
28-983"it] SOla-b; bk xi, ch 7 [io64''28-*’5] 
592d 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6, llOc-lllc; 
ch 12, 118d-I19a; ch 16 121d-122d 

14 Plutarch; Numa Pompilius, S3b-c 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk vi, par 8 37b-c; 
bk X 71c-89a / City of God, bk xx, ch 2-3 
531a-532b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 6 
626a-b; ch 8-11 626c-627c; bk ii, ch 7 638d- 
639c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i 
lOd-lld; q 12 50b-62b-, q 13, aa 1-2 62c-64d; 
A 5, ANs 66b-67d-, a 12 74c-75b; Q 86, a 2, 
REP I 462a-463a-, q 87, a 3 472c-473a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [34- 
45) 56b; paradise, iv [28-48) 111a; [124-132] 
112a-, V [1-12] I12a-b; xiii [112-142] 126c-d; 
XIX [1-99] 135a-136a; xx [79-93] 137c; [130- 
138] 138a-, XXI [73-102] 13ga-b; xxvi [13-69] 
146a-c 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part h, 160b'C 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 98b-99a;209a-d-,212a-d; 
238c-239c; 267c-268a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b- 
20a-, 38a-, SSb-d; 9Sd-101d esp 95d-97c 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c; part iv 
51b-54b passim / Meditations, 69a-71a,c pas- 
sim; 74a, c; Hi-iv, 81d-89b esp hi, 88d-89a; v 
93a'96a / Objections and Replies, 108a-114c; 
120c-123a; 127b-c; postulate iv-v 131a-c; 
prop i-hi 132b-133a; 140b; lS8b-161d; 168d- 
169a; 211c-212a-, 212c-213a; 213d-214a-,215b-c 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 11, schol 
3S8d-359b; part h, prop 5 374c-d; prop 21- 
42 382d-38Sc esp prop 24-25 383c-384a, prop 
30-33 385a-d, PROP 36 386b; prop 45-47 

THE GREAT IDEAS 6a to 6h 

( 6 . Man's hiowledge of God.) 

390a-391a; part iv, prop 28 431c; prop 36-37 
434a-436a; appendix, iv 447b-c; part v, 
PROP 24-32 4S8d-460b 

32 'Mii.roti: Paradise Lost, bkviii [i 14 - 130 ] 234b- 
235a; [ 412 - 416 ] 241a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 194 , 205d-206a; 229-230 
213a-b; 233 , 214a-b; 242-290 217b-225a; 
566-567 273b; 586 277a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, 
SECT 7-18 113d-117c; bk ii, ch xvii, sect 1 
167d-168a; sect 17 172b-c; CH xxiii, sect 
33-35 212d-213c; bkiii,chvi,seCTii 271b-d; 
BK IV, CH xviii-xix 380d-388d 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 146-149 
442a-d 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 200c-201a; 308b- 
309d 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-b; 173b-248d esp 177b- 
192d, 218d-223d, 234c-240b, 241d-242c / 
Practical Reason, 292a-c; 320c-321b; 349b- 
352c esp 350c-351a; 354d-355d / Judgement, 
S75b-577a; 589b-590b; 598b-599b; 600d- 
601c; 603a-d; 606d-608c 
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 159b- 
160a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196a-197c 

6 a. The names of God: the metaphorical and 
symbolic representations of God; the 
anthropomorphic conception of God 

Old Testament: Exodus, 3:13-15; 6:2-3; 15:3; 
20:7; 33:20-23; 34:5-7,14 / Leviticus, 19:12; 
21.6; 22:32 / Deuteronomy, 5:11; 28:58 / 
11 Samuel, 22— (D) II Kings, 22 / Psalms pas- 
sim, esp 18, 23, 28:7; 29:1-11, 31:2-3, 61:1-8, 
68:4, 71:3, 78:35, 78:65, 83:18, 95:1-11— (D) 
Psalms passim, esp 17, 22, 27:7, 28:2-10, 30:3- 
4, 6oez-9, 67:5, 70:3, 77:35, 77:65, 82:19, 
94:1-11 / Proverbs, 18:10; 30:4 / Isaiah, 
17:10; 30:27-30; 40:11; 41:4; 42:8; 44:6; 47:4; 
48:2,12; 51:15; 54:5; 55:13; 63:16— (Z?) Isaias, 
17:10; 30:27-30; 40:11; 41:4; 42:8; 44:6; 
47:4; 48:2,12; 51:15; 54:5; 55:13; 63:16 / 
Jeremiah, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6; 31:35; 32:18; 
33:2; 50:34; 51:19— (D) Jeremias, 10:16; 
16:21; 23:6; 31:35; 32:18; 33:2; 50:34; 51:19 
/ Daniel, 7:9,13 / Amos, 4:13; 5:8; 9:6 
Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 14:12-21 — (Z?) 

OT, Bool^of Wisdom, 14 : 12-21 
New Testament: Matthew, 6:9 / Lube, 11:2 / 
John, 10 : 1-18 / 1 Corinthians, 10:4 / Revelation, 
1 : 8 ; 21 : 6 ; 22 : 13 — W*) Apocalypse, 1 : 8 ; 21 : 6 ; 
22:13 

5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [ 160 - 175 ] S3d-54a 

5 Euripides: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [376- 
391] 414b 

6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49d-50a; 60a-d; 
80a-c 

7 Plato: Cratylus, 91c-92b; 93d-97d/ Philebus, 
609d-610a / Laws, bk x, 7S9d-760c 

8 Aristotle;: Metaphysics, bkxii, ch 8 [1074*’!- 
7] 604d-605a 

9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 [i252’’i9-27] 
446a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a; 860a 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 11, 194c- 
195b; CH 24-25 201c-202a; bk vii, ch 10-12 
250b-251c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 6-7 
626a-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 1, aa 
9-10 8d-10c; Q 3, A I, REP 1-5 14b-15b; a 2, 
REP 1-2 15c-16a; a 3, rep i 16a-d; q 4, a i, 
rep i 20d-21b; q 13 62b-75b; q 14, a i, rep 
1-2 75d-76c; qq 27-43 lS3a-237a,c passim; 
Q 102, A I, REP 4 523d-525a; q 113, a 7, rep i 
580b-581a; part i-ii, q 47, a 1, rep 1 819c- 
820b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, 
A 3, REP 3 247a-248a; q 102, a 2, ans 271b- 
272a; part hi, q 2, a 5, ans 715a-716b; q 16, 
A 3, ANS 798c-799b; part hi suppl, q 96, a 2, 
ANS 1052a-1053b 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv [28-48] 
111a; XXVI [124-138] 147a-b; xxx [34-99] 
152a-d 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, S4b; 79d-80a; 
PART II, 162c-d; PART HI, 172d-173a; 181a- 
182c; 183d-184a; part iv, 271c; 272b-c 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 238d-239b; 256c-d 

28 Hakv by: On Animal Generation, 42 Sc-d; 443c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60c-61b 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17, schol362c- 
363c; PART 11, PROP 3, schol 374b-c 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
370a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, 
sect 17 ll7a-c; bk ii, ch xhi, sect 18 152a-c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 176a-b; 192c-d / Judge- 
ment, 547b-d; 593c-d; S98b-S99b; 599d-600a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 248d 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi, 
345a-c 

54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b 
/ New Introductory Lectures, 875d-876b 

6b. Natural knowledge: the use of analogies; 
the evidences of nature; the light of 
reason 

Old Testament: Job, 12:7-9; 26:7-14; 36:24- 
42:2 / Psalms, 8; 19:1-6; 65; 75:1; 95:1-6; 
104; 107; 147:12-20— (D) Psalms, 8; 18:1-7; 
64; 74-^; 94:1-6; 103; 106; 147 / Ecclesiastes, 
3:11; 8:17; 11:5 / Isaiah, 45:5-8— (D) Isaias, 
45:5-8 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solombn, 13:1-5— (D) 
OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 13:1-5 / Ecclestasticus, 
16:26-30; 18:4-7; 42:15-43:33— (£>) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 16226-31; 18:2-6; 42:15-43:37 / 
II Maccabees, 7:28— (D) OT, II Machabees, 
7:28 

New Testament: Matthew, 6^6-30 / Luke, 
12:24-28 / Romans, 1:18-24 

63 to 6c(l) 

-i 7 Plato; Timaeus, 465d-466a / Laws, bk vii, 
728b-730c; bk x, 758b-759a 
8 Aristotle; Heavens, bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a 
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982’’28-983®ii] 
501a-b; bk vi, ch i S47b;d-548c esp [io26“23- 
33] 548b-c; bk xi, ch 7 [io64’’6-i3] 592d-593a 

12 Epictetus; Discourses, bk 1 , ch 6 110c-112b; 
CH 9, 114c-n5a‘, CH 16-17 121d-124a 

12 Aurelius; Meditations, bk xii, sect 28 310a 

14 Plutarch; Pericles, 123c-124a / Coriolamts, 
191d-192b / Nicias, 435b-d 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk v, par i 27a-b; 
bk VI, par 8 37b-c; bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c; 
BK X, par 8-10 73b-74a‘, bk xi, par 6 90c-d / 

‘ City of God, bk viii, ch 3 266a-d; bk x, ch 14 
307c-308a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 4 
625b-c 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 2; aa 
1-2 10d-12c; Q 3, A I, REP 1-5 14b-lSb; a 3, 
rep I 16a-d; a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; a 6, rep i 
18c-19a; q 12, a 4 53b-54c; aa 12-13 60d-62b; 
Q 32, A 1 175d-178a: Q 50, a 2, ans 270a-272a; 
Q 65, a I, rep 3 339b-340b; Q 79, a 9, ans 
422b-423d; q 86, a 2, rep r 462a-463a; q 88, 
a 2, REP 4 471c-472c; a 3 472c-473a; q 94, a i 
501d-S03a; q 103, a i, ans 528b-S29a; part 
i-n, Q 5, A 5, ans 640b-641a; q 14, a t, rep 2 
677b-678a; q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, 
A 5, ANS S8b-S9d; q 66, a 5 79b-80c; q 68, a i, 
ANS and rep 2 87c-89c; q 90, a 4, rep i 207d- 
208b; Q 93, A 2 216c-217b; q 94, a 2, ans 221d- 
223a; q 99, a 3, rep 3 247a'248a; q ioo, a i 
251b'252a; Q 109, a i, rep i 338b-339c; part 
H-ii, Q 1, A 5, REP 4 383b'384b; q 4, a 7, ans 
407d-409a; q 10, a 12, rep 4 436b-437d; q 27, 
A 3, REP 2 522c-523b; A 4, rep 3 523c-S24a; 
A 6, REP 3 524c-52Sc; part hi, q 3, a 3, 
ANS 724c-725b; q 12, a 3, rep 2 778b-779a; 
PART III SUPPL, Q 91, A I, ANS 1016b-1017c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [34- 
45] 56b; PARADISE, IV [28-48] 111a; x [1-27] 
120b-c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, S4b-c; 66a-c: 78d- 
79a; 79d-80b; 83a-b; part ii, 137b-c; 149C'd: 
160b; 163a-b; part hi, 165a-167b: 172d- 
173a; 183d-184a; 241a-242a 

25 Montaigne: ErrfljT, 98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d; 
238c-239c; 246a-d; 251c-252b; 267c-268a 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 421d; 429b 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b- 
20a; 38a; 39d-40a; 41b-d; 5Sb-c; g6c-g7c esp 
96d-97a / New Atlantis, 203a-b 

31 Descartes; Discourse, part i, 43 c; part iv, 

52a-d / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 71d- 
72b; Hi-iv, 81d-89b; v 93a-96a / Objections 
and Replies, 110c-114c; 120c-122b; 127a-c; 
PROP i-Hi 132b'133a; 140b; 158b-161d; 

168d-169a; 2nc-212a; 212c-213a; 213d'214a; 
215b-c; 232b; 283d-284a; 284d 

31 Spinoza; Ethics, part ii, def i 373a; prop 
45-47 390a-39Ia; part iv, prop 28 431c; prop 

36-37, DEMONST434a-d; appendix, iv447b-c; 
PART V, PROP 21-42 4S8a-463d esp prop 24-25 
458d-4S9a, prop 30-33 459d-460c, prop 36 
461a-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vh [109-130] 219b- 
220a; bk vih [114-130] 234b-235a 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 163a-164b / Pen- 
sees, 229 213a-b; 242-253 217b-220a; 265-290 
22Ib-225a; 557-567 272b-273b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 
371a 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk i, ch 11, 
sect 12, 107c-d; ch hi, sect 7-18 113d- 
117c; BK 11, ch vh, sect 6 132d; ch xvh, 
sect I 167d-168a; sect 17 172b-c; sect 20, 
173a; ch xxiii, sect 33-37 212d-214b; bk 
HI, CH VI, SECT II 271b'-d; bk iv, chx 349c- 

‘ 354c 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect 29-33 
418c-419a; sect 146-156 442a-444d 

35 Hume; Human Understanding, sect ii, div 14 
456b; SECT xi 497b-503c passim; sect xh, 
DIV 132, 509c 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 

38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437a 

40 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 12d-13a; 200d; 
308b-309c 

42 Kant; Pure Reason, 33a-d; 173b-192d / Prac- 
tical Reason, 320c-321b; 346b-347a; 349b- 
352c; 3S4d-355d / Intro. Metaphysic of 
Morals, 384a, c / Judgement, 547b-d; 598b- 
599b; 602b-603a; 603b-d; 607d-609b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, lS9b- 
160a; PART m, 304d-305b 

47 Goethe: Faust, part 1 [3432-3468] 84a-b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 217c-d; bk vi, 
248d-249a 

52 Dostoevsky : Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 120d* 
121c 

6c. Supernatural knowledge 

6c(l) God as teacher: inspiration and revela- 
tion 

Old Testament: Genesis, 2:15-17; 3:8-24; 9:1- 
17; 17:1; 26:24; 35‘**; / Exodus, 3:4- 

6,13-15; 4:10-12; 6:2-8; 20:1-7; 24:12; 29:45- 
46; 33:11-34:8 / Leviticus, 11:44-45; 18:1-2 
/ Numbers, 12:1-8; 15:41 / Deuteronomy, 
4:1-5,10-13,32-36; 5:4-11; 18:18-22; 29:29 / 

/ Kings, 3:5-15: 8:35-36— (D) HI Kings, 3:5- 
15'. 8:35-36 //ot, 33; 34:31-32; 35:10-11; 38- 
42 / Psalms, 25:3-5,8-12; 32:8-9; 94:10-13; 
119; 143 esp 143:8-10— (D) Psalms, 24:4-5,8- 
12; 31:8-9; 93:10-13; 118; 142 esp 142:8-10 / 
31:8-9; 93:10-13; 118; 142 esp 142:8-10 / 
Proverbs, 2:5-6; 6:23 / Isaiah, 6:1-9; 11:1-3; 
28:9-13; 48:3-8— (D) Isaias, 6:1-9; ii’-i-3; 
28:9-13; 48:3-8 / Daniel, 2; 4— (D) Daniel, 2; 
3:98-4:34 /Joel, 2:28-29 

Apocrypha: Eeclesiasticus, OT, 

Ecclesiasticus, 17:5-12 

THE GREAT IDEAS 6c(l) to 6c(2) 

(6c. Supernatural knowledge. 6c(l) God as 
teacher; inspiration and revelation?) 

New Testament: Matthew passim, esp 4:23, 
7:28-29, 10:1-20, 11:25-27, 13:1-23, 17:5, 
28:18-20 / Mar\ passim, esp i:i-n, 4:1-2 / 
htike passim, esp 2:41-50, 3:21-22, 8:4-15, 
9:34-35, 10:21-22 / John passim, esp 3:2, 
5:31-47, 10:26-27, 12:23-30, 15:15, 16:25-29, 
i7:6-8//^c«,22:6-i4/7?omflnj, 1:16-20; 10:17 
/ 7 Corinthians, 2; 12:1-8 / Galatians, 1 :ii-i2 / 
Ephesians, 1:9,17; 3:1-5 / II Timothy, 3:15-16/ 
Hebrews, i-.s-y,2.\y-d, j IPeter, 1:10-12,22-25/ 
77 P<?/cr, 1:19-21 / 7 /o/m, 2:20-27 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk 11, par 7 lOb-c; 
BK IV, par 30-31 26b-27a; bk vi, par 8 37b-c; 
BK IX, par 23-25 68a-c; bk xi, par 2-5 89c- 
90c; DK xiii, par 16-18 114d-llSc / City of 
God, bk VII, CH30 261b-d; BKx,cHi3307b-c; 
bk XI, CH 2-4 323a-324d; bk xix, ch 18 
523a-b; ch 22 525b-c; bk xx, ch 28 S56c- 
557a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 15 643c- 
644a 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a- 
10c; Q 3, A I, rep 1-5 14b-15b; q 8, a 3, rep 4 
36b-37c; q 12, a 13 61c-62b; q 32 175d-180d; 
Q 46, A 2 253a-255a; q 57, a 3, rep i 297b- 
298a; q 68, a 1, ans 354a-355c; q 89, a i, rep 3 
473b-475a; a 2, rep 3 475a-d; q 94, a 3 504a- 
505a; q 104, a 4, ans 538a-c; q 105, a 3 540c- 
541b; Q 106, A 3, ans and rep 2 547c-548b; 
Q 113, A I, rep 2 576a-d; q 117, a i, rep i 
595d-597c; a 2, rep 2 597c-598c 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 63, 
A 3 6Sa-d; Q 68 87c-96c; q 91, aa 4-5 210c- 
212c; Q 98, AA 2-6 240c-245b; q ioo, a 3, ans 
253a-d; q ioi, a 2, rep 1 267a-268a; qq 106- 
107 321a-330d; q iii, A 4 354c-355d; q 112, 
a 5, ANS 359c-360c; part ii-ii, q 1, a 7, rep 3 
385c-387a; q 2, a 10, ans 399b-400b; q 4, a 4, 
rep 3 405a-406a; q 6, a i, ans 413d-414c; 
PART HI, Q I, A 3, ANS 704d-706a; q 3, a 8 
729b-730b; q 7, a 7 750a-d; q ii, a 6, rep 2 
775d-776b; Q 12, a 3, ans and rep 1-2 778b- 
779a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxx- 
xxxHi 99b-105d passim; paradise, xix [1-99) 
135a-136a; xxiv [52-147] 143b-144a; xxv [64- 
96] 145a-b; xxvi [25-45] 146a-b 

22 Chaucer: Second Nun’s Tale [15,787-816] 
467a-b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83a-b; part ii, 
137b-138b; 160b; part hi, 165a-167b; I76d- 
177c; 181a-180c; 205b-d; conclusion, 281d' 
282a 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 212a; 238c'239c; 267c- 
268a; 273a-b 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 38a; 
54b-c; 95d-101d esp 95d-96c / New Atlantis, 
203a-c 

31 Descartes :D/Vco«w, parti, 43c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [3o8]-bk viii 

[653] 182a-246a esp bk viii [283-477] 238b- 
242a; bk xi [99]-bk xii [649] 301b-333a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 185 205a; 585-588 277a-b; 
642-692 290b-301a; 881 345b / Vaamm, 
355b / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ix, 
sect 23 291b-c; BK IV, CH VII, SECTii,340b-c; 
cH XVI, SECT 14 371b'C; ch xviii-xix 380d- 
388d 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 
132, 509c 

38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333d; 366c-d 

40 Gibbon: Decline attd Fall, 201a; 307d-308a; 
346b-c 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 227d-228a; 231a-d 

43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 455a-c 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 394a-b; 481d-482a 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 157c-d; 
I59b-160a; part hi, 306c-d 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bki, 50b-c 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,nviVj\ 21 h- 
I37c; BK vi, 150d-153d 

6 c(2) The light of faith 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 44-50 esp 44:20, 45:4, 
46:15, 49:10, 50:28-29— (D) OT, Ecclesiasti- 
cus, 44-50 esp 44:21, 45:4, 46:17-18, 49:12, 
50:30-31 

New Testament: Lul^, 8:4-17 / John, 6:28- 
40; 10:37-38; 12:44-46; 14:1,7-11; 16:27-31; 
20:24-29 / Romans, 3;2i-5;2; 10:14-17 / 
II Corinthians, 4:3-6 / / Thessalonians, 2:13 / 
Hebrews, 4 :2; ii / 1 Peter, 1 :7-9, 21-23 / ^ 
2:20-29; 5:4-10 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i la-b; bk 
IV, par 25 25c; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c; bk vii, 
par i648c-49a; bkxhi, par 19 115c-d/ 

God, bk X, ch 1-2 298b,d-300a; bk xi, ch 2 
323a-c; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b; bk'xxi, ch 5 
563d-564d; bk xxii, ch 4-5 588b-590a; ch 7 
591c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, 
A 2, REP I lld-I2c; Q 32, A 1, ANS 175d'178a; 
Q 46, A 2, ANS 253a-255a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-h, q 62, 
aa 3-4 61c-63a; Q 65, aa 4-5 73d-75a; Q 66, 
A 6 80c-81b; q 67, a 3 83b-84d; a 5 85d-86d; 
Q IOO, A 4, REP I 253d-255a; q 108, a 2, rep i 
332b-333d; q iio, a 3, rep i 350a-d; a 4, ans 
350d-351d; part ii-ii, qq 1-16 380a-456d; 
Q 45, A I, REP 2 598d-599d; part hi, q 14, a i, 
ans 784b-785c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [ 34 - 45 ] 
I08a; XXIV 142d-144b 

22 Chaucer: Second Nun’s T7/i"463b-471b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 66a-c; part h, 
l37b-d; 149c-d; 160b; part hi, 165b-c; 172d- 
l73a; 209b; 209d; 241a:242a 

25 Montaigne : Essays, 98b-99a; 209a-d; 212 a-d; 
238 c-239c; 267c-268a; 294a-b 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 9Sd- 
96 c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c 

6c(3) to 6c(4) Chapter 29; GOD 587 

31 Descartes; Rules, in, 4d-Sa / Discourse, 
PART I, 43c / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 
III, 88d-89a / Objections and Replies, 125c- 
126b; 168c-169a; 232b 

32 Minton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [552-587] 331a- 
332a 

33 Pascal; Provincial Letters, 147b; 163a-164b / 
Pensees, 229 213a-b; 242-290 217b-22Sa; 425 
243b-244b; 523 264a; 561-567 272b-273b; 
794-796 327b; 880-881 345b 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, 
SECT 14 371b-c; ch xvh, sect 24 380c-d; 
CH xviii-xix 380d-388d passim 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sectx, div lor 
497a-b; sect xii, div 132, 509c 

37 Fielding; Tom Jones, 379c-380a 

40 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 190c-191a; 309a-c 

42 Kant; Pure Reason, 242a-243a ! Practical 
Reason, 320c-321b; 345c-d; 353a-354d / 
Judgement, 599d-600a; 604d-609b esp 606a-d 

44 Boswell; Johnson, 395a-b 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of History, part in, 306b- 
307b; PART IV, 349b-350a 

47 Goethe; Faust, part ii [10,111-121] 246b- 
247a 

51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk v, 196a-198b; 
BK XV, 631a-c 

52 Dostoevsky; Brothers Karamazov,Ei^i,ll&-h-, 
bk ii, 26b-27d; bk hi, 64c-67a; bk v, 127b- 
137c passim; bk vii, 177b-180a; bk xi, 338a-b 

6c(3) Mystical experience 

Old Testament; Genesis, 15; 18; 22;9-i8; 26:1- 
6,24-25; 28;io-22; 3i;ii-i3; 46:i~4 

/ Exodus, 3:i-4;i7; 19-20; 24 / Numbers, 12; 
22;2i-35; 24;i2-24 / Joshua, 3;7-8; 5:13-15— 
(D) Josue, 3:7-8; ^:i 3 -i 6 / Judges, 6:11-26; 13 
/ 1 Samuel, 3— (D) I Kings, 1 / I Kings, 3:5-15; 
9:1-9; 19— (D) III Kings, 3:5-15: 9:1-9: 19 / 
/ Chronicles, 17:1-15— (D) I ParaUpomenon, 
17:1-15 / job, 4:12-21; 33:14-17: 38 :i- 42'-8 / 
Isaiah, 6— (D) Isaias, 6 / Jeremiah, i— (D) 
Jeremias, i / Ezeljel esp 1-4, 8-12, 40-48 — (D) 
Ezechiel esp 1-4, 8-12, 40-48 / Daniel, 7-12 [ 
Amos, 7-8 / Zechariah, i-6— (D) Zacharias, 
1-6 

New Testament: Matthew, 1:20-25; 3:16-17; 
17:1-8; 28 / Luke, 1:1-38; 2:8-15,25-35; 
9:28-36; 24 / Acts, 2:2-11; 7; 9:1-20; 10 esp 
10:9-20; 11:5-10; 18:9-11; 22:1-21; 23:11; 
26:13-18 / II Corinthians, 12:1-9 / II Peter, 
1:17-18 / Revelation— IP) Apocalypse 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vh, par 16 48c- 
49a; bk viii, par 25-30 60a-61c; bk ix, par 
23-25 68a-c; BK X, par 65 87d'88a / City of 
God, BK IX, ch 16 294a-29Sa; bk xvi, ch 6 
426c-427a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, 
All, REP 2 59d-60d; q 84, a 5 446c-447c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, 
A 3, REP 2 241c-242b; part ii-ii, Q 180, a 5, 
ANS 611d-613a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [i-SiJ 
106a-107a; xxi 138b-139c passim; xxiii [1-69] 
141b-142a; xxx [34-99] 152a-d; xxxii [139]- 
XXXIII [145] 156a-157d 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52a-b; 68d-69b; 

, PART II, 137b-138a; 149c-d; 160b; part hi, 
165d-166a; 174b-176d; 183d-185c; conclu- 
sion, 281d-282a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 277-288 222b-224b 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 476b-477a 

42 Kant: Practical Reason, 320d-321b 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vh, 
189a-191a,c 

6c(4) The beatific vision 

Old Testament: Genesis, 28:10-22; 32:24-30 / 
Exodus, 24 esp 24:9-11; 33:11-23; 34:5-7 / 
Numbers, 12:6-8 / Deuteronomy, 34:10 / Job, 
19:26-27; 42:5 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 43:30-31— (D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 43:32-35 

New Testament: Matthew, 5:8 / John, t:i8 / 
Acts, 7:55-57 / I Corinthians, 13:12 / II Corin- 
thians, 5:6-7; 12:1-4 / I Timothy, 6:13-16 / 
/ John, 3:2-3 

IS Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 25 68c ( 
City of God, bk xii, ch 20, 355b; bk xxn, 
ch 29 614b-616d 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12 
50b-62b; q 26, a 3 151a-c; Q 60, a 5, rep 5 
313b-314c; q 62, a i, ans 317d'318c; a 2, 
ANS 318d-319c; q 84, a 5 446c-447c; q 89, a 2, 
REP 3 475a-d; q 93, a 8, rep 4 499b-500c; 
q 94, A 1 501d-503a; q 100, a 2, ans S21c-522b; 
PART i-ii, Q 3, A 8 628d-629c; q 4, aa 2-3 
630b-631d 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, 
A 3, contrary 83b-84d; a 4 84d-85d; a 6, 
rep 3 87a-c; q 69, a 2, rep 3 97b-98c; a 4, 
ANS and REP 3 lOOc-lOlc; q 98, a 3, rep 2 
241c-242b; part ii-ii, q i, a 8, ans 387a-388c; 
q 8, A 7, ANS 421d-422c; q 9, a 4, rep 3 42Sd- 
426c; Q 180, A 5 611d-613a; part hi, q i, a 3, 
rep i 704d-706a; q 9, a 2, ans and rep 3 764c- 
765a; part iii suppl, q 72, a i, ans and rep 1 
917c-919a; q 82, a 3, rep 4 971a-972d; q 84, 

A 2, ANS and REP 4 984c-98Sd; q 87, a 3, ans 
999d-1000c; q 90, a 3 1014d-1016a; q 92 
1025b-1037c; q 98, a 5, ans 1075b-d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, 1 [1-12] 
106a; II [37-45] 108a; v [1-12] 112a-b; vi [to- 
21] 113d; XIV [28-51] 127b; xv [2S-84J 12Sc- 
129b; XXI [52-102] 138d-139b; xxvi [103-108] 
146d-147a: xxviii [106-1 14] 150a; xxxii [139]- 
xxxiii [145] 156a-157d 

22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 10, 499b-500a; 
par 103 S49b-550a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, parti, 65a-b 

31 Descartes: Meditations, hi, 88d-89a 

32 Milton: On Time [9-22] 12a-b / Paradise 
Lost, BK in [256-265] 141a 

7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Moham- 
' medan,andChristian conceptions of God 
and His relation to the world and man 

la. Creation ' > 

, Old Testament: Genesis, 1-2; 5:1-2 / Exodus, 
20:11 / I Samuel, 2:8 — (D) I Kings, 2:8 / 
Nehefniah, g: 6 —{D) II Eidras, ^:6 / Job, 9:1- 
13; 10:8-13; 12:7-10; 26:7-14; 28:24-27; 
37:14-38:41 esp 38:4-11 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:5; 
19:1-6; 24:1-2; 33; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 90:2; 
95:1-7; 96:5; 102:25-28; 104; 119:73,90; 
121:2; 136:5-9; -139:14-16; 146:5-6; 148— 
(D) Psalms, 8 esp 8:6-7; 18:1-7; 23:1-2; 32; 
73 :i6-i 7 ; 88 :i2-i3 ; 89 :2 ; 94 ;i-7 ; 95 :5 ; 101 :26- 
29; 103; 118:73, 9o;'i2o:2; 135:5-9; 138:14-16; 
145:5^; 148 / Proverbs, 3:19-20; 8:22-31 / 
Ecclesiastes, 3:11 / Isaiah, 40:26-28; 42:5-8; 
44:24-28; 45:5-13; 48:12-16; 51:12-16; 64:8; 
65:17— (D) Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5-8; 44:24- 
28; 45:5-13; 48:12-16; 51:12-16; 64:8; 65:17 
! Jeremiah, 10:11-13; 27:5; 31:35; 51:15-16— 
(D) Jeremias, 10:11-13; 27:5; 31:35;. 51:15-16 
/ Amos, 4:13; 5:8 / Jonah, i-,g—{D) Jonas, 
1:9 / Zechariah, 12:1 — (D) Zacharias, 12:1 
Apocrypha: Judith, 16:14 — (D) OT, Judith, 
16:17 / Rest of Esther, 13:10— (D) OT, Esther, 
13:10 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:14; 2:23; 6:7; 
9:1,9; 11:17,24— (D) OT, Boo^ of Wisdom, 
1:14; 2:23; 6:8; 9:1,9; 11:18,25 / Eccle- 
siasticus, 17:1-9; 18:1-5; 23:19-20; 24:8-9; 
33:9-13: 39:16-35; 42;i5-43;33-(D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-8; 18:1-5; 23:27-29; 

24:12-14; 33:10-14; 39:21-41; 42:15-43:37 / 
Song of Three Children, 34-60— (D) OT, 
Daniel, 3:56-82 / Bel and Dragon, 5— (D) 
OT, Daniel, 14:4 / II Maccabees, 7:23,28 — 
(D) OT, II Machabees, 7:23,28 
New Testament: John, 1:1-10 / Acts, 14:14-15; 
17:23-27 / Romans, 1 :i9-2o / Colossians, 1:12- 
17 / Hebrews, 1:10; 3:4; 11:3 / II Peter, 3:5 / 
Revelation, 4:11; 10:6; 14:7— (D) Apocalypse, 
4:11; 10:6; 14:7 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 7 45a-d; 
BK XI, par 5-11 90b-92b; bk xii-xiii 99b- 
125a,c / City of God, bk vii, ch 29 261a-b; bk 
viii, cH 9-12 270d-273a; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; 
BK XI, CH 4-34 324a-342a,c; bk xu 342b,d- 
360a,c esp ch 1-2 342b,d-343d, ch 4-5 344b- 
345b, CH 9-27 347b-360a,c; bk xhi, ch 24 
373d-376a,c; bk xxii, ch i S86b,d-587b; 
ch 24, 609c-610a 

19 Aquinas: Stimnta Theologica, part i, q 7, 
' A 2, REP 3 31d-32c; o 8, a i 34d-35c; a 2, ans 

> 35c-36b; a 3, ans and rep i 36b-37c; q 9, a 2, 
ANS 39c-40d; q 21, a 4, ans and rep 4 126c- 
127c; QQ 44-46 238a-2S5d; q 50, a i,ans 269b- 
270a; a 3, ans 272a-273b; q 56, a 2, ans and 
REP 4 292d-294a; q 57, A 2, ans and rep 2 
295d-297a; q 61 314d-317c; qq 65-74 339a- 
377a,c; q 75, a 6, rep 1-2 383c-384c; q 84, 
A 3, rep 2 443d-444d; QQ 90-:93 480c-501c; 

7 to 7 b 

Q 94, A 3, ANS S04a-S0Sa; q 104, a 1 esp rep 4 
S 34c-536c; aa 3-4 537b-538c; q'ii8, aa 2-3 
601c-604b; q 119, a i, ans 604c-607b ' 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, PARf 11-11', q 24, 
- ' A 5, ANS 492b-493d; part Hi, q 2; a 7 71Sb-d; 

Q 3, A 8, rep 2 729b-730b; q 6, a 3,' rep 2 
\ 742a-743a‘ 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgaTory, xxv [58- 
- 78] 92a; XXVIII [91-96] '97a;' paradise, vii 

[64-75] llSd-116a; [121-148] 116b-c; x [1-27' 
I20b-c; XIII [52-87] 126a-b; itix [40-51] f35c: 
XXIX [1-48] 150b-d '' 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii; 162b; part hi, 
188d 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17b-d / 
Novum Organtim, bk ii', aph 15 149a 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-56a / 
Meditations, ni-iv, 87a-90b / Objections and 

‘ Replies, prop hi 132d-133a; '*137d-138a; 
' 140b-c; 214a-G; 229c-d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17, schol362c- 

363c; APPENDIX, 370c-372d passim; part iv, 
PROP 68, schol 445a-b '' ' 

32 Milton; Paradise Lost, bK i [6-10] 93b; [650- 
659] 107b; bk II [345-353] 118b-119a; bk hi 
[56-134] 136b-138a; [708-735] lS0b-I51b; bk 
iv [720-735] 168a-b; bk v [468-505] 18Sb- 
186a; [577-599] 187b-I88a; [800-863] 192b- 
194a; bK'vii [59-640] 218b-231a esp [139-161] 
220a-b, [216-550] 221b-229a; bk viii '[452- 
499] 242a-243a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 482 258a 

35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 56-57 
36d-37b / Human Understanding, bk ii, 

CH XV, SECT 12, 16Sc; BK IV, CH X, SECT I5 

352d-353a; sect 18-19 353c-354c - ' 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 46 
421b-c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xh, div 
132, 509d [fn i] 

38 Montesquieu; Spirit of Laws, bk 1, la-b 
Gibbos: Decline and Pall, 228 a ' 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 81d-82a/ Judgement, 59 ^d 

[fn i] _ , N . 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 245d- 
246a; part iv, 361a 

47 Goethe: Faust, prologue [243-270] 7a-b 
49 Darwin; Origin of Species, 239c-243d 

54 Freud; New Introductory Lectures, 87Sd-876a 

lb. Providence . ' 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1-3; 6-9 esp 8:21-22; 
12-13 esp 12:1-3, 12:7, 13:14-18; 15 esp 15:13- 
21; 17-18; 21-22 esp 22:15-18; 26:1-6,22-25; 
28:10-22; 35:9-15; 37-50 esp 45:7-8 / Exodus, 
3: 12; 13:21-17:7; 19-20; 40:34-38— (D) 
Exodus, 3; 12; 13:21-17:7; 19-20; 40:32-36/ 
Numbers, 9:15-23; 12; 22-24 / Deuteronomy, 
4:1-40; ^11; 29-33 / Joshua, i-ii ; 23-24— (D) 
Josue, 1-11; 23-24 / Judges, 1-16 /'/ Samuel, 
8-10; 1^-16— (D) I Kings, 8-10; 15-16 / II 
Samuel, 7—(D) II Kings, 7 / 7 Kings, 1 1 ; 13-22 

to 7<r V 

, passim— (D) III Kings, ii; 13-22 passim / II 

1 . Kings passim— (D) /FJvwg/ passim / 1 Chron- 
icles, 17:3-15 — {P) I Parahpbmenon, 17:3-15 / 

' 'll ^Chronicles, n-36 passim— (Z7) II Paralipo- 
menon, 11-36 passim / Esther esp >4:13-14 — 
(D) Esther, 1:1-10:3 esp 4:13-14 / Job esp 
• 1-2, 24, 27, 38-41 / Psalms passim, espj 3-4, 
9-11, 13, 17-18, 65, 77, 104— (ZJ) Psalms pas- 
sim, esp 3-4, 9-10, 12, 16-17, 64, 76, 163 / 
Proverbs, 16:33 / Ecclesiastes, 3; 7:13-15; 8-g; 

. 11-12 / Isaiah, 36-37; 46; 31— (D) Isaias, 56- 

37; 46; 51 / Jeremiah, 17:5-8; 18-19; 31: 45— 
,(i?) Jeremias, 17:5-8; 18-19; 3i: 45 / Daniel 
passim, esp 3:i-4:3, 6:1-28— (D) Daniel, 1:1- 
3 :23 passim, esp 3 .-1-23 ; 3 :9i-i2 :i3 passim, esp 
' 3:91-100, 6:1-28 / Jonah esp i, 4— (£>) Jonas 

esp 1,4/ Malachi, 1 :2-3—(D) MalacItias, i :2-3 

Apocrypha: Tobit—ID) OT, Tobias / Judith esp 
5-6, 8-16 — (D) OT, Judith esp 5-6, 8-i6 / 
^st of Esther — (Z?) OT, Esther, 10:4-16:24 / 
Wisdom of Solomon, 14:1-3— (D) OT, Boo\of 
Wisdom, 14:1-3 / Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-20— (Z?) 
OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-32 / Song of Three 
Children— (P) OT, Daniel, 3:24-90 / Susanna 
— ID) OT, Daniel, 13:1-64 / Bel and Dragon 
— (Z?) OT, Daniel, 13:65-14:42 / 1 Maccabees, 
3:13-26 — (Z5) OT, Z Machabees, 3:13-26 / 
II Maccabees, 6:1-16— (Z)) OT, II Machabees, 
6:1-16 

New Testament: Matthew, 6:25-34; ’/•.'/-if, 10 
esp 10:17-20, 10:29-33:23:37/ Luke, 11:1-13; 
12:1-34; 21:12-19 / John, 6:22-71 esp 6:40, 
6:44-45, 6:64-65— (£>) John, 6:22-72 esp 
6:40, 6:44-45, 6:65-66 / Acts, 1:15-26; 6:8- 
7:60; 13:48— (D) Acts, 1:15-26: 6:8-7:59; 
13:48 / Romans, 8:28-11:36; 13:1-2 / Ephe- 
sians, 1:4-2:10; 4:1-7 / Philippians, 2:12-13 / 
II Timothy, i:g / Hebrews, 1:1-3; / 

Z Fe/er, 1 :i-5 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 1 6Ic-d / 
Cify of God, BK I, CH 8-9 133a'135a; bk iv, ch 
33 206c-d; BK V, ch 1 207d-208c; ch 8-11 
2l2c-216d; ch 19 224b'225b; ch 21-22 226a- 
227a; bk x, ch 14-17 307c-3I0b; bk xi,' ch 22 
333d-334c; bk xii, ch 27 3S9c-360a,c; bk xiv, 

, CH 27 396c-397a ; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b / 
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 27 650a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, 
REP I 14b-15b; q 8, a 3, ans 36b-37c; q 13, 

' A 8, ANS and rep i 70d-71b; Q 15, a 3, rep 4 
93b-94a; qq 22-24 127c-143c; q 96, a i, ans 
and rep 2 510b-511b; parti-ii, q 9, a 6, rep 3 
662a-d 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-h, q 93, 
A 5, REP 3 219a-d; part ii-n, q i, a 7, ans 
385c-387a; q 25, a ii, rep 3 S 08d-509c; part 

■ III, Q 61, A I, ANS 85Sa-d; part hi suppl, q 69, 
A 3t ans 887d'8S9c; q 71, a 5, ans 90Sc-908b; 
<Q 77, AT, ans 943a-944d; q 78, a 3, ans 950b- 
951a ' 

, 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii {61-96] 
< t 'ilOb-c; paradise, i [94-142] 107 fa-d; vi fi-iiij 

113c-114d: VIII [85-148] 117c-118c; xi-xii 
122a-125a esp xi [28-39] 122b, xii 
124a; xx [31-138] 137a-138a ' 

■ ' 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 
138-154 \ Q 6 h -\ 68 h / Knight' s Tale [1251-1267] 
180b; [1663-1672] 187b / Tale of Man of Law 
236b-2S5b esp [4869-4924] 242b-243b, [5247- 
’ 5253] 249b / Friar's Tale [7064-7085] 281a-b 

/ Franklin’s Tale [11,177-206] 353b-354a / 
Monies Tale [14,021-052] 434b-435a; [14,149- 
252] 437a-438b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53d; part ii, 
113b-c: 160a; 162b; part iv, 254b; 27lb 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 98b-99a 

26 Shakespeare: Richard 111 , act 11, sc ii [77- 
95] 120b-c 

27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc ii [i-ii] 
67d-68a; [47-53] 68b-c; [230-235] 70a 

29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part ii, 408c 

30 Bacon; Advancement of Learning, 19d; 38a / 
Novum Organum, bk i, aph 93 125d-126a 

32 Milton: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Paradise Lost, 
BK HI [80-134] 137a-138a / Samson Agonistes 
[210-214] 344a; [373-380] 347b-348a; [667- 
709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-39Sb 

33 Pascal: PensSes, 619-641 284b-290a 

35 BuRKELty : Human Knowledge, intro, sect3 
40Sb-c; sect 60-66 424b-426a: sect 93-94 
431b-c; SECT 105-107 433b-434a; sect 146- 
155 442a-444c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
54-57 474b-475d; sect xi, div 108 500b-d 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 7Sc-d; 377c-378a 

38 Rousseau: Inequality, 33]c-d / Social Con- 
tract, BK hi, 414d; BK iv, 437d-438b 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 292d-294a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 542a-b 

44 Boswell: Johnson, OSc-d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 158c- 
160b; 168d-170b; part iv, 32Ib-c; 36Sd- 

' 369a,c 

48 Melville: Moby Dick, 85a; 237a; 396b- 
397a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b: bk 
IX, 342a-344b; 357b-358b; bk x, 447c-448a; 
465c-467c passim; bk xii, 553b; bk xhi, 
563a-b; Ek xV, 619d-620a; 631a-c; epilogue 
I, 650b-c; epilogue ii, 675a-677b; 680b-c; 
684b-d 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov , EKV ,\ 2 ' lh - 
137c passim; bk xi, 343b-c 

54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b 

7 c. Divine government and law 

Old Testament: Genesis, g:i-y / Exodus, 12-13; 
15:18; 19-31 esp 20:1-17; 34-35 / Leviticus 
passim / Numbers passim, esp 5-10, 15, 18-19, 
27-30, 35-36 / Deuteronomy passim, esp 5 :6-2i 
/ 1 Chronicles, 29:11-12— (D) I Paralipomenon, 
29:11-12 / Job, 9:1-13; 34:12-18; 37-41 / 
Psalms, 1; 10:16; 19:7-14; 37:30-31; 40:8; 
47; 59:13; 66:7; 72:8; 78:1-8; 89:30-32; 93; 

THE GREAT IDEAS 7c/o7d 

(7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohamme- 
dan, and Christian conceptions of God and 
His relation to the world and man. -7c. 
Divine government and lawi) 

96:10-13; 97:1-2; 99:1; 103:19-22; 119 pas- 
sim; 145:11-13— (6) Psalms, i; 9:16; 18:8- 

15: 36:30-31; 39:8-9; 46; 58:14; 65:7; 71:8: 

77:1-8; 88:31-33; 92; 95:10-13; 96:1-2; 
98:1; 102:19-22; 118 passim; 144:11-13 / 
Ecclesiastes, 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 51:4-8; •ysvj— 
(P) Isaias, 51 ! ]eremiah, 3i-34--(Z)) 

Jeremias, 31-34 / Ezekiel, 18 — (Z)) Ezechiel, i8 
/ Daniel, 4; 7:27— (Z?) Daniel, 3:98-4:34; 
7:27 / Amos, 2:1-8 / Malachi, 1:14— (D) 
Malachias, 1:14 

Apocrypha: Beland Dragon, 5 — (D) OT, Daniel, 
14:4 

New Testament: Matthew, 5:17-20 / L«%?, 
16:17 / Romans passim, esp 2:11-16, 7:21-25, 
8:7 / / Timothy, 1:17 / Hebrews, 1:8; 8:10; 
10:16 / James, 2:8-12 / Revelation, 11:15-18; 
19:6— (D) Apocalypse, 11:15-18; 19:6 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk 11, par 9, lOd; par 
14 12a-b; bk 111, par 13-17 16c-18a / CiV)' of 
God, BK V, cH II 216c-d; bk vii,ch 30 261b-d; 
BK IX, CH 22 296d-297a; bk x, ch 13-15 307b- 
308b; CH 17 309c-310b; bk xi, ch 18 331d- 
332a; ch 22 333d-334c; bk xii, cH 5 345a-b; 
BK XIX, CH 12-15 517b-S21c; ch 21 S24a-S2Sa; 
CH 23-25 S2Sc-S28d; ch 27 529a-d; bk xxii, 
CH 1-3 S86b,d-588b; CH 24 609a-612a pas- 
sim 

19 Aquinas: Siimma Theologiea, part i, q 2, a 3, 
ANS 12c-14a; Q 21, A 1, ANs 124b'125b; a 2, 
ANS 125c-d; Q 26, A 4, ANS 151c-lS2a,c; q 47, 
A 3, REP I 258c-259a; Q 63, a 7, ans 33ic- 
332b; Q 65, A 3, REP 1 341c-342b; q 83, a 1, 
REP 3 436d-438a; qq 103-119 528a-608d; 
PART 1-11, Q 10, A 4, ANS 66Sd-666a,c; Q 17, 
A 8, REP 2 692a-c; q 19, a 4 705b-c; a 6, ans 
and REP 2 707a-708a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologiea, part i-ii, q 71, 
A 2, rep 4 106d-107c; a 6 llOb-lllb; q 72, a 2, 
ANS 112b-113a; a 4, ans 114a-llSa; q 74, a 8, 
REP 1 134b-136a; q 91, aa 1-2 208b-209d; aa 
4-5 210c-212c; q 93 2I5b,d-220d; q 97, a 3, 
ANS and REP 1 237b-238b; a 4, rep 3 238b- 
239b; qq 98-108 239b-337d; part ii-ii, q 23, 
A 6, ANS 487a-d; q 187, a 5, rep 3 671d-673b; 
PART III, Q 60, A 4, REP 2 849c-850b; PART HI 
SUPPL, Q 69, A I, ANS 88Sc-886c; q 72, a 2, 
ANS 9I9a-920c 

21 Dante: ZJk’otc Comedy, hell, vii [70-76] 10b; 
XI 15a-16b; PURGATORY, XVI [52-105] 77b-d; 
PARADISE, 1 [94-142] 107b-d; 11 [112-148] 
109a-b; iii [34-90] 109d-110b; x [1-27] 120b-c: 
xxvn [ioo]-xxviii [139] 148b-lS0b; xxxii 
[37-84] lS5a-c 

22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [1663-1672] 187b / 
Monl(s Tale [14,221-228] 438a-b / Canon's 
Yeoman's Tale [16,935-949] 487a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 95d-96b; partii, 
136d-138b; 159d-164a,c; part hi, 167b-c; 
171a-172a; 177c-180a; 199b-204a; 216b-219d; 
240a-241a; 24Sc-246a,c; part iv, 247a-249b; 

. 272b-c 

28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 491d-492a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning; 71a-b; 
94b-c; lOOd 

31 Descartes; Discourse, part v, 54 c; S5b / 
Objections and Replies, 229c-d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, PROP3, scHOL'374b-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [237-249] 116b; 
[310-328] 118a; BK III [274-343] 141b-143a esp 
[317-333] 142b; BK V [600-615] 188b; bk vi 
[169-188] 200a; bk vii [139-173] 220a-221a; 
[550-609] 229a-230b; bk xii [223-248] 324a-b 
/ Samson Agonistes [667-673] 3S4a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, ?i’j6 345a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, 
SECT 5-6 105a-c; bk 11, ch xxviii, sect 8 
230a; bk iv. ch hi, sect 28-29 322a-323a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 29-33 
418 c- 419 a; sect 51-53 422 d- 423 a; sect 57 
423 d- 424 a; sect 60-66 424 b- 426 a; sect 93- 
94 431 b-c; SECT 105-107 433 b- 434 a; sect 
146-155 442 a- 444 c 

35 Hume; Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
54-57 474b-475d; sect viii, div 78-81 485c- 

36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 261b-266b esp 
261b-262a, 266b 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 20 a'd 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, la- 2 b; 
bk xii, 8Sd-86a; bk xxvi, 214b,d-21Sa 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 252c 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 237b; 238b-240b / Judge- 
ment, 594d [fn i] 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 1S8c- 
160b; 168d-170b; part hi, 309d-310a; part 
IV, 368d-369a,c 

52 Dostoevsky; Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim 

Id. Grace 

Old Testament: Psalms, 84:11 — (D) Psalms, 
83:12 / Proverbs, 3:1-4,21-26 / Jeremiah, 31:18 
—(D) Jeremias, 31:18 / Lamentations, 5:21 / 
Zeehariah, 12:10— (D) Zacharias, 12:10 

New Testament; John, 1:11-18 / Acts, 4:33 / 
Romans passim, esp 1:3-5, 3:1-6:23, 

1 Corinthians, 2:11-3:10; 15:9-10 / ll Corin- 
thians, 1; 4-6; 8:7-9; 9:5-15! 12 / Galatians 
/ Ephesians / Philippians, 2:12-13; 4:13 / 
. ll Thessalonians, 2:15-16 / II Timothy esp 
1 :8-9 / Titus, / Hebrews, 2:9; 12:14-29 

/ James, 4:6 / / Peter passim, esp 1', 5:5 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 5-i 2b-c; 
BK II, par 15 I2b-c; bk vi, par 4 36a-b / City 
of God, BK XIII, ch 3-5 361a-362c; ch 7 362d' 
363b; CH 14-15 366b-d; ch 20 370c-371a; bk 
XIII, CH 23-BK XIV, CH 1 372a-377a; bk xiv, 
CH 26 39Sd-396c; ch 27, 397a; bk xv, ch 1-3 

Id to 7e 

Chapter 29: GOD 591 

397b,d-399c; bk xvr, ch 26-27 438c-439d; 
BK XXI, CH 15-16 572c-574a; bk xxii, ch 22 
606d-608b esp 608a-b / Christian Doctrine, 
BK I, CH I 624b, d 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theohgica, part i, q 2, a 2, 
REP I lld-i2c; Q 8, A 3, ans and rep 4 36b-37c; 
Q 12, A 2, ANS 51c-S2c; A 4, ANS 53b-54c; a 5, 
ANS S4c-55b; a 13 61c-62bj q 38 200c-202b; 
Q 43 230a-237a,c; q 62 3I7c-32Sb; q 89, a i, 
REP 3 473b-47Sa; a 2, rep 3 47Sa'd; q 95 
506b-510a; q 104, a 4, ans S38a-c; q 108, a 8, 
ANS and REP 1-2 S61a-562a; q 113, a i, rep 2 
576a-d; part i-ii, q 5, aa 5-7 640b-642d esp 
A 7, REP 3 642a-d 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theohgica, part i-ii, q 50, 
A 2 7c-8a: Q 51, A 4 ISa-d; q 55, a 4, ans and 
REP 6 28c-29d; q 58, a 3, rep 3 43b-44a; q 62 
59d-63a; q 63, a 2, ans and rep 1-2 64b-6Sa: 
AA 3-4 6Sa-66c; q 65, aa 2-5 72a-75a; q 66, 
A 2, REP I 76c-77c; Q 68 87c-96c; q 76, a 2, 
REP 2 141d-142c; q 79, aa 3-4 lS8a-lS9c; q 8i, 
A 3, REP 3 165d-166b; q 83, a i, rep 4-5 171a- 
172b; A 2, REP 2 172b-173a; Q 85, A 6, ans 
182d-184a: Q 95, a i, ans 226 c- 227 c: q 98, a i 
239b-240c; q ioo, a 5, rep 2 25Sa-2S7c; a 10, 
REP 3 262b-263b; A 12, ans 264d-265d; Q 106, 
A I, ANS and REP 1,3 321a-322a; qq 109-114 
338a-378a,c; part ii-ii, q 2, aa 9-10 398c' 
400b; Q 24, A 3, REP I 491a-d; a ii, ans 498b' 
499c; PART in, Q 6, A 3, rep 3 742a-743a; qq 
7-8 74Sc-763b; q 10, a 4, rep 3 771b-772a; 
Q 14, A 4, REP 2 786d-787c; q 15, a 2, ans 
789a-d; q 22, a i, ans and rep 3 827c-828c; 
Q 23, A I, REP 1 833a-d; a 4, rep 2 835b-836a; 
Q 26, A 2, REP I 846b-d;Q6i, Ai, rep 2 855a-d; 
Q 62 8S8b-864c; part hi suppl, q 75, a 2, 
REP 5 937a-938a 

21 Dante : Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; pur- 
gatory, VII [40-60] 62d-63a: [112-123J 63d- 
64a; ix [13-69] 66a-c; xi [1-24] 68d-69a; xiii 
[10-21] 72a; PARADISE, VII [16-120] llSb-116b; 
XX [31-138] 137a-138a; xxiv 142d-144b esp 
[58-60] I43b, [118-123] 143d-144a: xxix [58- 
66] ISOd-lSla; xxx [34-99] lS2a-d; xxxii 
[40-84] 155a-c; xxxii [i39]-xxxni [145] 156a- 
157d 

22 Chaucer; Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 
144 19b-20a / Second Nun's Tale [15,788-822] 
467a-b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 88c-89a; part ii, 
137c-d; 149c-d; part hi, 176d-177c; 186a-b; 
I9Ib-193c esp 193a; 241c-242a; partiv, 2S0c- 
251b; 253b-254b; 2S5b; 264a 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 209a-d; 212a-d; 238c- 
239c; 267c-268a; 273a-b; 294a-b 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 125d- 
126a 

32 Miisrovs-.Paradise Lost, bkii [1024-1033] 133b; 
BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134] 138a, 
[167-184] 139a-b, [227-238] 140b; bk xi [1-31] 
299a-b ; [251-262] 304b-30Sa / Samson Agoms- 
tes [356-372] 347b: [652-666] 353b-354a 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, Ia-14a; 19a-26b; 
29b; lS4b-159a / Pensees, 202 211a: 430-435 
24Sa-2Sla; 505 261a-b; 507-51 1 261b; 513-517 
262a-263b; 520-524 263b-264a; 643 290b- 
291a; 881 345b 

37 Fielding; Tom Jones, 38d 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 310d- 
3Ila; PART IV, 354a-c 

52 DosroRvsKv: Brothers Karamazov, BKV,127b- 
137c passim 

7e. Miracles 

Old Testament: Genesis, 17:18-18:16; 19:9- 
11,24-26; 21:1-8 / Exodus, 3-4; 7-12; 14-17 / 
Numbers, 9:15-23; 11-12; 16-17; 20:1-13; 
21:5-9; 22:21-34; 26:9-10 / Joshua, 3-4; 
6;i-2o; 10:12-14; 24:6-7— (D) Josue, 3-4; 
6:1-20; 10:12-14: 24:6-7 / Judges, 6:^6-/\o / 
I Samuel, 12:16-19— (D) I Kings, 12:16-19 / 
/ Kings, 17; 18:30-39— (D) III Kings, 17; 
1830-39 / II Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11 
— (D) IV Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11 / 
Nehemiah, 9:9-21 — (D) II Esdras, 9:9-21 / 
Psalms, 78; 105; 106:7-11; 114 — (D) Psalms, 
77; 104; 105:7-11; 113:1-8 / Isaiah, 38:1-9— 
(D) Isaias, 38:1-9 / Daniel, 3:i-4:3; 5-6— (D) 
Daniel, 3:1-23,91-100; 5-6 / Joel, 2:30-31 / 
Jonah— {D) Jonas 

Apocrypha: Song of Three Children, 1-27— (D) 
OT, Daniel, 3 :24-5o / Bel and Dragon, 28-42 
—(D) OT, Daniel, 14:27-42 / II Maccabees, 
1:18-22; 2:10— (D) OT, II Machabees, 1:18- 
22; 2:10 

New Testament: Matthew, 1:18-25; 8-9; 12:9- 
13,22-29: 14:13-36: 15:22-39; 17; 20:29-34 
/ Marl [, 1:29-34,40-44; 2:3-12; 3:1-5; 4:34- 
40; 5; 6:34-56; 7:24-8:26; 9:1-10,16-29: 
10:46-52; 13:24-26 / Lul(e, 1:5-66; 4:31- 
5:26: 6:6-10; 7:1-16; 8:22-56; 9:12-17,28-43; 
11:14-26; 13:11-17; 14:1-6; 17:11-19; 18:35- 
43 / John, 2:i-n: 3:2: 4:46-54; 5:1-16; 6:5- 
26; 7:31; 9:1-33; 11:1-45; 12:37-38; 21:1-11 / 
Acts, 2:1-22; 3:2-11; 5:12-16; 8:6; 9:36-43; 
14:7-10; 15:12; 19:11-12; 20:7-12; 28:1-10 
/ I Corinthians, 12:8-10 / Galatians, 3:5-7 / 
Hebrews, 2:3-4 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 8-13 303a- 
307c; CH i6-i8 308b-310d; bk xxi, ch 5-8 
563d-568d; bk xxii, ch 5-10 589a-S99b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part i, q 89, 
A 8, REP 2 479c-480c; q 92, a 4, ans 491 b-d; 
Q 104, A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 105, AA 6-8 543b- 
545b; Q io6, a 3, ans 547c-548b; q no, a 4 
567c-568b; q 114, a 4 584a-585a; part i-ii, 
Q 10, A 4, rep 2 665d-666a,c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part i-ii, q 63, 
A 4, REP 3 65d-66c; q 81, a 4, ans 166b-I67a; 
Q 113, A 10 369c-370b; part hi suppl, q 75, 
A 3, ans 938a-939d; q 83, a 3 978c-980d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv [88- 
iii] 143c-d 

592 THE GREAT IDEAS 7fio U 

(7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohamme- 
dan, and Christian conceptions of God and 
His relation to the world and man. 7 e. 
Miracles!) 

22 Chaucer; Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b 
esp [4869-4924] 242b-243b / Prioress's 'Tale 
[13,418-620] 392a-39Sb / Second Nun's Tale 
[16,001-021] 471a-b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83c; part ii, 
137b-c; 160b; part hi, 166a-167b; 188a-19Ia; 
PART IV, 249b-250a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 
33c-d; 41b-d / New Atlantis, 201d-203c esp 
203a-b 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk jcii [173-222] 323a- 
324a 

33 Pascal: Pensies, 643-644 290b-291b; 803-856 
328b-341b: 876 345a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, 
SECT 13 371a-b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 62-63 
425a-c; sect 84 429b-c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
54 474b-c; sect x 488d-497b 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 180b-c; 189b-191a; 
206b-d; 29Sc-296b; 46Sd-466c; 60Sb-d 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 227d-228a; 232a-c; 
398b-399b 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 126b-c; 3S9a 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of History, part i, 247a; 
part hi, 307a-b; part iv, 338b-c; 348d- 
349a 

47 Goethe: FiiHrt, part i [762-770] 20a 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 219b-220a 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 
lla-b; BK II, 21d-22b: bk v, 127b-137c passim; 
BK VII, 171a-177b; 18gd-190a 

If. The Book of Life 

Old Testament: Exodus, 32:31-33; 33:19 / 
Psalms, 69:28— (Z?) Psalms, 68:29 / Isaiah, 
4:3— (£’) AflW/, 4:3 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-13— (D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-14 

New Testament: Matthew, 20:1-16; 22:1-14 / 
Luje, 10:20 / John, 5:21; 6:44; 10:26-29 / Acts, 
13:48 / Romans, 8:28-9:23 / Ephesians, 1-3 / 
11 Thessalonians, 2:12-14 / 11 Timothy, 1:8-9; 
2:19-20 / Hebrews, 12:22-23 / ^ Peter, 1:1-5; 
2:1-9 / II Peter, 1 :io / Revelation, i3;4-8; 
17:7-8; 20:11-21:27 esp 20:15, 2i:2y; 22:18- 
19— (ZJ) Apocalypse, 3:4-5; 13:4-8; 17:7-8; 
20:11-21:27 esp 20:15, 21:27; 22:18-19 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk xv, ch 1 397b,d- 
398c; BK XX, ch 8 536d-538c; cii 14-16 542d- 
544d 

19 Aquinas: Sttmma Theologica, part i, q 24 
141b-143c 

20 Aquinas: Sttmma Theologica, part hi, q 63, 
A 1, REP I 864c-865b; part hi suppl, q 87, a i 
997b-998c 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xix [103- 
148] 136a-c; xx [94-138] 137d-138a; xxi [52- 
102] 138d-139b; xxxii [40-84] 155a-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [356-363] 101a 

33 Pascal: Pensies, 884 346a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 238c; 334b-c 

7 g. The resurrection of the body ' 

Old Testament: Job, 14:13-15; 19^5-27 / 
Isaiah, 26:19; 66:14 — (^) leaias, 26:19; 66:14 
/ Ezelfel, 37:1-14— (D) Ezechiel, 37:1-14 / 
Daniel, 12:1-3 

Apocrypha: II Maccabees, 12:41-45— (Z)) OT, 
II Machabees, 12:42-46 

Ne>v Testament: Matthew, 22:23-33; 27:52-53; 
28 / Marl(, 12:18-27; 16:1-9 / Lul^e, 20:27-38; 
24:1-12 / John, 2:18-22 / Acts, 23:1-10; 24:15; 
26:8 / Romans, 4:17; 6:3-11; 8;io-n / I Co- 
rinthians, 6:14; 15 / II Corinthians, 1:9-10; 
4:14/7 Thessalonians, 4:13-17 / Hebrews, 6\i-2 
18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 29, 317b- 
318a; bk xiii, ch 1-2 360a-361a; ch 16-20 
367a-371a; ch 22-24 371c-376a,c; bk xx, ch 
6-7 534a-536d; ch 9-10 538c'S41a; ch 12-17 
541c-54Sc; ch 20-23 S47c-552c; ch26, 555d- 
SS6a; bk xx, ch 30-BK xxi, ch 10, 559d- 
570b; BK xxii S86b,d-618d esp ch 4-5 588b- 
590a, ch 7 S91c-d, ch 11-21 599c-606d, ch 
25-30 612a-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, 
ch 19-21 629a-b; ch 23-24 630a-631a 

20 Aquinas : Sttmma Theologica, part hi suppl, 
QQ 75-86 93Sa-996a,c; q 93, a i 1037d-1039a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi [94-111] 
9b-c; X [1-15] 13d; xiii [85-108] 18d-19a; 
paradise, vii [121-148] 116b-c; xiv [1-66] 
126d-127c; xxv [64-129] 145a-c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 191b-193c; 

I95b-d; part iv, 253b-255b; 259b-c 
25 Montaigne :£'ss(7ys, 245c-249c; 311a , 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [227-343] 140b- 
143a esp [294-329] 141b-142b; bk xh [386- 
445] 327b-329a esp [411-429] 328a-b 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 95 43Ic 
38 Montesquieu of Laws, bkxxiv, 205d- 

206a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233d; 234d 
44 Boswell: Johnson, 472a-b ; 

7 h. The Last Judgment and the end of the world 

Old Testament: Job, 19:25-27; 21:27-34 / 
Psalms, 50; 96:10-13— (Z7) Psalms, 49; 95:10- 

13 / Ecclesiastes, 3:16-17; 11:9-10; 12:14 ! 
Isaiah, 2-4; 11:11-16; 13:6-22; 24; 26-27; 
3°: 34-35: 65:17-25; 66— (Z)) Isaias, 2-4: 
ii:ii-i6; 13:6-22; 24; 26-27; 3°: 34-35: 
65:17-25; 66 / Daniel, 7:21-27; 12 / Joel / 
Micah, 4— (Z)) Micheas, 4 / Zephaniah—iP) 
Sophonias / Zechariah, 14— (D) Zacharias, 

14 / Malachi, 3-4— (Z?) Malachias, 3-4 
Apocrypha: Judith, 16:17 — (D) OT, Judith, 

16:20-21 / Rest of Esther, 10:4-11:12— (Z?) 
OT, Esther, 10:4-11:12 

S'io %b Chapter 29; GOD 593 

New Testament: Matthew, 7:1-2; 10:14-15; 
n;ao- 24 ; ia; 36 ; i3’-36-43>47-5'>'. ^4-^5 / 
Marli, 13:4-37 / Lu\e, 17:20-37; 21:5-36 / 
John, 12:48 / Acts, 2:17-21; 17:31 / Romans, 

• , 2:5-11 /,/ Corinthians, 4:15-5:4; 15:23-28 / 

I Thessalonians, 1:9-10; 2:19; 4:14-5:4 / 

II ,Thessalonians, 1-2 / II Timothy, 3:i~4:9 / 

Hebrews, /James, 5:7-9 / 2 Peter, 4:5-6 

/ 71 Pif/er, 2:9; 3:7-13 / I John, 2:18-29; 4-i7 
/ Jude / Revelation passim, esp 14:15-16:21, 

) 20:1-22:21 — (O) Apocalypse passim, esp 14:15- 

1 16:21,20:1-22:21 

. 18 Augustine: C/y' 0/ Go^7 , bk xviii, ch 53 
504d-50Sc; bk xx 530a-560a,c; bk xxi, ch 
11-27 570b-586a,c / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, 
CH 37, 673d-674a 

20 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part m suppl, 
QQ 73-74 922b-935a,c; q 77, a 2 945a'946b; 
QQ 87-99 997a-1085a,c 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, hele, vi [94-115! 
9b'C; X [1-15] 13d; paradise, xix (100-148] 
136a-c 

22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a 

23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part hi, 230a; 244b-c 

32 Milton; Christs Nativity [133-172] 4b-5b / 

Paradise Lost, bk hi [274-343] 141b'143a esp 
[326-341] 142b; BK VII [139-173] 220a-221a; 
bk XI [45-83] 300a-301a; bk xn [451-465] 
329a; [537-551] 331a / Areopagilica, 41Qa-b 

35 Locke: Toleration, 17a-b 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 187c-189a 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 233c-234d 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim, esp 134d'135a; bk xi, 
337a'346a passim 

8 . Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning 

I God and His people 

8 a. The Chosen People: Jew and gentile 

Old Testament; Genesis, 12:1-4; *3-H“*7: *5! 
ly-.i-iS-.ip; 22:1-18 esp 22:15-17; 26:1^,23- 
25; 27-28; 35:9-13: 46:1-7; 48-49 / Exodus, 
3-17; 19-20; 33:1-34:18 / Leviticus, 26 / Deu- 
teronomy, i; 4-12 passim, esp 4:37-38, 7:6-8, 
10:15; 14:1-2; 15:6; 23:1-8; 26-32 passim, esp 

2 26:17-19, 28:1-68, 31:16-21, 32:9-14 //oi/iKa, 

10:12-14; 23:1-13— (D) Josue, 10:12-14; 23:1- 
13/7 Samuel, 12 — (D) 7 Kings, 12 / 7 Kings, 
8:51-53— (D) III Kings, 8:51-53 / 77 Kings, 
iiii7— (D) IV Kings, 11:17/7 Chronicles, 17— 
(D) 7 Paralipomenon, 17 / Nehemiah, 9— (7>) 
77 Esdras, 9 / Psalms passim, esp 33:12, 50:7, 
78:1-72, 8i:i-i6, 89:1-52, 105:1-106:48, 

132:1-18, 135:4-14, 136:1-26— (D) Psalms 
passim, esp 32:12, 49:7, 77:1-72, 80:2-17, 
88:2-53, 104:1-105:48, 131:1-18, 134:4-14, 
135:1-27 / Isaiah passim, esp 4o;i; 42:1-6, 
43:1-7, 44:1-5, 46:3-4, 49:1-26, 63:7-8— (D) 
Isaias passim, esp 40:1, 42:1-6, 43:1-7, 44:1- 
5, 46:3-4, 49:1-26, 63:7-8 / Jeremiah passim, 
esp 3, 7:23, 11:4, 24:7, 30:22, 31:1, 3i:33> 

32:38— (D) Jeremias passim, esp 3, 7:23, 11:4, 
24:7, 30‘-22, 31:1, 31:33, 32:38 / Ezekiel, 
11:15-20; 14:11; 16-17; 20; 34; 36-37— (D) 
Ezechiel, 11:15-20; 14:11; 16-17; 20; 34; 

' 36-37 / Amos, 3:1-2 / Obadiah — ID) Abdias 

/ Micah, 5:7-15- (D) Micheas, 5:7-11 / Zech- 
ariah, 1:12-2:13; 8-10 esp 8:8— (D) Zacharias, 
1:12-2:13; 8-10 esp 8:8 / Malachi, 1:1-3 — 
(D) Malachias, 1:1-3 

Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 14:5 — ID) OT, Es- 
ther, 14:5 / Wisdom of Solomon, 16:20-26 — 
{D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 16:20-26 / Ecclesi- 
asticus, 17:17-21; 47:22- (D) OT, Ecclesiasti- 
cus, 17:14-17; 47:24-25 

New Testament: Matthew, 10:5-6 / Acts, 15:1- 
29; 21:19-25 / Romans, 1:13-16; 2-4; 9; io;ii- 
13; II / / Corinthians, 12:13 / Galatians, 2:6- 
16; 3:13-29; 4:21-31; 5:6; 6:15 / Ephesians, 
2;it-3;8 / Colossians, 3:9-11 

15 Tacitus ; Histories, bk v, 295d 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 34 206d- 
207a,c; bk xvi, ch i6 433c-434a; ch 18 434c; 
ch 21-28 435a-440b: ch 32 441c-442c; bk 
XVII, ch 7 458c-4S9d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part 1, q 21, 
A 4, REP 2 126c-127c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, 
AA 4-5 242b-244b; qq 102-105 270b-321a 
passim, esp q 102, a 6 292c-298a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 82d-83a; part 11, 
leob-c; PART III, 177C'180d 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [101-269] 321b' 
325a / Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp [210- 
292] 344a'346a, [420-471] 348b'3S0a, [843- 
902] 358a-359a, [1156-1223] 364b'366a 

33 Pascal: PensSes, 603 279b; 610-612 280b' 
282b; 619-641 284b'290a; 713-718 304b-308b 

38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 435b-c 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 179d-183a 
.. 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 245d- 
247b; PART III, 305b-c; part iv, 322a'b 

8 b. God’s Covenant with Israel: circumcision 
as sign of the Covenant 

Old Testament: Genesis, 12:1-3,7; 15:17-21; 
17; 22:16-18; 26'.2-3 / Exodus, 2;23-4;3i esp 
2:24; 6:1-9; 19:3-8; 24:7-8; 31:16-17; 32:11- 
13; 34 esp 34:10, 34:27-28 / Leviticus, a-.-iy, 
26 / Deuteronomy, 1:8; 4-11 passim, esp 4:23, 
5:2-3, 7:12-13, 8:18-20, 10:16; 29-31; 34:4 
/ Joshua, 5:1-9; 7:10-12; 23:16-24:28— (D) 
Josue, 5:1-9; 7:10-12; 23:16-24^8 / Judges, 
2:1-5 / I Kings, 8:56; 19:9-18— (D) III Kings, 
8:56; 19:9-18 / II Kings, 11:17; 13:22-23; 17 
esp 17:14-16, 17:34-40; 22-23 “P 23:2-3— 
ID) IV Kings, 11:17; 13:22-23; 17 esp 17:14- 
16, 17:34-40; 22-23 esp 23-2-3 / I Chronicles, 
16:13-22— (D) I Paralipomenon, 16:13-22 / 
ll Chronicles, 6:14-15 — (D) II Paralipomenon, 
6:14-15/ AV/jc/rm/t, 1:5; 9— (D) II Esdras, 1:5; 

9 / Psalms, 25:14; 44:17; 74:19-20; 78; 105 
esp 105:7-8; III— (£>) Psalms, 24:14; 43:18; 

THE GREAT IDEAS 8c/o8i 

(8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God 
and His people. 8 b. God’s Covenant with 
Israel: circumcision as sign of the Covenant.) 
73:19-20; 77; 104 esp 104:7-8; no / Isaiah, 
24:1-5; 33:1-8; 54 esp 54:10; 56 esp 56:4-6; 
59:20-21; 61 esp 61:8— (£>) Isaias, 24:1-5; 
33:1-8; 54 esp 54:10; 56 esp 56:4-6; 59:20- 
21; 61 esp 61:8 / Jeremiah, 4:4; ii; 14:19-22; 
22:5-9; 31-33 «P 31:31-33. 32:40. 33:20-26; 
34:13-20; 50:4-5— (D) Jeremias, 4:4; ii; 
14:19-22; 22:5-9; 31-33 osp 31:31-33. 32:40. 
33:20-26; 34:13-20; 50:4-5 / Ezelfiel, 16-17; 
20:33-38; 37:21-28; 44:6-9— (D) Ezechiel, 
16-17; 20:33-38; 37:21-28; 44:6-9 / Hosea, 
2:16-20; 6 esp 6:7; 8 — (D) Osee, 2:16-20; 
6 esp 6:7; 8 / Haggai, 2:4-5— (D) riggeus, 
2:5-6 

Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 44:19-45:5— (D) OT, 
Ecclesiasticus, 44:20-45:6 / I Maccabees, 1:44- 
63; 2:19-6:8 esp 4:7-14 — (D) OT, I Machabees, 
1:46-66; 2:19-6:8 esp 4:7-14 
New Testament: Ltihe, 1:70-75; 2:21 / John, 
7:22-23 / Acts, 3:25; 7:1-8,51-53; 15:1-29; 
21:20-21 / Romans, 2:25-4:16; 11:25-27 / 
I Corinthians, 7:18-19/ Galatians, 3:13-5:11; 
6:12-15 / Ephesians, 2:11-13 / Colossians, 
2:10-14; 3;9~ii / Hebrews, 8:6-10:17 
18 Augustine: City of God, bk xvi, ch 16 433c- 
434a; ch 18 434c; ch 21-28 43Sa-440b; ch 32 
441c-442c; ch 36-38 443d-446a; bk xix, ch 
22 525b-c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Tbeologica, part i-ii, q 98, 
AA 4-6 242b-24Sb 

23 Hobuzs: Leviathan, part 1, 82d-83a: part hi, 
177c-180a: 199b-201b; 206c 

32 Milton: Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 610-612 280b-282b; 637-639 
289b-290a: 675 296b-297a 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 322a-b 

8c. The Law: its observance as a condition of 
righteousness and blessedness 
Old Testament: Genesis, 26:4-5 / Exodus, 12- 
13; 19-40 esp 20:1-17 / Leviticus passim, esp 26 
/ Numbers passim / Deuteronomy passim, esp 
4:1-15, 5:6-21, 6:1-9, 15'17~25, 7:9-26, 10:12- 
13, 11:1-32, 12:32, 28:1-68, 30:11-20 / Joshua, 
1:7-8; 8:30-35; 22:1-6 — (Z?) Josue, 1:7-8; 
8:30-35; 22:1-6 / / Kings, 8:54-62— (D) III 
Kings, 8:54-62 / II Kings, 17; 21:8— (D) IV 
Kings, 17; 21:8 / I Chronicles, 22:12-13— (D) 
I Paralipomenon, 22:12-13 / Chronicles, 31; 
33:8; 35:1-19— (Z?) U Paralipomenon, 31; 
33:8; 35:1-19 / Ezra, 9-10— (D) I Esdras, 9-10 
/ Nehemiah, 1:5-9; 9:16-38— (D) II Esdras, 
1:5-9; 9:16-38 / Psalms, 1; 19:7-14; 37:30-31; 
40:8; 78; 89:20-36 esp 89:30-32; 94:12; 
105:43-45; 119— (D) Psalms, i; 18:8-15; 
36:30-31; 39:9; 77; 88:21-37 esp 88:31-33; 
93:12; 104:43-45; 118 / Proverbs passim, esp 
6:20-23, 28:7, 29:18 / Isaiah passim, esp 

5:24-25, 30:9, 42:21-25, 51:7-8— (D) Isaias 
passim, esp 5:24-25, 30:9, 42:21-25, 51:7-8 
/ Jeremiah passim, esp 2:5-8, 6:19, 9:13-16, 
16:10-13, 26:4-6, 31:33, 44:10-14, 44:23— 
(D) Jeremias passim, esp 2:5-8, 6:19, 9:13-16, 
16:10-13, 26:4-6, 31:33, 44:10-14, 44:23 / 
Ezeljel, 5:5-9; 11:17-20; 18; 22:26; 36:25- 
27; 43-48— (D) Ezechiel, 5:5-9; 11:17-20; 
18; 22:26; 36:25-27; 43-48 / Daniel, 9:1-15 / 
Hosea, 4:6; 8:1— (Z?) Osee, 4:6; 8:1 / Amos 
2:4-6 / Zephaniah, 3:1-7 — (Z9) Sophonias 
3:1-7 / Zechariah, 7:12-14 — (Z9) Zacharias 
7:12-14 / Malachi, 2:1-10; 3:7; 4:4— (D) 
Malachias, 2:1-10; 3:7; 4:4 

Apocrypha: Tobit, 14:8-9— (D) OT, Tobias, 
14:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 2:16, 
9:15, 10:19, 11:15, 17:11-14, 19:17-20, 19:24, 
24:23. 32:15, 33:2, 34:8, 39:1-11, 41:8, 42:1- 
2, 45:1-5— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus passim, 
esp 2:19, 9:22-23, 10:23, 11:15, 

19:17-18, 19:21, 24:32-33, 32:19, 33:2, 34:8, 
39:1-15, 41:11, 42:1-2, 45:1-6 / Baruch— 
(D) OT, Baruch / I Maccabees, 1:38-63; 
2:19-68— (D) OT, 1 Machabees, 1:40-66; 
2:19-68 / 11 Maccabees, 2:2-3; 6-7; 11:22-26 
— {D) OT, 11 Machabees, 2:2-3; 6-7; 11:22-26 

New Testament: Matthew, 5:17-20; 12:1-13; 
15:1-20; 19:3-9 / Marl{, 7:1-23; 10:2-12 / 
Luhp, 6:1-9; “■•87-41; 16:16-17 / 

John, 1:17; 5:1-18,45-47; 7:19-23 / Acts, 
10:9-15,25-28; 13:38-39; 15:1-10; 21:20-21 / 
Romans passim / Galatians passim / Ephesians, 
2:14-15 / 7 Timothy, 1:5-11 / Hebrews, 7-10 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 17 309c- 
310b; BK XX, ch 28 556c-S57a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Tbeologica, part i-n, q 91, 
A A 4-5 210c-212c; qq 98-105 239b-321a 

21 Dantl: Divine Comedy, paradise, v [13-84] 
112b-113a passim 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 177d'178a; 
ISOa-d; 206c'207a; 216b-218a; 223a-c; part 
IV, 269a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 18b-c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [223-260] 324a- 
325a; [285-314] 32Sb-326a 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 610 280b-282a; 619-620 
284b-286a; 628-634 287a-289a; 678 297a'b; 
680 298a 

35 Locke: Toleration, 14b-lSa 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 179d-182c esp 181a- 
182a; 208a'C 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of History, part i, 246c-d 

8 d. The Temple: the Ark of the Torah 

Old Testament: Exodus, 25-27; 30:1-6; 35:10- 
38:31; 39:32-40:36 / Leviticus, 26:11 / Num- 
bers, 9:15-22 / Deuteronomy, 10:1-5; 12:5-^; 
16:5-6; 31:24-26 / Joshua, 3-4; 6:1-16— (71) 
Josue, 3-4; 6:1-16 / I Samuel, :z—{p) 
I Kings, 4:3-7;2 / II Samuel, 6:1-17; 7:1-13 
— (Z5) II Kings, 7:1-13 / I Kings, 5-8 

—(D) III Kings, 5-8 / II Kings, 12:4-16; 

8e to 9a ' Chapter 

25:1-17— (Z?) 'IV Kings, 12:4-16; 25:1-17 / 
I Chronicles, 13; 15:1-17:12, ■ 22:1-29:10— (Z?) 

1 Paralipomenon, 13; 15:1-17:12; 22:1-29:10 
/ 11 ‘Chronicles, 2-7 esp 7:12-16; 8;ii; 
24:4-14; 29; 34; 36— (D) 11 Paralipomenon, 
2-7 esp 7:12-16; 8:11; 24:4-14; 29; 34; 36 / 
Ezra, 3-6 — (D) I Esdras, 3-6 / Psalms, 5:7; 
11:4; 27:4-6; 65:4; 68:29; 138:2— (D) Psalhis, 

' 5:8; 10:5; 26:4-6; 64:5; 67:30; 137:2 / Isaiah, 

2:2-3; ^6:6-y—(P) Isaias, 2:2-3; / 

Jeremiah, 7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7— (Z)) Jeremias, 
7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7 / Ezekiel, 40-42— (Z)) 
Ezechiel, 40-42 / Jonah, 2:4 — (Z)) Jonas, 2:5 / 
Micah, 4:1-2 — (D) Micheas, 4:1-2 / Habak: 
ktik, 2:20 — (Z)) Habacuc, 2:20 / Haggai— 
(Z?) Aggetis / Zechariah, 8:9— (Z)) Zacharias, 
8:9 / Malachi, 3:1— (Z?) Malachias, 3:1 
Apocrypha: Tobit, 14:4-7— (Z?) OT, Tobias, 
14:6-9 / Wisdom of Solomon, 9:8— (Z)) OT, 
Boo^ of Wisdom, 9:8 / Baruch, 2:26— (D) 
OT, Baruch, 2:26 

New Testament: John, 2:13-17 / Hebrews, 
9:1-10 

15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 296a; 297d-298a 
18 Augustine: Ci7y 0 / bk x, ch 17 309c- 
310b 

20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q loi, 
A 4, ANS and REP 1,4 269a-270b; Q 102, a 4 
276d-283c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 178c; 180a-c; 
184c; 198a-b 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [244-256] 324b; 

[284-371] 32Sb-327a esp [331-343] 326b ' 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 180a; 180d-181a; 
352c-3S4d esp 3S4a-b 

Be. The messianic hope 
Old Testament: Genesis, 49:10-12 / Numbers, 
24:15-25 / Deuteronomy, 30:1-10 / Psalms, 

, 22:27-31; 44; 46-48; 60; 67-69 passim; 74; 

102; 106:40-48; 126; 132; 147:1-11— (Z?) 
Psalms, 21:28-^2; 43; 45-47; 5 P>' 66-68 pas- 
sim; 73; loi; 105:40-48; 125; 131; 146 / 
Isaiah, 2-4; 7:10-16; 9:1-7; 11-12; 25-27; 
30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 49; 
51-56 esp 52:13-53:12; 59:20-62:12; 65:17- 
66:24— (Z?) Isaias, 2-4; 7:10-16; 9:1-7: 11-12; 
25-27; 30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 
49: 51-56 esp 52:13-53:12; 59:20-62:12; 

65:17-66:24 / Jeremiah, 23:3-6; 30-33— (Z>) 
Jeremias, 23:3^; 30-33 / Ezekiel, 17:22- 
24; 34; 36-37— (Z>) Ezechiel, 17:22-24; 34: 
36-37 / Daniel, 9:20-27 / Hosea, 1:10-11; 
2:16-23; 3:3-5; 13-^4 — C'^) Oiee, 1:10-11; 
2:16-24; 3:3-5: 13-^4 / ^-3 ! rimos, 

5;g_i5_(Z)) 9:9-14 / Micah, 2:12-13; 

4-5; 7:7-20 — (Z7) Micheas, 2:12-13; 4-5: 7:7- 
20 / Zephaniah, 3 — (Z?) Sophonias, 3 / Zecha- 
riah, 2; 8-10; 12-14 — Zacharias, 2; 8-10; 
12-14 / Malachi, 3-4— (A>) Malachias, 3-4 
->New Testament: Matthew, i esp 1:20-23; 3:1- 
3,13-17; 12:14-21; 16:13-16; 17:1-13; 26:63- 

29: GOD 595 

64 / 8 : 27 - 29 ; 9 : 2 - 13 ; 14 : 61-62 / Z«^e, 

1 : 30 - 35 ; 3 : 1 - 6 , 15 - 16 ; 7 : 24 - 28 ; 9 : 18 - 20 , 28 - 
36 ; 22 : 66-70 / John, 1 : 15-41 esp 1 : 41 ; 4 : 4-30 
esp 4 : 25 - 26 ; 7 : 26 - 53 ; 10 : 24-38 
: 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi, q i, 
A 6 708c-709c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 229c 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xh [ 235 - 244 ] 
324b; [ 284 - 330 ] 325b-326b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 607 280a; 609 280b; 613 
282b-283a; 616-619 283b-28Sa; 642 290b; 
662 293b; 673 296a; 675 296b-297a; 692 
300b-301a; 719 308b-309a; 727 315b-316b; 
729-730 316b-317a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 181b; 207d-208a; 
308a 

41 GiBzott: Decline and Fall, 134b-13Sa 

9 . Specifically Christian dogmas concerning 
the divine nature and human destiny 

9a. The Trinity 

Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26 
New Testament: Matthew, 1:18-20; 3:11,16- 
17; 10:19-20; 12:31-32; 28:19 / Mark , 1:8-12; 
3:28-30; 13:11 / Litke, 1:15,26-35; 2:25-27; 
3:16,21-22; 11:13; 12:10-12 / John, 1:1-8,14, 
18,32-34; 3 esp 3:16-17, 3:35-36; 14-16; 
20:22-23 / ^ ttts , i: 2,5-8; 2:1-41 esp 2:32-39; 
4:23-31; 5:32; 8:17-22; 9:31; 10:38,44-48; 
11:15-17; 13:2-4; 15:7-9; 19:1-6; 20:28; 
28:25-27 / Romans, 5 esp 5:5-10; 8:1-9:!; 
14:17; 15:13,16 / 1 Corinthians, 2:9-14; 
3:16-23; 6:19; 12:2-13 / Corinthians, 
1:18-22; 4:4; 13:14— (Z>) II Corinthians, 

1:18-22; 4:4; 13:13 / Ephesians, 1-3 passim 
/ Colossians, 1:13-15 / I Thessalonians, 
1:5-6 / II Timothy, 1:14 / Titus, 3:4-7 / 
Hebrews, 1:2-3; 6:4-6; 10:14-17 / I Peter, 
1:1-12 / U Peter, 1:21 / Z John, 4-5 esp 
4:9-10, 4:14-15,5:1-2, 5:5-7, 5:10-12 //We, 
17-21 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xih, par 6-12 
I12a-113d; par 32, U9b / City of God, bk x, 
CH 23-24 3l2c-3]3c; bk xi, ch io327d'328d; 
CH 23-29 334c-339b; ch 32 340b-d; bk xih, 
ch 24 373d-376a,c; bk xvi, ch 6, 426c / 
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 5 625d'626a; 
ch 34 634b-c; bk hi, ch 2, 657b-6SSa 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 27-43 
153a-237a,c; q 59 , a 1, contrary 306c-307b; 
Q 61 , A 2 , ANS 31Sc-316a; q 88 , a 3 , rep 3 472c- 
473a: Q 91 , A 4, REP 2 487d-488c; Q 93 , a i, 
rep 2 492a-d; aa 5-8 495b-S00c; q 108 , a i, 
ANS 552c-553c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93 , 
A I, REP 2 215b,d'216c; q 106 , a 4, rep 3 324a- 
32Sc: part ii-ii, Q I, A 8 , REP 3 387a'388c; q 2, 
A 8 397d-398b; part iii, q 2, a 3 , rep 3 7I3a- 
714c: Q 8 , A I, REP i 7S6d-7S7c; q 16 , a i, rep 2 
796b-797d; a 2, rep 2 797d-798b; a 5, rep i 
800c-801b; q 17 , a 1 , rep 5 807a-808d: a 2t 

THE1GREAT JDEAS 9b to 93(1) 

(9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the 
divine iiatitre and human destiny. 9<?. The 
Trinity.) ^ , 

REP 3 808d-809d; Q 19, a i, rep i 816a-8I8b; 
QQ 20-24 821a-839c; q 25, a i, ans and rep 1,3 
839d-840d; q 26, a 2, ans and rep 2 846b-d; 

' ' Q 63, A 3,. REP I 866c-867c; a 4, contrary 

867d-868b; part jh suppl, q 95, a I, rep 2 
1042c-1044c:rA 3, ans 1045b-1046d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [34- 
45] 56b; paradise, x [1-6] 120b; xiv [28-33] 
127b; XXIV [124-147] 144a; xxxiii '.[76-145] 
lS7a-d 

22 Chaucer: Troiltts tind Cressida, bk v, Stanza 

267 155a / Second Nun's Tale [15,794-808] 
467a-b •; 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 97c; part hi, 
182a-c; 207b; 207d-208c; 227b; part iv, 259d 

30 Bacon: Adiancement of Learning, 100c 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 159a; 

232b ' ' 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity [1-14] la-b / Paradise 
Lost, BK HI [56-415] 136b-144b esp [167-172] 
139a, [372-389] 143b-144a; bk v [600-615] 
188b; BK VI [719-733] 212a; jbk xii [469-551] 
329b-331a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307a-314a esp SlOb- 
31Ia; 438b-441d esp 438b-o, 441a-b; 605a-b; 
607a 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 422a-c; 520b-S21c 
esp 521c 

46 Hegel: Philosophy'of History, part hi, 303d' 
304a; 306a-c 

93 . The Incarnation: the God-man 

New Testament: John, 1:1-14 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk,v, par 20 32d-33a; 

BK VII, par 13-14 470-486; par 24-25 50d-51c; 
BK X, par 67-70 88b-89a; bk Xi, par 4 90a-b / 
City of God, bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a; cii 17 
29Sa-c; ch 21 296b-d; bk x, ch 20 311b-c; ch 
22 312a'b; ch 24 312d-313c; ch 27-29 315b- 
318b; BK XI, ch 2 323a-c: bk xxi, ch 15-16 
S72c-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 11-14 
627b-628b; ch 34 634b-c ^ ^ 

19 Aquinas: A/wma Theologica, part i, q 62, a 9, 
REP 3 3243-3256; q 64, a i, rep 4 334a- 
335c; Q 73, A I, REP 1 370a-371a; q 95, a i, 
REP I 506b-507c; part i-ii, q 5, a 7, rep 2 
642a-d 

20 Aqvisas: Stimma Theologica, part hi, qq 1-26 
701b,d-846d esp q 26, a 1, rep 3 845b-846a; 

• , PART III SUPPL, Q 76, A I 939d-941a; Q 95, a 3, 
ANS 1045b-l046d; a 4 1046d-1047d- 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, -xxix 
[106-120] 98d-99a: xxxi (76-126] 101c-102a; 
xxxii [19-63] 102c-103a; paradise, n.[3i-45l 
108a; VI [10-21] 113d; vii [16-120] 115b-116b; 
XIII [37-87] 125d-126b; xxxii [i39]-xxxiii 
[145] 156a-157d. 

, 23 Ho^bzs: Letiathan, partiii, 182a-c 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 
, 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / 

. Paradise Lost, bk hi [56-4i5].l36b-144b esp 
(315-341J 142a-b, [383-389] 143b-144a; bk xii 
' [307-385] 326a-327b ' '’t I" ' 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a; 763-765 322a; 785 

- 325b; 862 342b-343a ' \ c ' . ' 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307d-308b> . 

41 GiBBOniDecline and Fall, 134a-l61a,c espl34a- 

138a, J50cd51b; 230d-231a ' r ' 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 306b-c; 

308a-b . V 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b- 
137c , . ‘ s. V 

9 ^(1) The divinity of Christ ,, , > , - 
Old Testament: Lsaiah, g: 6 -y-^(P) Isaias, 
9:6-7 < . ' ' ' 

New Testament: Matthew passim,, esp 1:18-25, 
3:16-4:11, 7.-2I, 8.-29-32, 10:32-33, 11^25-30, 
14:22-33, 16:13-20, 17:1-8, 26:63-68, 27:38-54 
/. passim, esp 1:1, liio-ii, 1:21-28, 2:3- 
12, 3:11-12, 5:2-7, 9:1-8, 14:60-65, 15:39, i6:ig 
/ Luhp passim, esp2:49, 4141,19:28-36, lolzi- 
I 22, 22:29, 24:49 / John passim, esp 1 :i-i4, 1:49, 
5:17-27, 8:16, 10:30, 10:38, 11:27,. 14:10-11, 
14:20, 14:28, 17:1-3, 20:17 / 8:37 f Rom- 

ans, 1:3-4; 8:3,29-33 / / Corinthians, 1:24; 
15:28 / 7/ Corinthians, 1:19; 5n8-:2t / Philip- 
pians, 2:5-6 / Colassians,\i'.i'^~i'j\ 2:8^ / 
7 Timothy, 3:16 / Hebrews, i;i-8! 4:141 5:5,8; 
15:8 / 7 John, 2:22-24; 3:8] 4:9-10,13-15; 
y.i-il,zo J U John, j-nj Jude ! 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 25iSl&-c 
/ City of God, bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a; ch 17 
295a-c; bk x, ch 20 311b-c; cH 22 312a-b; 
ch 24 312d-313c; ch 27-29 315b-318b; bk xi, 
CH 2 323a-c; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a; 
BK XXII, CH 6 590a-S91c ' , 

20 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica, part, in, Q 3 
723a-730b; qq 16-24 796a-839c; q 25, a 1 
839d-840d; part hi suppl,. q 95, .a 3i .'ns 
104Sb-1046d 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, paradise, vii [16-120] 

. . 115b-116b , , X 

22 Chaucer: Prioress's To/e 391a-395b ^ 

32 Milton:, Christs Nativity la-7b'/ The Passion 

10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / 
Paradise Lost, bk hi [56-415] I36b-144b esp 
[135-142] I38b, [167-172] 139a, (281-314] 141b- 
142a, [383-3S9], 143b-144a; bk v [60Q-615] 
188b; BK VI [719-733] 212a; bk xii [307-385] 
326a-327b ( 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 734 317a; 763-765 322a; 785 
325b; 841^^842 336a-337a - 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308a-b • ■ < 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 134b-138a esp 135b- 
136b 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ir, 270d- 
27Jc; PART III, 306d-307b 
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b- 
137c passim; bk vii, 189c-190c 

9h{2) 16 9c 

96 ( 2 ) The humanity of Christ 
V NewTestament: Matthew, 1:18-25; 2:11; 11:19; 

I3-54-56; 25:37-45; 26:1-28:8 / Mar^, 6:2-3; 
: r ' 15:37-16:6 / Li/^e, 1-2; 7:33-34; 11 ‘^7-28; 22- 
,■ ,23; 24:2-7,36-43 / John, i:i-i8 esp 1:14; 

' 5:27; 6:42; 19:28-20:29 / Romans, 1:3-4; 8:3 / 
I , ill Corinthians, 5:16 / Galatians, 4:4 / Ephesians, 
, 2:14-16 / Philippians, 2:5-8 / Colossians, 1:20- 

22 / / Timothy, 3:16 / Hebrews, 2:14-18; 4:15; 
. . y . r > l :20-24 / ^ 4 :2-3 

18 Augustine; Confessions, bk vii, par 25 51a-c / 
■, ■ City of God, bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a; ch 17 
■ . . 295a-cJ BK X, CH 20 311b-c; ch 22 3I2a-b; 

CH 24 312d-313c; ch 27-29 315b-318b; bkxi, 
! CH 2 323a-c; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a / 
, Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 14 627d-628b 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i, q 51, a 2, 
. ' jEP i 276b-277a; a 3, rep 5 277a-278c; q 113, 

• , A 4, REP 1 578b'57ga; q 119, a 2, rep 4 607b' 
608d 

20 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica, part ii-ii, q 1, 
.■ A i, REP 1 380b-381a; q 18, a 2, rep t 462d- 

463d; PART HI, QQ 4-24 730c-839c; q 25, aa 1-2 
839d-841c; part hi suppl, q 76, a i 939d-941a; 
Q 90, AA 1-2 1012b-1014d; q 92, a 3, rep 12 
1034b-1037c 

. 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, papadise, vh [16-120] 
I , 115b-116b; xni '[37-45I i2Sd; [73-87] 126b 
. 22 Chaucer: Parson’s Tale, par 12 S03b-S04b 
32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 
10b-12a esp [15-21] lOb-lla / Upon the Circum- 
cision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, bk iit [56-415] 
, 136b-144b esp [238-241] 140b, [281-294] 141b; 

,■ bk xii[22-44] 299b-300a; bk xn ^07-385] 
326a'327b 

, 33 Pascal; Pensies, 553 268a-270a; 763-765 
'■ 322a; 785 325b 

,40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308a 
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134b-138a esp 
134b-135b, 137a-d;330a 
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part n, 270d- 
I , 271c; part hi, 306b-307a 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim; bk vn, 189c-190c 

9i(3) htary, the Mother of God 
Old Testament: Isaiah, 7:14 — (D) Isaias, 7:14 
t New Testament: Matthew, 1:18-25; 12146-50 / 
Mar/(, 3:31-35 / Lrify, 1-2; 8:19-21; 11:27-28 
/ 7o/i«, 2:1-12; 19:25-27 ' t"" 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk xvii, ch 16 465c' 

1 466d esp 466c'd; CH 24 47^-4723,0; BK XVIII, 

— , CK 35, 491d / Christian Doctrine, bk r, ch 14 

627d-628b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, 
A 10, REP I 752c-753e; Q 25, a 5.843d-844b; 

■, J’ART III SUPPL, Q 83, A 3, CONTRARY 978c- 
980d: Q 96, A 5, REP 2 1055c-1058a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii [43TI26] 
3a-4a esp [94-99] 3c; purgatory, x [34-45] 

.> 67d; PARADISE, xui [79-S71 126b; xxni Mlb- 

- 142c; xxx-xxxr 151d'154c es]) xxxi [94- 

. ' ' 142) 154b-c; xxxit [85]-xxxiii [45] 15Sc-156c 
■ 22 CnwcEur Prioress’s Tale 391a-395b 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity lo-Ib / Paradise Lost, 

. ,BK in [274-285] 141b; bk xn, [307-385] 326a- 
. -4 , -327b esp [375-382] 327b, . 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 62b-64b / Pensees, 

742 319a , ' , / . • 

41 Gibbon; Decline and'Fall, i34d-137c passim; 
140a; lS4d. 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 338b-c 

47 Goethe: TfuKrf, .part i [3587-3619] 87b-88a; 
part II [11,989-12,111] 291b-294b 

9c. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doc- 
trines of original sin and salvation 
Old Testament: I Samuel, 2:t-io— (D) I Kings, 
2;i-iD / Isaiah, 53-t-(D) Isaias, 53 / Lamenta- 
tions, 4 :2o ‘ . 

New Testament: Matthew, 1:21; 9:2-8; 10:32- 
33; i6-,24-27; 18:11-14; 26126-28 / Mar}{, 2:1- 
< 12; 8:34-38; 14:22-24 / >1:67-79; 2:11; 

5:17-26; 7:37-50; 9:23-26,56; 15; 19:1-10; 
22:19-20; 24:46-47 / John esp 1:29, 3:16-18, 
4:42, 6:31-59, to;g-i8, 14:6-7, 14:18-19, 15:1- 
, 4 / 13:12-26; 4:10-12; 5:30-31; 13:15-50 

esp 13:38-39; 16:30-31 / Romans esp 3:20-26, 

. 5:1-6:23, 8:1-4 7 7 Corinthians, 15:3,12-23 / 

11 Corinthians esp, 2:10, 4:13-14, 5:14-21, 8:9, 
13:4-5 / Galatians pzssim, esp 2:20-3:14, 4:1-5 
/ Ephesians esp 1:5-7, t.:i2-ii\, 2:1-22 / Colos- 
. , Haii^esp.i:i2-i4, i;i9-22,2:i3-i4/i'rmiot/iy, 
1:12-17; 2:5-6 / Titus esp 2:11-3:7 / Hebrews 
esp 2:1-18, 5:9, 7:25-27, 9:1-10:39 / I Peter esp 
1:3-11, 3 ■.17-4:6 / / John esp 3:16, 4:9-10, 4:14 
, / Revelation passim, esp 5-7— (D) Apocalypse 

I . passim, esp 5-7 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 15 12b'c; 
bk IV, par 18-19 23d-24b; bk vii, par 24-27 
50d-52c; bk x, par 67-70 88b-89a / City of 
God, BKVii, CH 31-32 261d-262b; bk ix, ch 
15 293a-294a; ch 17 295a-c; bk x, ch 4-6 

. 301a'302d; ch 19-20 310d-311c: ch 22-25 

312a-314c; ch 27-32 315b-322a,c; bk xi, ch 
2 323a-c;'Eil>xni, ch 2-4 360b-362a; ch ra- 
il 15 36Sd-366d; ch 23-24 372a-376a,c; bk 
xvii .449a-472a,c passim; bk xviii, ch 23 
, , 483d'48Sa; ch 31-35 4883-4933; bk xx, ch 
, ' 26 555a-556b; cii 30 SS7c-560a,c; bk xxi, ch 

15-16 S72c-574a; bk xxii, ch i S 86b,d'S87b; 
CH 3 S88a-b; ch 22-24 606d-612a; ch 29-30 
614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch ti-12 
627b-d; ch 14-18 ,627d'629a; ch 34 634b-c; 
BK II, CH 41 6S6a-c 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, Q.97, 
A I, rep 3 S 13c'514c; part i-ii, q 5, a 7, rep 

I 3 - 642a-d ■ , 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti-ii, q 85, 
A 5, REP 2 181d-182d: Q 87, A 7, REP 3 190C' 

, 191d; Q 89, A 5, REP i 202c-203b; q 91, a 5, 

REP 2 211c-212c; Q 9S, A I, A.vs and rep 3 
239b-240c; a a 240c-241b; a 4, ans and rep i 

598 THE GREAT IDEAS 9cio'9d 

(9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the 
divine nature and human destiny. 9c. 
Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doc- 
trines of original sin and salvation.) 
242b-243c; a 6, rep 2 244c-245b; Q 100, a 
12 264d-265d: q ioi, a 3, ans and rep r 268a- 
269a; q 102, a 2, ans 271b-272a; a-tj, rep 2,5- 
6 esp REP 6 276d-283c; a 5, rep 5 283c-292c; 
Q 103, A I, ANS 298b-299b; a 2 299b'300d; a 3, 
REP 2 300d-302a; q 104, a 3, ans 305d-306d; 
QQ 106-108 321a-337d; part n-n, Q i, a 7, rep 
1,4 385c'387a; a 8, rep 4 387a-388c; q 2, a 7 
396a'397c; q 14, a 2, rep 3 448d-449d; part 
III, Q I 701b,d-709c; Q 26 845a-846d; q 60, a 
3, ANS 848d-849c; a 5, rep 3 850b-851b; q 61, 
A I, REP 3 855a-d; A 3 856c-857c;‘q 62, a 5, 
rep 2 862b-863a: a 6, ans and rep 1-2 863a- 
864c; PART m suppl, q 6g, a 4 889c-890c; Q 
71, A 14, "REP 2 916C'917b; q 75, a 2, rep 3-4 
937a-938a; q 76, a i 939d-941a; q 78, a i, 
REP 3 947d-949b; q 8g, a 2, ans and rep 4 
1006b-1007c; a 5, ans 1009b-d; q go 1012a- 
1016a; Q gs 1042c-1049d; q gg, a 3, rep i 
1081d-1083a 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv [46-63] 5d- 
6a; PURGATORY, XXXII [28-63] 102c-103a; 
xxxm [52-72] 104d-105a; paradise, vii 
[16-120] 115b-116b; xni [37-87] 12Sd-126b; 
XIX [103-111] 136a; xxiii 141b-142c; xxxii 
[1-138] lS4d-lS6a 

22 Chaucer: Troiltis and Cressida, bk v, stanza 
263-267 154b-lSSa / Second Nun's Tale 
[15,788-822] 467a-b / Parson's Tale, par 8 
497b-498a; par 13 S04b-S05a; par 68-69 
533b-S34b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iii, 191b-192c; 

I95d-196a; 197c-198a; 204a-207b; 240c; 

242b-245a; part iv, 260b-c 

24 Rabelais: Garganlua and Pantagriiel, bk iv, 
269c-270b 

27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, 
sc ii [71-79] 182d 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 68, schol 
445a-b 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b passim / The 
Passion 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b- 
13a / Lycidas [165-185] 31b / Paradise Lost 
93a-333a csp bk i [1-26] 93b-94a, bk hi 
[56-415] 136b-144b, BKx [615-640] 287b-288b, 
BK XI [22-44] 299b-300a, bk xii [285-484] 
325b-329b 

33 Pascal; PenSees, 425-856 243b-341b passim, 
csp 556-588 270b-277b 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 181b 

41 Gibbon; Decline and Fall, 334b-c 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 482a-d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 
306b-c; PART iV, 331d-332a; 3S4a-c 

48 Melville: Moby Diclt_, 318b 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim 

54 Freud: IVar and Death, 763b-c 

9d. The Church: the mystical body of Christ; 
the Apostolate ’ ' 

Old Testament: Song of Solomon — (D) Canticle 
of Canticles 

New Testament: Matthew, 3; 4:18-22; 8:18-23; 
9:35-10:42; 11:1-15; 13:1-53; 16:17-24; 18:15- 
20; 20:25-28; 24:14; 25; 28:16-20 / Mar\, 
1:1-9,16-20; 3:13-19; 10:42-45; 13:10; 16:14- 
20 / Lu\e, 3:1-20; 4:43-44; 5:1-11; 6:13-16; 
8:16-17; 9:1-6; 11:48-50; 12:11-12; 22:24-30; 

! John, 1:6-8,15-42; 4:34-38; 10; 13:31- 
17:26; 20:19-21:24 esp 20:20-23, 21:15-17 / 
Acts esp 1:8, 1:13-26, 2:1-47, 5:1-42, 13:47, 
16:1-40, 22:14-15 / Romans / I Corinthians 
passim, esp 3:1-23, 4:9-13, 6:1-20, 10:16-17, 
12:12-31, 15:1-11 / II Corinthians esp 1:12-21, 
2:10-11, 3:1-4:18, 5:20-21, 7:8-13, 10:1-13:10 
/ Galatians passim, esp 1-2, 3:28, 4:1-31 / 
Ephesians esp 1:22-23, 3:8-12, 4:1-12, 5:23-33 
/ Phtlippians, 1 127-2 :4 / Colossians passim, esp 
1:15-29, 2:13-19, 3:6-11 / Hebrews, 3:5-6 / 
I Peter, 2 :4-io / 7 John 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 4 36a-b / 
City of God, bk i, ch 35 149b-c; bk x, ch 20 
Sllb-c; BK XIII, ch 21 371a-c; bk xvh, ch 9 
461b-d; ch 11 462c-463a; ch 15-16 465b- 
466d; ch 20 469a-470c; bk xvhi, ch 48-52 
S01b-504d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c; bk xx, ch 
7-12 535b-541d; bk xxh, ch 17-18 603a-604b 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 16 628c-d; cii 18 
628d-629a; bk hi, ch 31-32 669c-670a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 95, 
A I, REP I 506b-S07c 

20 AqOinas; Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, Q ii 
A 9, contrary and rep 3,5 388d-389d; a 10, 
ans 389d-390d; q 2, aa 6-8 395b-398b; q 5 
410a-413c; qq 183-189 62Sa-700d; part hi, Q 
8 7S6c-763b; part in suppl, q 71, a 9 910d- 
912b; Q 95, A 3, ans and rep 4 1045b-1046d; 
A 4, REP 1,5 1046d-1047d 

21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, ix [73- 
145]' 66c-67b: XIX [127-141] 82d-83a; xxix 
[i]-xxx [21] 97d-99c; xxxii [i]-xxxih [78] 
102b-105a; paradise, xi 122a'123c csp [28- 
39] 122b; XII 123c-125a; xxiii [i]-xxvi [81] 
141b-146c passim; xxvii [1-66] 147b-148a; 
XXIX [109-114] 151b; xxx-xxxii lSld-156a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 151a-c; part hi, 
198a-199a; 207b-224c; part iv, 247a-249b; 
275a-278d 

32 Milton : Paradise Lost, bk xii [436-514] 328b- 
330b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 473-484 256b-2S8b; 646 
291b; 801-802 328b; 832 334a; 849 339b- 
340a; 852 341a-b; 857-861 342a; 867-905 
343b-349a 

35 Locke: Toleration, 4b-Sd 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 307b' 
310c; PART IV, 31Sd; 331d-332c: 338a-d 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
127b-137c passim 

54 Freud: Group Psychology, 674c-d; 691d-692a 

9<?/o 10 

9e. The sacraments 

New Testament: Matthew, 3; 18:18; 19:4-6,10- 
12; 20:20-23; 26:26-29: 28:19 / hiar\, 1:4,8- 
10; 10:2-12,35-40; 14:22-24; i6;i6 / Lithe, 
3:3,16; 22:14-20 ! John, 1:25-27,33; 3:1-8; 6 
esp 6:32-35, 6:47-59; 19:33-34; 20:21-23 / 
Acts, 2:40-42; 8:12-17,26-40; ii:i6; 19:1-7; 
22:16 / Romans, 6:3-4 / 7 Corinthians, 1:12-17; 
6:it; 7:8-14,34-39; 10:16-17; 11:23-30; 12:13; 
15:28-29 / Galatians, 3:27 / Ephesians, 4:5; 
5:21-33 esp 5:31-32 / Colossians, 2:11-12 / 
Hebrews, 5:1-6 / James, 5:14-16 / 7 Pif/tfr, 
3 :20-22 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 12 64d' 
'65a; bk xiii, par 26-29 117c-118c / Cf/7 of 
God, BK X, CH 5-6 301b-302d; ch 19-20 310d- 
Sllc; BK XIII, CH 3-4 361a'362a; ch 7 362d- 
363b; BK XX, ch 26 55Sa-556b; bk xxi, ch 16 
573b-574a; ch 20 57Sc'd; ch 25 S79d-58Ia / 
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3 637c-d; ch 41 
656a-c; bk hi, ch 9 661a-c; bk iv, ch 21, 
690d-691b 

19 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part 1, q 92, 
A 3, ANs 490 c- 491 b; Q 113, A 5, ans and rep 3 
579a-d 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologica, part i-ii, 
Q 102, A 5 283 c' 292 c; q 103, a 4, ans 302 a- 
304 a; q ro8, a 2, ans and rep 2 332 b- 333 d; 
part ii-ir, Q I, A i, REP 1 380 b- 38 Ia; a 3, 
rep 4 381 d- 382 c; a 8, rep 6 387 a- 388 c; 
Q 3, A i, REP 1 400 c- 401 a; q 10, A 12, 
REP 5 436 b- 437 d; part in, qq 60-65 
847 a- 884 a,c; part hi suppl, q 83, a 3, 
ans and rep 4 978 c- 980 d; q 99, a 4 1083 a- 
1084 a 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, hell, xxvh [67-132] 
40c-41a 

22 Chaucer: Pardoned s Tale [12,829-849] 381 b 
/ Parson's Tale, par 12-22, S 04 b- 5 I 0 b esp 
par 22, 510 b 

’23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 1, 7Ib; part hi, 
180c-d; 206c-207a; 208b; 2IIc-2I2c; partiv, 
249b-250c; 263d-264a 

30 Bkcoh: Advancement of Learning,10\o. 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 1626.-1856. 

32 Miitroit: Paradise Lost, bkxii [436-445] 328 b- 
329 a 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 71b-80b; 128b- 
137b / Pensies, 554 270a; 862, 343a; 870 
344a-b; 904-905 348b-349a; 923 351b 

35 Locke: Toleration, 12a / Human Understand- 
ing, BK II, CH XXIII, SECT 17 250d-251a; bk 
IV, CH XX, SECT 10 391c-392a 
• 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a; 260b- 
261a; 373b-376a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 193a'b; 297c-d 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 329d; 334b-c 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 173 d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 331 d- 
332 c; 338 a-d; 349 d- 350 a 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 
80c-81a 

Sy. The second coming of Christ 
New Testament: Matthew, 10:14-15; 11:20-24; 
12:36-37; 13:36-43,47-50; 24-25 / Mat\, 
i3-'4-37 / 10:11-15; 17:20-37: 19:11-28; 

21:5-36 / John, 14:1-4 / Acts, 1:9-11; z-.ij-zi; 
17:31 / Romans, 2:5-11 / 7 Corinthians, 15:23- 
28 / Philippians, 3:20-21 / 7 Thessalonians, 
1:9-10; 2:19: 4:14-5:4 / 77 Thessalonians, 1-2 / 
77 Timothy, 3;i-4;8 / James, 5:7-9 / II Peter, 
2:9: 37-13 / I John, 2:18-29 / Jf‘^ 0 , 17-25 / 
Revelation esp 1:4-20 — (D) Apocalypse esp 
1 :4-2o 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiii, ch 2 360b- 
361a: CH 6-362c-d; ch 23-24 372a-376a,c; 
BK xviir, CH53 S04d-S05c; bkxx 530a-560a,c; 
BK XXI, ch 11-27 S70b-S86a,c / Christian 
Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c 
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 73, A 1 922b-923c; a 3 924b-925b: q 77, a 2, 
ANS 945a-946b; qq 87-90 997a-1016a 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 179d; 191b- 
192c; 197c; 229c-230a; 244b-c; part iv, 
248a-b: 251c-2S2b; 254b-2SSb 

32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b esp [133-172] 
4b-Sb / At a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Paradise 
Lost, BK HI [274-343] 141b-143a; bk vh [139- 
173] 220a-221a; bk xi [72-83] 300b-301a / 
Areopagitica, 404a-b 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 757 32 Ia 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Pall, 187 b- 188 a 
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 
13 c-d; bk v, 127 a- 137 c 

10. The denial of God or the gods, or of a super- 
: natural order: the position of the atheist 

Old Testament: Psalms, 14:1-3; 53:1-3 — (D) 
Psalms, 13:1-3: 52:1-4 

5 Aristophanes : Thesmophoriazusae [443-458] 
605b 

7 Plato: Apology, 204 c- 205 c / Laws, bk x, 
758 b- 765 d esp 758 b- 759 a. 759 d- 760 c, 761 b-c 
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 3, 263 c; 
BK IX, sect 39 295 a 

18 Augustine ; City of God, bk v, ch 9, 213c 

19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, 
REP 1-2 12c-14a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 160 a 
25 Montaigne: Essays, 211 b- 212 a 
ZQBkcou-. Advancement of Learning, Vo-e 

31 Descartes; Meditation's, 72 a-b 

32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [569-723] 3IIb- 
315a esp [617-623] 312b / Samson Agonistes 

[293-299] 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 205 a- 217 b 

35 Locke: Toleration, 18b / Human Understand- 
_ ing, BK I, CH HI, sect 8 114a-c 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 92-96 
431a-d: SECT 133, 439d-440a; sect 154-155 
444a-c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, niv 
116, 503c-d 

36 Swtft: Gulliver, part i, 29 a 

THE GREAT 

( 10 . The denial of God or the gods, or of a super- 
natural order: the position of the atheist^ 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 379c-380c 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv, 200b- 
20Ia; BK XXV, 208a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 13a-b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, llb-c; 192c-d / Judge- 
ment, S9Sd-596c, 

43 Mill: Liberty, 280d-281c , 

50 Marx: Capital, 3Ic-d; 35b-c; 305d [fn 2 ] 

51 Tolstoy: JPar and Peace, bk v, 196b-d 
, 52 Dostoevsky ; BroiAeri Kflramdzoy, BK I, lla-c; 

BK V, 135b-136b; bk xi, 312b'314d; 345a-c 

11, The denial of God as completely tran- 

scending the world or nature: the posi- 
tion of the pantheist ^ 

12 Epictetus: Discourses, bkt, ch 14 120 d- 121 c 
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; 

^ 1 SECT 13 258c; bk vii, sect 9 280b-c; Bk xh, 

SECT 30 310a-b 

17 Plotinus; Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 16 , 75c- 
76a / Third Ennead, tr vni 129a-136a / 
Fourth Ennead, tr ix 205a-207a,c / Fifth 
Ennead, tr i, ch 1-2 208a-209b; tr ii 214c- 
215c: tr hi, ch 15-17 224c-226c; tr viii, 

CH 7 - 10 , 242d-244d 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk r, par 2-3 lb-2a; 

BK III, par 10 ISb'd; par 18 ISb; bk iv, par 26 
25c-d; par 31 26c-27ai bk vii, par 1-3 43b- 
44b; BK X, par 8-10 73b-74a; bk xii, par 7 
lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a/ City of God, bk 
IV, CH 12-13 19Sd-196b: bk vii, ch 6 248a-b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3 , a 
8 19d-20c: Q 6 , A 4 30b-d; Q 8 , a i, ans 34d- 
35c; A 3 , REP I 36b-37c; q 16 , a 6 98b-d; q 
90 , A I 480d-481d; Q 105 , a 5 542a-543b > 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b 
31 Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99c : 

- 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp def 3-6 
355b, prop 1-15 35Sd-361d, prop 18 363c, 

PROP 25 365b, prop 28-29 365c-366c; part n, 

PROP i-ii 373d-377c; part iv, pref, 422b, d- 
423b; PROP 4 425b-d 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, 
sect 18 152a-c , , 

42 Kant: Judgement, 564c-565d esp 565c-d; 
566c-d; S80c-d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 176b-c; 

-■ • PART 1 , 220c-221a 
48 Melville: Moby Dicl^, 115b-117a 
51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk v, 216d-218b; 

BK XIII, 581c-S82a; bk xiv, 608a-b; bk^xv, 
631a-c 

12. The denial of a revealed and providential 

God: the position of the deist 

7 Plato: Parmenides, 489d-490d / Laws, bk x, 
765d-768c , 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [ 62 - 158 ] 
ld-3a; bk ii [ 167 - 183 ] 17a-b; [ 589 - 660 ] 22c- 

IDEAS 11 /o 14 

23b; [1090-1104] 29a: bk v [55-90] 61d-62b; 
[146-234] 63a-64a; [306-310] 65a; [1161-1240] 
76b-77b; bkvi [43-95] 80d-81c 1 

15 Tacitus; ^«7a/f,jBK VI, 91b-d •,'< 

17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch i6, 7 Sc- 

, 76a I •, 1 , 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, pat 19 32b-c 
23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part ii, 162a-b 

33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 137a-b / Pensks, 
342-290 217b-225a passim; 430-434 245a- 
250a: 543-549 266a-267a: 556-5S8 270b-277b 
37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 38c-39c; 53c; 7Sc-76a 
42 Kant; Pure Reason, 190a-c / Judgement, S47d 
, 52 'Dosro^xsviY: Brothers Karamazov, 

I21c; 127b-137c passim; bkx, 292d-294a 

13. God as a conception invented by man: its 

emotional basis'- 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 14:12-21— (£>) 
OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 14:12-21 i 
23 Hobbes; Leviathan, part i„79a-b; ?9d-80a 
25 Montaigne: 256c-d . C 

42 Kant; Judgement, 593c-d t • 

49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 302b-303d; S93b-c 

50 Marx: Capital, 31c-d 

52 Dostoevsky; Brothers Karamazov, bk iii, 
67d-68c; bk v, 120d-121a; bk x, 293a( 

54 Freud; Group Psychology, 692a-693a / War 
and Death, 763b-c / Civilization and Its Dis- 
contents, 771a-b; 778d / New Introductory 
Lectures, 87Sd-878c , , 

14. The worship of false gods: deification and 

idolatry 

Old Testament: Genesis, 31:19-35 / Efodiis, 
20:1-6,22-23; .22:20; 23:13; 32: 34:11-17 ! 
Leviticus, 17:7; 19:4: 20:1-6; 26:1,28-30 / 
\ Numbers, 25:2-5; 33:51-52 J Deuteronomy 
.passim, esp 4:1-3, 4:15-19, 4:23-28, 5:7-9, 
6:14-16, 7:25-26, 8:19-20, 9:15-21, 

11:16-17, 11:28, 12:2-3, 12:29-13:18,11631- 
, 22, 17:2-7, 18:9-14, 20:16-18, 27:15, 28:14- 

68, 29:16-29, 30:15-20, 31:16-21, 32:15-39/ 
Joshua, 22-23; 24:14-25— (D) Jostle, .22-23; 
24:14-25 / Judges, 2:10-23: 3:5-8; 6:24-32: 
i 8:33-34; 10; 17-18 / I Samuel, 7:3-4; 1532- 
23— (^) b Kings, 7:3-4: 15:22-23 /./ Kings, 
3:1-4; 9:6-9; 11-16; 18:17-29; '20:22-28; 
2135-29: 22:51-53— (D) III Kings, 3:1-4: 
9:6-9; 11-16; 18:17-29: 20:22-28; .21:25-29; 
22:51-54 / II Aingr passim, esp i:i-i8, 8:16- 
9:10; iori-36, 11:17-18, 14:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 
21:1-23:37— (£)) IV Kings passim, esp 1:1- 
18, 8:16-9:10, 10:1-36, 11:17-18, 14:1-18:37, 
19:16-19, 21:1-23:37 / II Chronicles, 13:8-9: 
28: 33— (/7) II Paralipomaton, 13:8-9; 28; 
33'/ Psalms, 81:8-16; 97:7; 106; 115:1-8: 
135:15-18— (D) Psalms, 80:9-17; 96:7; 105; 
113:1^^; 134:15-18 / Isaiah,' 1-2 esp 1.39, 
2:8-9, 2:18-21; 10:10-11; 19 esp i9:i-3> 
30-31 esp 30:22, 317; 36 esp 36:18-20; 
40:18-20; 41 esp 41:29; 42:8,17;- 44 esp 

Chapter 29; GOD '' 

44:9-20; 45:20-21; 46:5-9; 57:3-8; 65:3-5; 
66:3— (-D) Isaias, 1-2 esp 1:29, 2:8-9, 
2:18-21; 10:10-11; 19 esp 19:1-3; 30-31 esp 
30:22, 31:7; 36 esp 36:18-20; 40:18-20; 41 
"esp 41:29; 42:8, 17; 44 esp 44:9-20; 45:20-21';" 
46:5-9; 57:3-8; 65:3-5; 66:3 / Jeremiah, 

, 1-13 passim, esp 5:19, 7:9-10, ,7:17-19, 8:1-2, 
8:12, 8:19, 9:13-14, 10:2-15, 11:10-17, 13:10; 
16 esp 16:10-13, 16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25:3-7; 
32:30-35; 44; 50:38; 51 esp 51:17-18, 51:47, 
51:52 — (D) Jeremias, 1-13 passim, esp 5:19, 

, .7:9-10, 7:17-19, 8:1-2, 8:12, 8:19, 9:13^14, 
10:2-15, 11:10-17, j 6 esp 16:10-13, 

16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25:3-7; 32:30-35;' 44: 
50:38; 51 esp 51:17-18, 51:47, 51:52 / Ezel(tel, 

' 5 esp 5I11; 6; 14; 16; 20; 22-23; 

37:23— (D) Ezechiel, 5 esp 5:11; 6; 14; 16; 
20; 22-23; 36:17-19; 37:23 / Daniel 3; 6— 
{D) Daniel 3:1-23,91-97; 6 / Hosea passim, 
esp 2:8-13, 4:12-13, 8:3-6, 10:1-2, 13:2— 
(p) Osee passim, esp 2:8-13, 4:12-13, 8:3-6, 
10:1-2, 13:2 / Amos, 5 esp 5:25-27 / Nahum''' 
passim, esp 1:14 / Haba/^l^iil^, 2:18-19— (D) 

I, ,Habacuc, 2:18-19 / Zephaniah passim, esp 
1:4-6— (Z9) Sophonias passim, esp 1:4-6 / 

' Zechariah, 10:1-3; 13:2 — (D) Zacharias, 

10:1-3; 13:2 

■Apocrypha: Judith, 3:8; 5:23-6:4— (Z)) OT, Jud- 
ith, 3:12-13; 5:27-6:4 / Rest of Esther, .14:6- 
10— (D) O'!, Esther, 14:6-10 / Wisdom of 
Solomon, 12-15— (Z9) OT, of Wisdom, 
12-15 / Ecclesiasiictis, 34:1-7— (D) OT, Ee-' 
clesiasticus, 34:1-7 / Baruch, 6— (O) OT, 
Baruch, 6 / Be/ and Dragon— {D) O'?, Daniel, 
14:2-41 / I Maccabees, 1:41-2:28— (D) OT, 

7 Machabees, 1:43-2:28 / // Maccabees, 6-7— 
(D) OT, II Machabees, 6-7 
Nesv Testament: //eH, 7:39-44; 14:7-18; 

15:20,28-29; 17:16-31 / Romans, 2:22 / 7 
Corinthians, 5:9-11; 6:9; 8; 10:7,14-21; 12:2/ 

7/ Qorinlhtans, 6:14-17 / Galatians, 5:19^20 / 
Epiesians, 5:5 / Philippians, 3:18-19 / Co/w- 
s/cns, 3:5/7 Thessalonians, I'.g / I Peter, 4:3 / 

7 /oAn, 5:21 / Revelation, 2:20; 9:20; 21:8; 

' 22:14-15— (D) Apocalypse, 2:20; 9^0;. 21:8; 

. 22:14-15 . 

6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 12d-13b; 31a-b; 
BK 11, 79d-80a; bk hi, 9Sa-c; bk iv, 140c-141a 

7 Plato: Laivs. bk x, 769c-771b 

14 Plutarch; Ntima Pompilius, S3b-c/ Camilltis, 
104d'I0Sa / Pericles, 123c-124a / Pelopidas, 
239d-240c / Alexander, 575d-S76a / Demetri- 
us, 729d-731a 

15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 4b-d / Histories, bk v, 
296a 

16 Kepler: Harmonies' of ihe World, 1081a- 
1083b 

18 Augustine: City of God, bk i-x I29a-322a,c; 

.. BK xv'tn, CH 5-6 474d-475c; CK 8-10 475d- 

'■ .477c; cH 12-19 477d-482c; ch 21 482d-483b; 

. CH 24 48Sa-b 

19 Aquinas: Sttmma Theologica, part 1, q 17, 
A 4, REP 3 103c-104b; q 67, a 4, ans 352a- 
354a 

20 AQvmAS: Sttmma Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, 
A 4, ANS 2S3d-255a; q ioi, a 3, ans and rep 3 
268a-269a; q 102 270b-298a passim 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, hell, xix [88-117] 

27d-28a; xx 28b-29d; paradise, iv [49-63] 
mb; viii [1-12] 116d '■ 

. 22. Chaucer; Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 
265 154b-155a / Parson’s Tale, par 35-38, 
521a-522b; par 63-64 S30a-S31a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 51d-52a; 78d- 
79b; 79d-80a: 80d-82d; part iv, 261a'C 

25 Montaigne: Essays, 18d-20d; 238d-239b; 
246a-257d 

30 Bacon; Advancement of Learning, 100b; 
lOla-b 

32 Milton; Christs Nativity la-7b esp [165-228] 
5b-7a / Paradise ‘Lost, bk i [331-621] lOOb- 
107a; BK XII [101-120] 321b / Samson Ago- 
nistes [433-471] 349a-350a; [871-902] 358b- 
359a; (1139-1243] 364b-366b 

34 Newton; Optics, bk in, 543b-544a 

35 Locke: Toleration, 13b-15a / Human Under- 
standing, BK I, CH II, sect 26 112a'b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 94 
431b-c ^ 

37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 20a-c; lS2a-d 

' 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv, 200b- 
201a; BK XXV, 20Ca-c 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Wall, 81d; 184b-185d; 
4S7b,d-467d; 600d-601a; 77Sc-776a,c [n 173- 

174I 

41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, l54d; 195a-202a 
esp 19Sb, 197a-199c; 207a-208c; 229c-230a; 
252b-c; 329c-330b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 179a-b 

44 Boswell: Johnson, 173d 

46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270, 
85b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 196d- 
197c; PART 'I, 244c-245b; 246a-b; 253b- 
254b 

48 Melville: MobyDich, 17a-b; 36b-37a; 38b- 
39b;367a-372a 

CROSS-REFERENCES 

For: Other treatments of polytheism, and for discussions of the gods in relation to fate and human 
life, see Angel i; Fate i; Man loa. 

Man’s duty and piety toward God or the gods, and for man’s worship of God or the gods, 
see Duty 5, i i ; Justice i ib; Religion 2-2g. 

Man’s love of God and desire to be with God, see Desire yb; Love 5a-5b(2); Virtue and 
Vice Sd(3). 

Matters relevant to proving God’s existence and to other ways of affirming God’s existence, 
see Being 7a, 8f; Change 14; Metaphysics 2d; Necessity and Contingency 2a-2b; 
Reasoning 5b(3), 5b(5); Theology 4c. 

The problem of God’s immanence and transcendence, and for the doctrine of pantheism, 
see Nature ib; One and Many ib; World 3-3b. 

Matters relevant to the consideration of God as a necessary being, see Being 7a; Necessity 
AND Contingency aa-ab. 

The consideration of the unity and simplicity of God, see One and Many 6a. 

The consideration of God’s eternity and immutability, see Change 15c; Eternity 3. 

The consideration of God’s infinity and omnipresence, see Infinity y-yd. 

The consideration of God’s perfection and goodness, see Good and Evil a-aa; and for the 
discussion of God in relation to Satan and to the problem of evil, see Angel y-yb; Good 
AND Evil id, ab; Opposition ad. 

The consideration of God’s intellect, his knowledge and wisdom, the divine ideas and the 
divine truth, see Idea le; Infinity yd; Knowledge ya; Mind loe-iof; Truth ad; Wisdo.m 
id. 

The consideration of God’s will and love, see Love 5c; Will 4-42. 

The consideration of God’s beauty, happiness, and glory, see Beauty ya; Happiness yd; 
Honor 6-6b. 

The consideration of the divine independence and God’s free will, see Liberty 5d; Will 4b. 

The consideration of divine causality in relation to nature, the origin of the universe by 
creation or emanation, and the eternity of the world, ree ArT2c; Cause y-ya; Change 14; 
Matter 3d; Nature 30(4); Time ac; AVorld 4-40(3); and for the special problem of the 
creation of life and of man, see Evolution 4a, ya; Man 8b; Soul 4c. 

The consideration of God’s foreknowledge and providence in relation to man’s freedom and 
to the course of history, see Cause yc; Chance ab; Fate 4; History 5a; Liberty 5a~5c; 
Prophecy ib-ic; Sin 6a; Will yc. 

The consideration of divine causality as e.xpresscd in divine law and in the government of the 
universe, see Astronomy 6; Cause yc; Law 3-36(2); Monarchy ab; Sin i; Virtue and 
Vice 8c; World ic. 

The consideration of divine causality in the dispensation of grace and the performance of 
miracles, ree Cause yd; Liberty 5c; Nature 30(4), 6b; Religion 16(2); Sin 7; Virtue 
AND Vice 8b, 8e; Will 70(2). 

The consideration of God’s justice and mercy, and of divine rewards and punishments, 
see Happiness 70-70(3); Immortality 50-5!; Justice ii-iia; Punishment 50; SiN 
6c-6e. 

Odicr discussions of the doctrine of the Messiah, the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the second 
coming of Christ, see Man iic; One and Many 6b-6c; Prophecy 4c-4d; Relation 2. 

Other discussions of the doctrine of original sin and man’s redemption and salvation, see 
Happiness ya; Sin 3-3e, 7; Virtue and Vice 8a; Will yeji). 

Other discussions of the Last Judgment and the end of the world, see Immortality 5c; 
Prophecy 4d; V'orld 8. 

Chapter 29 : GOD 603 

For: Other discussions of the church as the Mystical Body of Christ, and of the tfaeoiy’ of the 
sacraments, see Religion 2c, 3a-3b; Sign and Symbol 5c. 

The general theory of, the relation of reason and faith in man’s knowledge of God, see 
Knowledge 60(5); Logic 4f; Metaphysics 3a; Religion ib-ib(3); Theology 2, 4b-4c; 
Virtue and Vice 8d(i); Wisdom ic. 

The distinction between man’s natural and supernatural knowledge of God, and for the 
discussion of mystical experience and the beatific vision, see Experience 7; Happi- 
, NESS 7c(i); Knowledge 6c(5); Religion 6f; Will 7d; Wisdom ic. 

Other discussions of God’s revelation of Himself, of Sacred Scripture, and of man’s inter- 
pretation of the Word of God, see Education 7a; Language 12; Prophecy 3d; Sign and 
Symbol 50. 

Other discussions of the relation of creatures to God, and especially of the problem of the 
resemblance between creatures and God, see Man 10a, iia; Relation 3; Same and 
Other 6. 

Other discussions of the names of God, and for the bearing thereon of the distinction between 
the univocal, the equivocal, and the analogical, see Idea 4b(4); Same and Other 3a(3)- 
3b, 6; Sign and Symbol 3d, ^{. 

Sciences peculiarly concerned with God, see Astronomy 6; Metaphysics 2a, 2d, 3a; 
Theology.
