CHAPTER: Mathematics

INTRODUCTION

MATHEMATICS 

INTRODUCTION 

I T is nccessar)' for us to obsen'c the difference 
between problems in mathematics and the 
problem of the truth about mathematics. In 
the case of any science— in physics, logic, or 
metaphysics, as well as mathematics— it is one 
thing to examine the discourses or treatises of 
the scientists on the special subject matter of 
their field, and quite another to examine dis- 
cussions of the science itself, its scope, branches, 
and unity, its objects, its methods and its reb- 
tion to other disciplines. The chapter on 
Quantity deals with the subject matter of 
arithmetic, geometry, and other branches of 
mathematics; here we arc primarily concerned 
with the nature of mathematical science itself. 

Sometimes reflections on the nature of a sci- 
ence are expressed by experts in its subject mat- 
ter who comment on the scientific enterprise in 
which tliey arc engaged in prefaces or inter- 
spersed remarks. Sometimes such reflections are 
the commentary on a particular science by 
those who may claim to speak with competence 
on the processes of the human mind, the nature 
of Imowlcdgc or of science in general, but who 
claim no special competence in the particular 
science under consideration. This is usually the 
commentary of philosophers who may assert 
their right to make all knowledge, as well as all 
reality, their province. The same man may, of 
course, be both a mathematician and a philoso- 
pher; as, for c.xamplc, Plato, Descartes, Pascal. 

In the case of mathematics, the disparity be- 
tween discourse in and abotit the science could 
hardly escape notice. Even if no preliminary 
rule of caution were laid down, we should be 
struck by the contrast between the agreement 
mathematicians have been able to reach in the 
solution of their problems and the disagreement 
of the commentators on basic questions about 
mathematics. To this there may be one signif- 
icant exception. Mathematics is honored for 

the precision of its concepts, the rigor of its 
demonstrations, the certitude of its truth. 
Even its detractors — like Swift or Berkeley— 
concede the e.xactitude and brilliance of math- 
ematics while questioning its utility; or they 
admit its intellectual austerity while challeng- 
ing some application of its method. Its “clear- 
ness and certainty of demonstration,” Berkeley 
writes, “is hardly anywhere else to be found.” 

This general agreement about the quality of 
mathematical thought may explain why in all 
epochs mathematics has been looked upon as 
the type of certain and exact knowledge. Some- 
times it is taken as more than a model for other 
sciences; it is regarded as the method of pure 
science itself or as the universal science. Some- 
times its excellences are thought to be qualified 
by the limited or special character of its objects; 
or it is contrasted with other disciplines which, 
employing different methods, deal with more 
fundamental matters no less scientifically. But 
always the conclusions of mathematics serve to 
exemplify rational truth; always the method of 
mathematics represents the spirit of dispas- 
sionate thought; always mathematical knowl- 
edge symbolizes the power of the human mind 
to rise above sensible particulars and contin- 
gent events to universal and necessary rela- 
tionships. 

Mathematics means this not only to mathe- 
maticians and philosophers, but also to moral- 
ists and statesmen. “The objects of geometrical 
inquiry,” writes Alexander Hamilton, “are so 
entirely abstracted from those pursuits which 
stirand put in motion the unruly passions of the 
human heart, that mankind, without difficulty, 
adopt not only the more simple theorems of 
the science, but even those abstruse paradoxes 
which, however they may appear susceptible of 
demonstration, are at variance with the natural 
conceptions which the mind, without the aid 

Chapter 52 : MATHEMATICS 43 

of philosophy, would .be led to entertain upon 
the subject. . . . But in the sciences of morals 
and politics, men are found far less tractable.” 
This, Hamilton points out, is not due merely 
to the passionate interest in their problems. 
“It cannot be pretended,” he says, “that the 
principles of moral and , political knowledge 
have, in general, the same degree of certainty 
with those of mathematics.”. 

Admiration for mathematics often extends 
beyond enthusiasm for its exemplary virtues 
or delight in its intellectual beauty to the rec- 
ognition of its influence on the whole history 
of thought. Yet here differences of opinion be- 
gin to appear. 

In the ancient world Plato and Aristotle 
represent opposite estimates of the importance 
of mathematics for the rest of philosophy. For 
the Platonists, Aristotle says, “mathematics has 
come to be identical with philosophy, though 
they say that it should be studied for the sake 
of other things.” He complains of those stu- 
dents of science who “do not listen to a lecturer 
unless he speaks mathematically.” They make 
the error of supposing that “the minute ac- 
curacy of mathematics is ... to be demanded in 
all cases,” whereas, according to Aristotle’s 
own view, “its method is not that of natural 
science.” 

In the modern world, thinkers who are both 
mathematicians and philosophers, like Des- 
cartes and Whitehead, represent a return to the 
Platonic point of view; while Kant, even more 
than Aristotle, insists that the philosopher is 
grievously misled if he tries to follow the meth- 
od of mathematics in his own inquiries. White- 
head charges Aristotle with having deposed 
mathematics from its high role “as a formative 
element in the development of philosophy” — a 
demotion which lasted until, with Descartes 
and others in the 17th century, mathematics 
recovered the importance it had for Plato. 

Attempting to qualify his osvn enthusiasm, 
Whitehead admits that he would not “go so far 
as to say that to construct a history of thought 
without a profound study of the mathematical 
ideas of successive epochs is like omitting Ham- 
let from the play which is named after him. 
That would be claiming too much. But it is 
certainly analogous to cutting out the part of 

Ophelia. This simile Is singularly exact. For 
Ophelia is quite essential to the play, she is 
very charming— and a little mad. Let us grant 
that the pursuit of mathematics is a divine mad- 
ness of the human spirit, a refuge from the 
goading urgency of contingent happenings.” 

For Kant the madness lies not in the pursuit 
of mathematics itself, but in the delusion of 
the philosopher that he can proceed in the 
same way. “The science of mathematics,” Kant 
writes, “presents the most brilliant example of 
how pure reason may successfully enlarge its 
domain ■ without the aid of experience. Such 
examples are always contagious, particularly 
when the faculty is the same, which naturally 
flatters itself that it will meet with the same 
success in other cases which it has had in one.” 
The expectation naturally arises that the meth- 
od of mathematics “would have the same suc- 
cess outside the field of quantities.” But phi- 
losophers who understand their own task, Kant 
thinks, should not be infected by the “confi- 
dence ... of those who are masters in the art 
of mathematics ... as to their ability of achiev- 
ing such success” by applying its method in 
other fields. 

“The exactness of mathematics,” Kant holds, 
“depends on definitions, axioms, and demon- 
strations. . . . None of these can be achieved or 
imitated by the philosopher in the sense in 
which they are understood by the mathema- 
tician,” because, according to Kant, the valid- 
ity of the mathematician’s definitions and 
demonstrations ultimately depends on the fact 
that he is able to construct the concepts he uses. 
The point is not that mathematics obtains its 
objects from reason rather than experience, 
but rather that it obtains them from reason by 
construction; as, for example, Euclid begins by 
constructing a triangle which corresponds with 
his definition of that figure. 

Hence, Kant maintains, “we must not try in 
philosophy to imitate mathematics by begin- 
ning with definitions, except it be by the way of 
experiment .In philosophy, in fact, the defi- 

nition in its complete clearness ought to con- 
clude rather than begin our work”; whereas in 
mathematics we cannot begin until we have 
constructed the objects corresponding to our 
definitions. “It follows from all this,” Kant con- 
cludes, “that it is not in accordance with the 

-14 THE GREAT IDEAS 

very nature of philosophy to baast of its dog- 
matiati character, particularly in the held of 
pure reason, and to deck itself with the titles 
and ribands of mathematics.” 

Differe-n’ces of opinion about mathematics 
represent, for the most part, philosophical con- 
troversy concerning the nature of science or the 
objects of its knowledge. Mathematicians who 
engage in such controversy assume the role of 
philosophers in doing so, for mathematics itself 
is not concerned with questions of this sort. But 
there arc some questions about mathematics 
which seem to call for a close study of the sci- 
ence itself and even for proficiency in its sub- 
ject matter and operations. They are questions 
about the scope of mathematics and about the 
divisions of the science, in relation to one an- 
other and to its unity. On these issues, mathe- 
maticians disagree not only with philosophers, 
but among themselves and in their capacity as 
mathematicians. 

These issues usually involve different inter- 
pretations of the history' of mathematics. The 
problem is not one of the origin of mathematics. 

The ancient opinion, found in Herodotus, 
Plato, and Aristotle, that the mathematical 
arts, especially geometry, were first developed 
by tlic Egyptians, is of interest because of the 
questions it raises about the circumstances of 
the origin of mathematics. Herodotus seems to 
suggest that geometry arose as an aid in the 
practice of surveying land. “From this prac- 
tice,” he says, “geometry first came to be known 
in Egypt, whence it passed into Greece.” Aris- 
totle, on the other hand, separating from the 
useful arts those which “do not aim at utility,” 
thinks the latter arose “first in the places where 
men first began to have leisure. That is why the 
mathematical arts were founded in Egy’pt, for 
there the priestly caste was allowed to be at 
leisure.” 

The Greek development of mathematics very' 
early distinguishes between the pure sciences of 
arithmetic and geometry and their useful ap- 
plications in the arts of measurement. The 
Greeks conceived mathematics as essentially 
speculative rather than practical or productive. 
They also divorced it from empirical investiga- 
tion of the sensible world. .As arithmetic is con- 
cerned with numbers, not with numbered 

things, and geometry with figures, not with 
physical shapes, areas, or volumes, so Plato 
points out that music and astronomy belong to 
the mathematical sciences when they deal not 
with audible harmonics but with their numeri- 
cal ratios, not with visible celestial motions but 
with their geometrical configurations. 

Provoked by' Glaucon’s interest in the use- 
fulness of the mathematical arts, Socrates ex- 
cludes their utility as being of nointerest to the 
philosopher. He recommends arithmetic and its 
sister disciplines only so far as these sciences en- 
tirely ignore the world of sensible things. The 
reason why the philosopher “who has to rise out 
of the sea of change and lay hold of true being 
. . . must be an arithmetician,” he explains, is 
tliat arithmetic can have “a very' great and ele- 
vating effect,” when it compels “the soul to 
reason about abstract number” and rebels 
“against the introduction of visible or tangible 
objects into the argument.” In the same way, 
only when it concerns itselfwith “knowledge of 
the eternal,” not with measuring earthly dis- 
tances, will geometry “draw the soul towards 
truth, and create the spirit of philosophy,” The 
astronomer, like the geometer, “should employ 
problems, and let the heavens alone, if he 
would approach the subject in the right way”; 
and, like theastronomer, thestudentofharmony 
will work in vain, if he compares “the sounds 
and consonances which are heard only” and so 
fails to “reach the natural harmonies of num- 
ber.” 

About the non-empirical or non-experimen- 
tal character of mathematics there has been little 
dispute. It is seldom suggested that the growth 
of mathematical knowledge depends upon im- 
provement in methods of observation. But on 
the relation of mathematics to phy'sics, which 
raises the whole problem of pure and applied 
mathematics, or of mathematical and c.xperi- 
mcntal physics, there has been much contro- 
versy', especially in modern times. 

Bacon, for example, adopts the ancient divi- 
sion of mathematics into pure and mixed, the 
former “wholly abstracted from matter and 
physical a.xioms.” Though he regards mathe- 
matics as a useful instrument in physics— “the 
investigation of nature” being “best conducted 
when mathematics arc applied to physics”— he 
also insists upon the primacy of physics and 

Chapter 52:';MATHEMATICS 

upon its essentially- experimental character. 
Physics has been corrupted, he says; by. logic 
and by mathematics. when these seek to domi- 
nate instead of, to serve it. “It is a strange fatal- 
ity that mathematics and logic, which ought to 
be but handmaids to physics, should boast their 
certainty before' it, and even exercise dominion 
againstit.” ■ . ' 

The certainty and clarity which Hume is 
willing to attribute: to mathematics cannot, in 
his opinion,, be. extended to mathematical 
phvsics. “The most perfect philosophy of the 
natural kind,” he thinks, .“only staves off our 
ignorance a little longer. ; . . Nor is geometryi 
when taken into the assistance of natural philos- 
ophy, ever able to remedy this defect, or lead 
us into the knowledge of ultimate causes, by all 
that accuracy of reasoning for which it is so 
justly celebrated. Every part of mixed mathe- 
matics,” Hume continues, “proceeds upon the 
assumption that certain laws are established by 
nature in her operations; and abstract reason- 
ings are employed ^ either to assist experience 
in the. discovery of these laws, or to determine 
their influence in particular instances, where it 
depends upon any precise degree of distance or 
quantity.” When mixed with physics, mathe- 
matics remains subordinate — at best an aid in 
the formulation and the discovery of the laws 
of nature. 

A different view seems to be taken by the 
great mathematicians and physicists of the 17 th 
century. Galileo, Descartes, and Newton tend 
to make mathematical analysis an integral part 
of physics. As the structure of the world is 
mathematical,- so, too, must the science of 
nature be mathematical. Geometry, says 
Descartes, is “the science which furnishes a 
general knowledge of the measurement of all 
bodies.” If we retain the ancient distinction 
behveen geometry and mechanics, it can only 
be in terms of the assumption, “confirmed by 
the usage” of these names, that “geometry is 
precise and exact, while mechanics is not.” 

In the preface to his Mathematical Principles 
of Natural Philosophy, Newton also says that 
“geometry is founded in mechanical practice, 
and is nothing but that part of universal me- 
chanics which accurately proposes and demon- 
strates the art of measuring.” What is called 
"rational mechanics” must not ’ be confused 

with the manual arts of measurement which are 
imperfect and inexact; and it is therefore wrong 
to distinguish geometry from mechanics as that 
which is perfectly accurate from that which is 
less so. “But since the manual arts are chiefly 
employed in the moving of bodies, it happens 
that, geometry is commonly referred to their 
magnitude, and mechanics to their motion.” 

Newton himself does not abide by this dis- 
tinction. His aim is to subject all the phenome- 
na of nature “to the laws of mathematics” and 
to cultivate mathematics as far as it relates to 
natural philosophy. “I offer this work as the 
mathematical principles of philosophy, for the 
whole burden of philosophy consists in this — 
from the phenomena of motions to investigate 
the forces of nature and from these forces to 
demonstrate the other phenomena.” He regrets 
that he has not been able to deduce all the phe- 
nomena of nature “by the same kind of 
reasoning from mechanical principles.” 

Fourier goes even further. “Mathematical 
analysis,” he says, is “as extensive as nature it- 
self.” Mathematical analysis has “necessary re- 
lations with sensible phenomena.” In laying 
hold “of the laws of these phenomena,” mathe- 
matics “interprets them by the same language 
as if to attest the unity and simplicity of the 
plan of the universe, and to make still more 
evident that unchangeable order which presides 
over all natural causes.” This much had been 
said or implied by Descartes and Newton. But 
in addition to all this, Fourier, from his own 
experience in developing a mathematical the- 
ory of heat, comes to the conclusion that “pro- 
found study of nature is the most fertile source 
of mathematical discoveries.” Mathematics it- 
self benefits from its alliance with physics; it in- 
creases in analytical power and in the generality 
of its formulations as physical inquiries extend 
the range of phenomena to be analyzed and for- 
mulated. 

The relations of mathematics to physics are 
considered in the chapters on Astronomy, Me- 
chanics, and Physics. Mathematical physics 
must be examined in the light of the opinion 
that mathematics and physics are separate sci- 
ences, distinct in object and method. Further- 
more, whereas some of the major contributions 
to mathematics appear in the great books of 

46 THE GREAT IDEAS 

physics or natural pliilosophy (e.g., Archimedes, 
Kepler, Newton, Fourier), even more funda- 
men tal formulations of the science occurin great 
books devoted exclusively to mathematics: 
Euclid’s Elements (on geometry), Apollonius’ 
treatise On Conk Sections., Nicomachus’ Intro- 
duction to Arithmetic, Descartes’ Geometry, and 
Pascal’s mathematical papers. Others belonging 
to this latter group arc listed in the Additional 
Readings. The great modern advances in math- 
ematics arc c.xemplified by the works of Gauss, 
Lobachevski, Hamilton, Ricmann, Boole, De- 
dekind, Pcano, Frege, Cantor, Hilbert. 

It would be both natural and reasonable to 
inquire about the relation between the great 
works of mathematics included in this set and 
the equally great treatises or monographs, listed 
in the Additional Readings, which represent for 
the most part the contributions of the 19th cen- 
tury. But since the major question which im- 
mediately confronts us in such an inquiry' con- 
cerns the relation of modern to ancient math- 
ematics, we can e.xamine the problem in terms 
of the works included in this set, for they repre- 
sent both the continuity and the discontinuity 
in the tradition of mathematical science. 

Galileo and Newton are disciples of Euclid 
and Archimedes; Fourier is a disciple of Newton 
and Descartes. But Descartes is the great in- 
novator. He seems to be quite self-conscious of 
his radical departure from the ancients and 
from the state of mathematics as he found it in 
his own day. Yet the truth and pow'cr of his 
mathematical discoveries seem so evident to 
him that he cannot doubt the ancients must 
have had some inlding of it. 

“I am quite ready to believe,” he writes, 
“that the greater minds of former ages had 
some knowledge of it, nature even conducting 
them to it. We have sufficient evidence that the 
ancient Geometricians made use of a certain 
analysis which they extended to the resolution 
of all problems, though they grudged the secret 
to posterity. At the present day also there 
flourishes a certain kind of Arithmetic, called 
Algebra, which designs to effect, when dealing 
with numbers, what the ancients achieved in 
the matter of figures. These two methods,” he 
claims, “arc nothing else than the spontaneous 
fruit sprung from the inborn principles of the 
discipline here in question.” 

Descartes does not regard his success as con- 
sisting in the advance of mathematical truth 
through discoveries based upon principles or 
conclusions already established. Nor would he 
even be satisfied to say- that his use of algebra in 
developing analytical geometry' created a new 
branch of mathematics. Rather, in his own 
view, it tended to unify all existing branches 
and to form a single universal method of analy- 
sis. In effect, it revolutionized the whole char- 
acter of mathematics and laid the foundation 
for the characteristically modern development 
of that science since his day', “To speak freely,” 
he writes, “I am convinced that it is a more pow- 
erful instrument of knowledge than any other 
that has been bequeathed to us by human agen- 
cy, as being the source of all others.” 

One need not quite agree with Bertrand Rus- 
sell that pure mathematics was not discovered 
until the 19th century, in order to perceive 
that the discoveries made in that century carry’ 
out the spirit of the Cartesian revolution. If 
one understands the difference between the 
universal mathematics of Descartes and the 
separate sciences of arithmetic and geometry ns 
developed by the ancients; if one understands 
the difference between the theory of equations 
in Descartes and the theory of proportions in 
Euclid; if one understands how algebraic sym- 
bolism, replacing numbers by letters, frees both 
arithmetic and geometry from definite quanti- 
ties, then the profound discontinuity between 
modern and ancient mathematics begins to be 
discernible, 

TJiere are other differences contributing to 
that discontinuity, such as the modern treat- 
ment of the infinite, the invention of the cal- 
culus, and the theory of functions. But what is 
of prime importance for the purpose of under- 
standing the nature of mathematics, its ob- 
jects, and its methods, is the perception of the 
discontinuity' in any one or another of its mani- 
festations. Here is a fundamental disagreement 
about the nature of mathematics which is not 
an issue between philosophers disputing the 
definition of the science, but rather an issue 
made by the actual work of mathematicians in 
ancient and modern times. 

In his Buttle of the Boo\s — ancient and 
modern — Swift secs only the great poets and 
philosophers of the ttvo epochs set against one 

Chapter- 52: MATHEMATICS 

another. The battle between the ancient and 
the modern books of mathematics might be as 
dramatically represented. In such affairs there 
is a natural tendency to prejudge the issue in 
favor of the modern contender. That prejudice 
has reason on its side in certain fields of knowl- 
edge where the perfection of new instruments 
and the discovery of new facts work to the ad- 
vantage of the latecomer. But it is questionable 
whether in this dispute over the nature of 
mathematics the same advantage prevails. 

When the issue is fairly explored by an exam- 
ination of the differences between the great 
masterpieces of ancient and modern mathemat- 
ics, it may be found impossible to say that truth 
lies more on one side than on the other, or that 
one conception of mathematics is more fruitful 
than another, because the two versions of the 
science may seem to be incommensurable in 
their aims, methods, and standards of accom- 
plishment. 

One example will illustrate this incommen- 
surability. The ancient notion of number, as 
may be seen in Nicomachus’ Introduction to 
Arithmetic, limits the variety of numbers. A 
number always numbers a number of things, 
even though we can deal with the number itself 
apart from any set of numbered things. It is al- 
ways a positive and integral quantity which, 
excepting unity itself, “the natural starting 
point of all numbers,” contains a multitude of 
discrete units. 

Numbers are classified according to the way 
in which they are constituted of parts and ac- 
cording to the constitution of these parts. The 
primary division of numbers is into even and 
odd. “The even is that which can be divided 
into two equal parts without a unit intervening 
in the middle; and the odd is that which cannot 
be divided into two equal parts because of the 
aforesaid intervention of a unit.” 

The even numbers are capable of subdivision 
into the even-times-even, the odd-times-even, 
and the even-times-odd; and the odd into the 
prime and incomposite, the secondary and com- 
posite, and the -number which, in itself, is sec- 
ondary and composite, but relatively is prime 
and incomposite. The peculiarities of these 
types of number are explained in the chapter 
on Quantity. There are still further classifica- 

tions of numbers into superabundant, deficient, 
and perfect; and of the parts of numbers in rela- 
tion to the numbers of which- they are parts. 

Finally, numbers are considered in terms of 
their geometrical properties, to be observed 
when their units are disposed discretely in spa- 
tial patterns, and in one, two, or three dimen- 
sions. There are linear, plane, and solid num- 
bers, and among plane numbers, for example, 
there are triangular, square, pentagonal, hexag- 
onal numbers, and so on. 

The arithmetic operations of addition, sub- 
traction, multiplication, and division are per- 
formed in the production of numbers or in the 
resolution of numbers into their parts. But 
though any two numbers can be added to- 
gether or multiplied, the inverse operations 
cannot always be performed. A greater number 
cannot be subtracted from a less, for subtraction 
consists in taking a part from the whole, and 
leaving a positive remainder. Since division is 
the decomposition of a number into its parts, a 
number cannot be divided by one greater than 
itself, for the greater cannot be a part of the 
less. 

In short, in Nicomachus’ theory of numbers 
what later came to be treated as negative num- 
bers and fractions can have no place. Nico- 
machus will not carry out arithmetical opera- 
tions in all possible directions without regard 
to the result obtained. He refuses to perform 
these operations when the results which would 
be obtained do not have for him the requisite 
mathematical reality. He does not find it re- 
pugnant to reason that subtraction and divi- 
sion, unlike addition and multiplication, are not 
possible for any two numbers; as, for exam- 
ple, subtracting a larger from a smaller number, 
or using a divisor which does not go into the 
dividend evenly, and so leaves a fractional re- 
mainder. On the contrary, Nicomachus finds it 
repugnant to reason to perform these opera- 
tions in violation of their proper meaning, and 
to produce thereby results, such as negative 
quantities and fractions, which are for him not 
numbers, /.<?., which cannot number any real 
thing. 

Understanding the nature ofsquare numbers, 
Nicomachus would be able to understand a 
square root, but he would not see why the op- 
eration of extracting the square root should be 

4S THE GREAT IDEAS 

nppHcd to numbers which arc not square. 
Hence another kind of modern number, the 
irrational fraction which is generated by sucit 
opera tionsas thccxtraction of thesquare of pos- 
itive integers wliich are not perfect squares, 
would never appear in Nicomachus’ set of num- 
bers; nor would the imaginary- number, whicli 
is the result of applying the same operation to 
negative quantities. 

When the aritlrmctical operations arc per- 
formed algebraically, with unknowns as well as 
definite quantities, the solution of equations 
requires the employment of terms which Nico- 
machus would not admit to be numbers — nega- 
tives, fractions (both rational and irrational), 
imaginarics, and complex numbers, which arc 
partly real and partly imaginarj'. Descartes 
finds nothing repugnant in these novel quanti- 
ties. On the contrar}’, he would find it repug- 
nant not to be able to perform the basic arith- 
metical operations without restriction. Algebra 
would be impossible, and with it the general 
method of analysis that proceeds in terms of the 
purely formal structure of equations from 
which all definite quantities have been c.xclud- 
cd. It would also be impossible to do what Des- 
cartes thinks essential to the unity of mathe- 
matics, namely, to represent geometrical opera- 
tions algebraically and to perform most alge- 
braic operations geometrically. 

Geometrical loci cannot be c.xpressed by alge- 
braic formulae or equations, unless there arc as 
many numbers as there arc points on a line. The 
number series for Nicomachus, without frac- 
tions and irrationals, is neither dense nor con- 
tinuous. There arc fewer numbers than there 
are points on a line. And without the use of 
zero, negative numbers, and fractions — none 
of which would be regarded as numbers by 
Nicomachus— it would be impossible for Des- 
cartes to construct a set of coordinates for the 
geometrical representation of equations, where- 
by all the points in a plane have their unique 
numerical equivalents. 

The Cartesian synthesis of algebra and gcom- 
ctiy, which in his view v.astly increases the 
power of c.ach, violates the ancient distinction 
between continuous and discontinuous quanti- 
ties— mtignitudes (like lines and plancs)*and 
multitudes (or numbers). Euclid, for example, 
treats the irrational or the incommensurable 

always as a relation of m.agnitudcs, never of 
multitudes, or numbers; for him certain geo- 
metrical relationships cannot be expressed nu- 
merically. Arithmetic and geometry arc not 
even coordinate, much less co-extensive sci- 
ences. Arithmetic is the simpler, the more ele- 
mentary' science, and is presupposed by gcotn- 
etry'. 

Other examples arising from the innovations 
of Descartes might be cmploy'ed to show the 
chasm between the arithmetic and geometry’ of 
theancients, and modern mathematics — such as 
the treatment of infinite m.agnitudcs and num- 
bers, the theory’ of functions, and the method of 
the calculu-s. But the multiplication of examples 
docs not seem necessary to suggest that there 
may be no answer to the question, Is Descartes 
right, and Nicomachus and Euclid wrong? or to 
the question. Are the modern innovations im- 
provements or corruptions of the mathematical 
arts and sciences? 

These questions are not like questions con- 
cerning the truth or falsity of a proposition in 
mathematics or the validity of a proof. A given 
theorem in Euclid must, in the light of his defi- 
nitions, axioms, and postulates, be either true 
or false; and accordingly Euclid’s demonstra- 
tions or constructions arc cither cogent or falla- 
cious. The same rules apply to Descartes. But 
whether Euclid’s or Descartes’ conception of 
the whole mathematical enterprise is right 
seems to present a choice between disparate 
worlds, a choice to be made by reference to 
principles and purposes which are themselves 
not mathematical. 

Modern mathematics may’ be much more 
useful in its physical applications, especially in 
the analysis and calculation of variable notions 
or quantities. It may have a special elegance 
and simplicity, as well as greater unity and even 
systematic rigor. But it may also purchase these 
qualities at the c.xpcnse of the kind of intelli- 
gibility which seems to characterize ancient 
mathematics as a result of the insistence that 
its objects have an immediately recognizable 
reality. Ancient mathematics never occasioned 
such an extreme remark as tliat made by Ber- 
trand Russell about modern mathematics— 
that it is “the science in which we never know 
what we arc talking about, nor whether what 
we are saying is true.” 

The question of jthe reality of the objects of 
mathematics is in part a problem for the math- 
ematician and in part a question for the philos- 
opher. The problem for the mathematician 
seems to be one of establishing the existence of 
the objects he defines. This can be illustrated 
by reference to Euclid’s Elements. . . 

The basic principles,, as Euclid expounds the 
science, seerri to be threefold : definitions, postu- 
lates, and axioms or common notions. The 
axioms are called “common notions’’ because 
they are truths common to other branches of 
mathematics as well as to geometry. The com- 
mon notions are called “axiomsl’ because their 
truth is supposed to be self-evident. In contrast, 
the postulates are peculiar to geometry, for they 
are written as rules of construction. They de- 
xi33.od that cestsisi opesstiosxs be sissumed passi- 
ble, such as the drawing of a straight line or a 
circle, or the transposition of a figure from one 
portion of space to another without alteration 
of its form or quantity. 

Euclid’s definitions include the definition of 
a straight line and a circle. His first two postu- 
lates, therefore, seem to ask us to assume that 
space is such that these defined geometrical 
objects exist in it as they are defined; or, in 
other words, that objects corresponding to the 
definitions have geometrical reality. But there 
are many definitions — of a triangle, of an equi- 
lateral triangle, of a parallelogram — for which 
Euclid states no postulate demanding that we 
assume the geometrical reality of the object 
defined. Hence before he undertakes to demon- 
strate the properties of these figures, he finds it 
necessary to prove that they can be constructed. 
Until they are constructed, and the construc- 
tion demonstrated, the definitions state only 
possibilities to which no geometrical realities 
are hpotvn to correspond in the space deter- 
mined by Euclid’s postulates. 

In his first constructions, Euclid can employ 
only the definition of the figure itself, his axi- 
oms, and those postulates which permit him to 
use certain , mechanical devices — the straight 
edge and the compass, which are the mechani- 
cal equivalents of his postulates that a straight 
line can be drawn between any two points and 
a circle described with any radius from any 
point upon a plane. When, for example, in the 
first proposition of Book I. Euclid thus demon- 

strates the constrC^ion of^i^quilaiEiai ^ 
angle, he has proved-ithe geotnetripdve^ste^^f 
of that figure, or, in oth'er^vrttcifsdisySw^ in 
the space of his postulates. 

A number of questions can be asked about 
this and many other similar demonstrations. 
The postulates. being assumptions, their truth 
can be questioned and an effort made to prove 
or disprove them. This type of questioning led 
to the development of the: non-Euclidean 
geometries. After centuries of trying unsuc- 
cessfully to prove Euclid’s postulate about par- 
allel lines, geometers like Lobachevski and Rie- 
mann postulated other conditions concerning 
parallels, with consequences for the properties 
of other geometrical figures. 

The interior angles of a Euclidean triangle, 
fiar e.'tsmpie, equal the sum of two right angles; 
in certain non-Euclidean triangles, they add up 
to mote or less than two rights. One interpreta- 
tion of this situation is that the truth of con- 
clusions in geometry is entirely dependent on 
arbitrary assumptions. Another is that the sev- 
eral variants of the parallel postulate indicate 
the selection of different spaces in which to 
construct figures; and under each set of spatial 
conditions postulated, there is only one body of 
geometrical truths concerning the properties 
of the figures therein constructed. 

Another type of question concerns the logi- 
cal, as opposed to the geometrical, conditions 
of geometrical proof. In his essay On Geometri- 
cal Demonstration, Pascal declares the geometric 
method to be the most perfect available to 
men, for it “consists not in defining or in prov- 
ing ever}'thing, nor in defining or proving 
nothing, but in maintaining itself in the mid- 
dleground of not defining things which are 
clear to all men and in defining all others; and 
not proving everything known to men, but in 
proving all the other things.’’ This method, it 
seems, is not restricted to the subject matter of 
geometry: to Descartes and Spinoza, at least, it 
seems to be the method for demonstrating any 
theoretical truth. Descartes presents “argu- 
ments demonstrating the existence of God and 
the distinction between soul and body, drawn 
up in geometrical fashion”; and as its title page 
indicates, the whole of Spinoza’s Ethics is set 
forth ‘‘in geometrical order.” 

It may be questioned whether the postulates 

which Descartes adds to his definitions and 
axioms, or those which Spinoza introduces be- 
ginning with Proposition 13 of Book II, func- 
tion as postulates do in geometry, i.e., as rules 
of construction; it may similarly be questioned 
whether Spinoza is following the geometrical 
method in Book I where he proceeds without 
any postulates at all. But the more general 
question concerns the criteria for testing the 
consistency and the adequacy of the primitive 
propositions— the definitions, axioms, postu- 
lates— laid down as the foundation for all that 
is to be demonstrated. The investigation of this 
problem calls for an e.xamination of the whole 
process of proof, from which has developed the 
modem thcor}’ of mathematical logic that chal- 
lenges the universalitj' and adequacy of the 
tradmonal logic of Aristotle, and asserts that 
mathematics and logic are continuous with one 
another— essentially the same discipline. 

The issues raised by mathematical logic or 
the logic of mathematics arc considered in the 
chapters on Hypothesis, Logic, and Reason- 
ing. Here wc must turn finally to one other 
question which is of interest principally to the 
philosopher rather than the mathematician. It 
concerns the objects of mathematics. It is a 
question about their reality or mode of exist- 
ence which cannot be answered by the mathe- 
matical proof of a constmetion. 

When, for example, Euclid constructs an 
equilateral triangle, the figure established can- 
not be the one imperfectly drawn upon paper. 
The postulated permission to use a ruler and 
compass docs not remove the imperfection of 
these mechanical instalments or the inaccuracy 
in their pliysical use. The triangle whose prop- 
erties the geometer tries to demonstrate must 
be perfect, as no actually drawn figure can be. 
llic philosophical question, therefore, concerns 
the reality or existence of this ideal, perfect 
figure. The same question can be asked about 
pure numbers— numbers apart from all num- 
bered things. 

Arc the objects of mathematics purely in- 
telligible beings existing apart from the sensible 
world of material things? Or arc they idea! enti- 
tics— not in the sense of existing outside the 
mind, but in the sense of being ideas in the 
mind itself rather than perceptible particulars? 

As indicated in the chapters on Being, Form, 
and Idea, Plato and Aristotle seem to ansvrer 
these questions differently. But there arc fur- 
ther difTcrcnccs among those who regard math- 
ematical objects as having being only in the 
mind. 

Aristotle, Aquinas, Locke, and James, for 
example, think of the objects of mathematics 
as universals formed by abstraction from the 
particulars of sense and imagination. “The 
mathematicals,” such as numbers and figures, 
Aquinas writes, “do not subsist as separate 
beings.” Apart from numbered things and 
physical configurations, numbers and figures 
“have a separate existence only in the reason, 
in so far as they are abstracted from motion and 
matter.” Hobbes, Berkeley, and Hume, on the 
other hand, deny abstract ideas ot uravetsai 
concepts. “Let any man try to conceive a tri- 
angle in general,” Hume declares, “which is 
neither isosceles nor scalenum, nor has any par- 
ticular length or proportion of sides; and he 
will soon perceive the absurdity of all the scho- 
lastic notions with regard to abstraction and 
general ideas.” 

Despite these differences, there seems to be 
general agreement in the tradition of the great 
books that the truths of mathematics arc ra- 
tional rather than empirical; or, in the lan- 
guage of Kant and James, a priori rather than a 
posteriori. But the meaning of this agreement 
is not the same for those who think that truth 
in mathematics docs not differ from truth in 
other sciences and those who think that mathe- 
matical tru ihsstand alone precisely because they 
are not about matters of fact or real existence. 

Plato, for whom all science is knowledge of 
purely intelligible objects, regards the mathe- 
matical sciences as inferior to dialectic in the 
knowledge of such objects “because they start 
from hypotheses and do not ascend to princi- 
ples.” The students of such sciences, Plato 
writes, “assume the odd and the even and the 
figures and three kinds of angles and the like 
in their several branches of science; these arc 
their hj’pothcscs, which they and cvcrj'body 
arc supposed to know, and therefore they do 
not deign to give any account of them cither 
to themselves or others; but they begin with 
them, and go on until they arrive at last, and 
in a consistent manner, at their conclusion.” 

Chapter 52: MATHEMATICS 51 

. For . Aristotle, what differentiates mathe- 
matics from physics and metaphysics' is the 
special character of its objects. Physics and 
metaphysics both deal with substances as. they 
e-xist outside the mind, whereas the objects of 
mathematics are abstractions. Though figures 
and .numbers “are inseparable in fact” from 
material substances; they'are “separable from 
any particular kind of body by an effort of ab- 
straction:” This; does. not deny, for example, 
that physical' things :have’ perceptible figures. 
It merely insists that the geometer does not 
treat figures as sensible, but as intelligible, that 
is, as abstracted from matter. Nevertheless, the 
truths of mathematics, no less than those of 
physics and metaphysics, apply to reality. All 
three sciences are further alike in demonstrat- 
ing their conclusions rationally rather than by 
experiment. All three employ induction to ob- 
tain their p'finciples, though metaphysics alone 
attains to the first principles of all science. 

For Kant, “mathematical cognition is cogni- 
tion by means of the construction of concep- 
tions.” To explain this he cites the example of 
the construction of a triangle. “I construct a 
triangle, by the presentation of the object 
which corresponds to, this conception, .either 
by mere imagination (in pure intuition) or 
upon paper (in empirical intuition); in both 
cases completely a /?r/on .without borrowing 
the type of that figure from any experience. . . . 
We keep our eye merely on the act of the con- 
struction of the conception, and pay no atten- 
tion to the various modes of determining it, for 
e.\ample, its size, the length of its sides, the size 
of its angles.” The a -priori character of such in- 
tuitions, on which rests the a priori character of 
mathematical truths, does not mean that math- 
ematics has no relevance to experience. Arith- 
metic and geometry are like physics, .according 
to Kant; they are sciences of experience or 
nature but like pure (as opposed to empirical) 
physics, they are a priori sciences. Since Kant 
holds that experience itself is constituted by a 
priori forms of perception, he can ascribe the 
validity which mathematics has for^all possible 
experience to the “a priori intuition of the 
pure forms of phenomena — space and time.” 

Bertrand Russell rejects this “Kantian view 
which [asserts] that mathematical reasoning is 
not strictly formal, but always uses intuitions. 

i.e.; the a priori knowledge of space arid time. 
Thanks to the progress of Symbolic Logic . . . 
this part of the Kantian philosophy,” Russell 
holds, “is now capable of a final and irrevocable 
refutation.” Leibnitz, before Kant, had advo- 
cated .‘‘the general doctrine that all mathemat- 
ics is a deduction' from logical, principles,” but, 
according to Russell, he had failed to substanti-' 
ate this insight, partly because of his “belief in 
the logical necessity of Euclidean geometry.” 
The sariie belief is, in Russell’s opinion, the 
cause of Kant’s error. “The actual propositions 
of Euclid ... do not follow from the principles 
of logic alone; and the perception of this fact,” 
he thinks, “led Kant to his innovations in the 
theory of knowledge. But since the grow.th of 
non-Euclidean geometry, it has appeared that 
pure mathematics has no concern with the 
question whether the axioms and propositions 
of Euclid hold of actual space or not.” 

Russell asserts that “by the help of ten prin- 
ciples of deduction and ten other premises of a 
general logical nature {e.g., ‘implication is a 
relation’), all mathematics can be strictly and 
formally deduced.” He regards “the fact that 
all Mathematics is Symbolic Logic” as “one of 
the greatest discoveries of our age; and when 
this fact has been established, the remainder of 
■the principles of Mathematics consists in the 
analysis of Symbolic Logic itself.” Though this 
view of mathematics may not be worked out 
in detail except in such treatises as Russell’s 
Principles of Mathematics and in the Principia 
Mathematica, pn which he collaborated with 
Whitehead, the conception of mathematics as a 
purely formal science, analogous to (if not 
identical with) logic, does have some anticipa- 
tions in the great books. For James, as for 
Locke and Hume, mathematics is strictly a 
science of the . relations between ideas, not of 
real existences. “As regards mathematical judg- 
ments,” James writes, “they are all ‘rational 
propositions’ . . . for they express results of com- 
parison and nothing more. The mathematical 
sciences deal with similarities and equalities ex- 
clusively, and not. with coexistences and se- 
quences.” Both James and Locke, however, 
differ fiom Hume in thinking that there are 
sciences other than those of number and quan- 
tity which can demonstrate their conclusions 
with certitude.. ■ 

The foregoing discussion indicates some 
the differences among philosophers concerning 
the objects of mathematics, the conditions of 
its truth, and its relation to other sciences. 
These disagreements do not seem to take the 
form of an opposition between ancient and 
modem thought, like that between ancient 
and modem mathematicians concerning the 
nature of their science. The two oppositions do 
not mn parallel to one another. 

On the contrary, the objections which mod- 

em philosophers, especially Berkeley, Hume, 
and Kant, raise against the notion of infinite 
quantities seem tofevorthe ancient rather than 
the modern tenor of mathematical thought 
Though the reasons they give do 'not derive 
from the same principles as those to which Plato 
and Aristotle appeal, they, like the ancients, 
appear to insist upon a certain type of intel- 
ligibility in the objects of mathematics, which 
seems to have been sacrificed in the mathe- 
matical development initiated by Descartes. 

of


OUTLINE' OF TOPICS 

1. The science of mathematics: its branches or divisions; the origin and development of 

mathematics 

I ^ ~> 

I a. The distinction of mathematics from physics and metaphysics: its relation to logic 

The ser\’ice of mathematics to dialectic and philosophy: its place in, liberal 
education , ,, 

ic. The certainty and exactitude of mathematical knowledge: the a priori founda- 

tions of arithmetic and geometry 

id. The ideal of a universal mathesis: the unification of arithmetic and geometry 

2. The objects of mathematics: number, figure, extension, relation, order - ' 

2a. The apprehension of mathematical objects: by intuition, abstraction, imagina- 
tion, construction; the forms of time and space 

2b. The being of mathematical objects: their real, ideal, or mental existence 

2c. Kinds of quantity: continuous and discrete quantities; the problem of 'the 
irrational 

3. Method in mathematics: the model of mathematical thought 

3a. The conditions and character of demonstration in mathematics: the use of 
definitions, postulates, axioms, hypotheses 

lb. The role of construction: its bearing on proof, mathematical existence, and the 
scope of mathematical inquiry 

_3C. Analysb and synthesis: function and variable i 

3d. Symbols and formulae: the attainment of generality • , ‘ 

4. Mathematical techniques 

4a. The arithmetic and algebraic processes 

4A The operations of geometry 

4c. The use of proportions and equations 

4d. The method of exhaustion: the theory of limits and the calculus 

'58 

5. The applications of mathematics to physical phenomena: the utility of mathematics 

5a. The art of measurement , ’gg 

57. Matlicm.atical physics: the mathematical structure of nature 

■' ’ '■ KEFERmCESy ■ ^ 

To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type, which are the volume'and page 
numbers of the passages referred to. For example, in.4 Homek: Iliad, bk ii [ 265-283] 12d, the 
number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; .the number 12d indicates that the pas-c 
sage: is in section d of page 12. , . ' ■ ' : ■ , 

, . Page Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a and b refer to the . 
. I , upper and lower halves of the page, For example, in S3 James : Psychology, I16a-119b, the passage 
begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is 
.. ; , printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the left- 
hand side of the page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side of 
the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half 
of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. ' 

Author’s Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, 

' sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are given in cer- 
tain cases; e.g., ///W, bk ii [265-283] 12d. 

Bible


REFERENCES

References : The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When the King James 
, and Douay. versions differ in title of hooks or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King 
James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.. Old Testa- 
ment: Nehemiah, 7:45— (D) II Esdras, 7:46. 

' ‘ Symbols: The abbreviation “esp” calls the reader’s attention to one or more especially 
relevant' parts pf a whole reference; “passim” signifies that the topic is discussed intermit- 
tently rather' than continuously in the work or passage cited. 

For additional information concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation of 
■ Refetence Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 

l.’The science of mathematics: its branches or 
Jiio I' divisions; the origin and development 
of mathematics 

S kEscRYEvs: Prometheus Bound [442-472] 
' 44 c.d esp [459-460] 44 d 
'"6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 70b-c 

■ 7 Plato: Charmides, 'l&-Sa / Phaedrus, 138c-d 

/ Gorgias, 254a-c / Republic, bk vii, 391b- 
' '397a / Timaeus, r ^ 5 lh-c / 'Statesman, S81a / 

Philebus, 633b-634b ' ' ' 

8 Aristo't LE :' Posterior Analytics, bk i, ck 7 
103 c-d;'cH 27 / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i 

[98i1’i3-24] 500 a;'CH 9 [992*29-34] S 10 c; bk II, 
ch 3 513 c-d “ 

• 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk 1, 812b-8l3d; 
BK n, 831d-832a 

’• 16 Ptolemy : bk i, 5a-6a 

J6 Copernicus:' Revolutions of the Heavenly 

■ Spheres, bk i, 510a-b 

■ Vl'PiioTiNus-. Fifth Ennedd-, tr ix, ch ii, 2S0c-d 
’ IS hvGv&imEv Christiari Doctrine, bk ii,‘ch 38 

6S4b-C' • 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ti,'Q 35, 
'A' 8 ', ans!779c-780c ■ ' ■ 

' 23 Hobbes: part i, 72a-d; part iv, 
• ■ '268c-d; 269b ■ ' ' ' ' ' 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46a-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c-d; 6c-7c; xiv, 31c- 
32a / Discourse, part i, 43b-c; part 11, 47b-d 
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c 

34 Newton: Principles, la-b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, 

' SECT 7 360b-c; SECT 15 363a-b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 
20' 458b; sect vii, div 48 470d-471c; sect 
XII, div 13 1 508d-S09a 
'41 Gibbon: Decline, and Fall, 290a; 299b 
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5d-6b; 17d-18d; 46a-c; 
68a-69c esp 68c-69a; 211c-218d / Practical 
Reason, 295b-d; 330d-331a / Judgement, S53d 
- ' (fn i] 

46 Hegel; Philosophy of Right, ,\dditions, 40 
122d-123b •/ Philosophy of History, part i, 
219a ' ‘ 

53 James: Psychology, Sl'ia-SySa 

la . The distinction of mathematics from phys- 
ics and metaphysics: its relation to logic 

7 Plato: Euthydemus, 75b / Republic, bk vi, 
386d-388a; bk vii, 391b-398c 

8 Aristotle : Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 12 
[77'’27-34] 107 a; [78*10-13] 107 b-c / Physics, 
BK II, CH 2 [i93*’22-i94*ii] 27 pa-c; ch 9 
'[206*15-29] 277 c-d /■ Heavens, E-K. i, cii 10 

: ' ■ [279’’32-28o*ii] Zllh-c ■/ Metaphysics,' EK. i. 

THE GREAT IDEAS lb to I<r 

(1. The science oj mathematics; its branches or 
divisions; the origin and development oJ 
mathematics, la. The distinction oj mathe- 
matics from physics and metaphysics: its 
relation to logic.) 

CH 8 [9S9’>29-g90°S] S08a; ch 9 [992'‘29-*’9] 
SlOc-d; BK II, CH 3 [995“i5-2o] 513d; bk in, 
CH 2 [996"2i-36] 514d-515a; bk iv, ch i 522a; 
BK VI, CH i S47b,d-548c; bk xi, ch i [io59*>i5- 
21] S87c-d; CH 3 [io6i'‘29-’>i2] 589c-d; ch 4 
589d-590a; cii 7 S92b-S93a; bk xir, ck" 8 
Iio73’’i-7] 603d / Soul, bk 1, ch i [403'>io-i6] 
632d 

9 Abistotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8 [ii42“i2-i9] 
391b 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 

19 Aquinas: Theologica, part i, q i, a 1, 

REP 2 3b-4a; q 7, a 3, ans 32c-33c; q 44, a i, 
REP 3 238b-239a; Q 85, a i, rep 2 451c-453c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 9, 
A 2, REP 3 424b-425a; part lit, Q 7, a 12, rep 
I 754C-7SSC 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 1, S6b-S7a; 58a-c; 
59b-c; 72a-d; part iv, 267a-b; 268c-269a 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
190b-c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46a-b 

31 Descartes: Rules, ii, 2d-3b; iv 5a-7d; viii, 
12b-13a; XIV, 31c-32a / Discourse, part ii, 
46c-47a / Meditations, 70b-c; i, 76b-c / Ob- 
jections and Replies, 128d-129a; 169c-170a 

33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 44Sa-b 

34 Newton: Principles, la-2a 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
sect 29 322c-323a; CK xii, sect 7-13 360b- 
362d passim 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
48 470d-471c 

39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 33Sb- 
337a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-9a; 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 
211c-218d esp 215d-217a; 243c-248d passim, 
esp 244d-245a, 248c / Piactical Reason, 
295b-d; 311d-313d / Pref. Metaphysical Ele- 
ments of Ethics, 376c-d 

43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445b-c 

53 James: Psychology, 867a-870a esp 869a-870a 

lb. The serA’ice of mathematics to dialectic and 
philosophy: its place in liberal education 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk vii, 
391b-398c; bk viii, 403a-d / Timaeus, 448b- 
450a; 453b-454a; 4S8b-460b / Theaetetus, 
515a-d / Philehus, 633a-63Sa / Laws, bk v, 
691d-692a; 69Sc-697a; bk vii, 728b-730d 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk hi, ch i 1299*1- 
300*19] 390b-391c; cii 7-8 396d-399a,c / 
Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch i l329“5- 
24] 428d-429a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5-6 
503d-506b; cii 8 l989'’29-990®32] 508a-c; cn 
g (992*24-‘’9] 510c-d; bk xii, ch 8 [i073*’3-7] 

603d; BK XIV, ch 3 622d-623d: cii 5-6 624d- 
626d / Soul, bk I, CH 4 [4o8’’33-409“9j 638d 

9 Aristotle; Ethics, bk vi, ch 8 [i^a^iB-ig] 
391b 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-813d 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, Sb-6a 
16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk t, 510a-b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 863b-872b passim 

17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 lOd-IIa 

18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 30 26b-c 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 16, 644d-645d; 
ch 38-39 654b-655b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-57a; S9b-c; 
PART II, 164c; PART IV, 268c-d; 269b 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 
27d; BK IV, 278b 

25 Montaigne; Essays, 70a-d 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
190b-c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16a-b; 
46a-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, ii 2a-3b; iv 5a-7d; xiv, 
29a-b / Discourse, part i, 43b-c; part ii, 
46c-48b / Geometry, bk 1 , 297a-b 

31 Spinoza; Ethics, part i, appendix, ,370b-c 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2 171a-l72b / Geometrical 
Demonstration, 442a-446b 

34 Newton: Principles, lb-2a 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 97a-b 
42 Kant; Pure Reason, lSc-16c; 46a-c; 211c-218d 
esp 215a-c / Judgement, 551a-552c 
51 Tolstoy: JPar and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d 
53 James: Psychology, 882a-883a 

Ic. The certainty and exactitude of mathemati- 
cal knowledge: the a priori foundations 
of arithmetic and geometry 

7 Plato: Philebus, 633b-634b 

8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 27 
119b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982*25-28] 
500c; BK II, CH 3 513c-d; bk xiii, ch 3 609a- 
610a 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 [i094'’i2-28] 
339d-340a 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-814b 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5 b-6a 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 5gb-c: 
PART IV, 268c-d; 269b 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth pay, 
252a-b 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 61b-c; 65b 
/ Novum Organttm, bk i, aph 59 112b-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, ii 2 a-3b; iv 5 a-7d / Dis- 
course, PART I, 43b-c; PART II, 47b-c; part iv, 
S2d-53a; part v, 54c / Meditations, i, 76b-c; 
v, 93a-95b / Objections and Replies, 128a-129a 
/ Geometry, bk ii, 304a-b 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c 
33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2 171a-l72b; 33 176b / 
Geometrical Demonstration, 430a-434a; 442a- 
446b 

Xdtola 

35 .‘Locke: Human Understanding, bk ,iv, 'ch ii, 
SECT 9-10 Snb'c; CH in, sect 18-20 317d- 
319c passim; sect 29 322c-323a; ch iv, sect 
' ,. 6-9 325a-326b; ch xii, sect.' 1-8 3S8c-360c 
passim, esp sect. 7 360b-c; ch xnr, sect 3 
364a '■ - 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect ri8 

436b-c ; 

ZS Human Understanding, sect Tv, div 

, 20 458a-b; sect.vh, oiV 48 470d-471c; sect 

XII, Div 131 S08d-509a ' • 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a ' 

42 Kant: Pure Reasoni- Sa-ZA', 15c-16c; 31b-d; 
c 35b-36a;. 46a-b; 68a^69c; 86b-c; llOa; 2nc- 

•218d / Practical Reason, 295b-d; 312c-d; 
330d-331a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of 
Ethics, 376c-d / Science of Right, 399a-b / 
..judgement, S51a-552a ’ . 

43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a; number 
85, 2S7d-2S8d 

'43 Mill: Liberty, 283d-284b / Utilitarianism, 
■445b-c ■ ' 

:4S Lferotsw-a. -. Elements of Clietnistry, pref, la; 2b 
. • 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 173a-b 
S3 James: Psychology, 17Sa'176a; 874a'878a; 

, 879b'882a 

id. The ideal of a universal mathesis: the unifi- 
cation of arithmetic and geometry 
■7 Plato: Meno, 180d-182c / Theaetetus, SlSa-c 
8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6 [4*’2o-5‘‘i4] 9a-c 
I Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 7 103c-d / Meta- 
, ■ physics, bk ii, ch 3 513c-df bk vi, ch i 
[io 26 “i 8-27] 548b; bk xi, ch 7 [io64*’6-9| 
'S92d-S93a; bk xiii, ch 2 [io77“9-io] 608b; 
.. 'cH 3 [i077*’i7-23] 609a 
II Euclid: Elements, bk ii 30a-40b; bk v 81a- 
.98,b: BK VII, definitions, 16-19 127b 
11 'NicomachuS: Arithmetic, bk ii, 831d-841c 
16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1012b- 
, 1014b - 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 58a-c 
31 Descartes: Rules la-40a,c esp ii, 2d-3b, iv 
Sa-7d, VI 8a-10a, xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c / Dis- 
course, part h, 46c-48b; part hi, SOd / 
Geometry 295a-3S3b esp bk i, 295a-298b 
33 Pascal: Arithmetical Triangle, 447a-4S6a 
- 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 109b-llla 
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 68a-69c 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b 

2, .The objects of mathematics: number, figure, 

■ extension, relation, order 
, 7 Plato; Charmides, 7d-8a / Meno, 176d-177a; 
180b-183c / Republic, bk vi, 387b-c; bk vn, 
393d ■/ Philebiis, 633d ' " ' 

. 8 '.Aristotle; .Categories, cH 6 .9a-lla; ch 8 
. ^[Io“n-I6] ISa-b / Physics, bk iv, ch ii [ 2I9'’5- 

■ " 8] 299b / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch i [ 9g6“i3- 
• 15] 514c; ch 5 520c-521b passim; bk vii, ch 2 

[io 28 '’i 8-28] 5Sla-b; bk xi, ch 3 [i66C2g-^^] 

. 589c 

9 Aristotle: RJietoric, bk i, ch 2 [ijjf> 26 -g 2 ] 
' , •^95'd 

' ■ H.Euclid: Elements, bk i, defi.nitions la-2a; 
BK VII, definitions, 1-2 127a; bk xi, defini- 
tions, I 301a 

11 Nicomachus; Arithmetic, bk i, 811d-812b 
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk‘i, Sa-b • 

18 Augustine; Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 

- 654b-c 

19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part i, q 7, 
A 3, ANS 32c-33c; a 4 , ans 33d-34c; q 30 , a i, 
rep 4 167a'168a; q 85 , a r, rep 2 45Ic-4S3c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d , 

' 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46a-c 
31 Descartes: Rules, ii‘, 3a-b; iv, 7a-b; vi 8a- 
10a; XIV, 30d'33b / Discourse, part ii, 47b-d; 

■ PART IV, 52d-S3a / Meditations, i, 76b-c / 
Objections and Replies, 2l7b-d / Geometry, 
BK II, 304a-306a; 316a-b 

34 Newton: Principles, la-b 

. 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xii, 
sect 3-5 147d-148b 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect 118-132 
436b-439c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 
13 1 S08d-509a 

42 Kant; Pure Reason, 46a-c; 62a-d; 68a-69c; 
211c-213a 

53 James: Psychology, 874a-878a esp 874a 

2a. The apprehension of mathematical objects: 
by intuition, abstraction, imagination, 
construction; the forms of time and space 

7 Plato: Meno, 180b-I83c / Republic, bk vi, 
387b-d; bk vii, 393a-394a / Theaetetus, 
535b-c 

8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 
lllb-c / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9 [i05i“23- 
33] 577b-c; bk xiii, ch 3 609a-610a / Memory 
and Reminiscence, ch 2 [452'’7-23] 694b-d 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3 11112^20-24] 
358d; BK VI, ch 8 [ii42'‘i3-i9] 391b 

11 Euclid; Elements, bk i, postulates, 1-3 2a 
19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part i, q i, a i, 
REP 2 3b-4a: Q 85, A I, REP 2 451c-4S3c 
31 Descartes: Rules, xiv-xv 28a-33d / Dis- 
course, part ii, 46d / Meditations, v, 93a-d; 
vi, 96b-d / Objections and Replies, 217b-d; 
218c; 228c-d 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2 171a-172b 
35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, 
sect 16 99b-c; bk ii, ch xiii, sect 5-6 149b-d; 
ch xvi 165C'167c passim 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
15-16 409a-d; sect 12-13 415b-c; sect 118- 
122 436b-437c 

■ 35 Hume; Human Understanding, sect xii, div 
122 505c-d; DIV 124-125 506a-507a esp 

DIV 125, S07b [fn i] 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 16a-c; 17d-18d; 24d-25b; 
Slb'd; 35b-36a; 46a-c; 55c-S6a; 62a-d; 68a- 
69c; 86b-c; 87b-c; 110a; 211c-212a / Practical 

THE GREAT IDEAS UioTx 

(2, The objects of mathematics: number, figure, 
extension, relation, order. 2a. The appre- 
hension of mathematical objects: by intui- 
tion, abstraction, imagination, construction; 
the forms of time and space.) 

Reason, 295b-d / Science of Right, 399a / 
Judgement, 55Ia-553c 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 
121a-b 

53 James: Psychology, 302a-304b; S49a-5S2a esp 
552b [fn i); 869a-870a; 874b-878a passim 

2b, The being of mathematical objects: their 
real, ideal, or mental existence 

7 Plato: Phaedo, 228b'230c; 242c-243c'/ Re- 
piiblic, BK VI, 387b-c: dk vii, 391b-398c / 
Theaetetus, 535b-c; 541b-d / Sophist, 562c / 
Philebus, 636b-c / Seventh letter, 809c-810b 

8 Aristotle; Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 41 {49'’32- 
37] 6Sc / Posterior Analytics, bki.ch io[ 76*’39- 
77“3] I 05 d; CH 13 [79“6 -ioJ 108 c ; ch 18 (81*40- 
°5] lllb-c / Topics, BK VI, ch 6 [i 43 ‘’ti- 33 l 
197 b-c / Physics, bk ii, ch 2 [i93'’23-i94”ii] 
270 a-c: BK III, ch 5 (204*8-34] 282 a-b: bk iv, 
CH I [2 o 8 '’i 9-24] 287 b-c: ch 11 (2to*’5-8j 299 b: 
CH 14 [223*21-29] 303 a / Heavens, bk hi, 
CH r [299*1-300*19] 390 b- 391 c: ch 7 (306*1- 
*■2] 397 b-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5 (985'’22- 
986*21] S 03 d- 504 b; ch 6 (987*’io-34l 50 Sc- 
506 a; ch 8 [989'’29-990*32l 508 a-c; cH 9 [991’’ 
9-992 '’i 8] 509 d-sna; bk hi, ch r [995“i3- 
18] S 14 a; [996*13-15] 514 c: cH 2 (996*22-36] 
514 d-S 15 a; [997'’i2-9g8“i9] S 16 b-d; cH 5 
[iooi‘’ 26 ]-ch 6 [ioo2‘’25] 520 c' 521 c: bk vii, 
cH 2 [io 28 *’i 8-28] S 51 a-b: cii 10 (1035*’ 
32-1036*12] 559 b-c; CH It [1036^32-1037*4] 
560 b-c; BK XI, cii i [i059*’2-i3] 587 b'C; ch 2 
Iio 6 o* 36 -*’i 9] 588 c-d; ch 3 [1061*29-^4] 589 c; 
BK XII, CII I [1069*30-37] 598 b; bk xii, cii 10 
Iio 75’'25 ]-bk XIII, CH 3 [io 78*’5] 606 c- 610 a; 
BK XIII, CH 6-9 61 Id- 618 c; bk xiv 619 b,d- 
626 d / Soul, BK III, CH 7 [ 43 i'’i 3 -i 9 ] 664 b 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ck 6 [1096*17-19] 
341b; BK VI, CH 8 [1142*13-19] 39Ib 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk i, postulates, 1-3 2a 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk 1, 811 a- 812 a: 
813 d- 814 b 

18 Augustine : Confessions, bk x, par ig 76 a-b 
/ Christian Doctrine, bk 11 , ch 38 6 S 4 b-c 

19 Aquinas; Stimma Theologica, part i,' Q 5, 
A 3, REP 4 2Sa-d; q 10 , a 6 , ans 45c-46d; q ii, 
A I, REP 1 46d-47d; a 3 , rep 2 49a-c; q 30 , a i, 
REP 4 167a-I68a: q 44 , a i, rep 3 238b-239a; 
Q 85, A I, REP 2 451c-453c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 111 , q 7, 
A 12, REP I 754c-755c; part hi suppl, q 83, 
A 2, ANS 976c-978c; a 3 , rep 2 978c-980d 

31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 30 b- 32 a / Discourse, 
PART IV, S 2 d 53 a / Meditations, i, 76 b-c; v, 
93 a-d; 96 a / Objections and Replies, 169 c- 170 a; 
217 b-d; 218 c: 228 C' 229 a 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c 
33 Pascal: Vacuum, 373a-b 
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 1, ch 111, 
SECT 6 113c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 19 259c- 
260a; bK iv, ch iv, sect 5-8 324d-325c 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
12-16 408a-409d; sect 12-13 415b-c; sect 
118-128 436b-438d passim, esp sect 121-122 
436d-437c, sect 125-126 438a-c 
35 Hume: Human Understanding, sectIv, div 20 
458a-b; sect xh, div 122 505c-d; div 124-125 
S06a-507a esp div 125, 507b [fn i] 

42 KanT: Pure Reason, 16a-c; 24a-33d esp 31d- 
32c;35b-36a; 46a-c; 62a-d;87b-c; 91c-d;94b- 
95a ; 211c-213a esp 211c-212a / Practical Reason, 
295b-d: 312c-d / Judgement, 551a'S53c 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 183a-b 
53 James; Psychology, 874a-878a esp 87Sa-876b; 
880b-881a ' 

2c. Kinds of quantity; continuous and discrete 
quantities; the problem of the irrational 

7 Plato: Meno, 180d-181c / Republic, bk viii, 
403a-d / Parmenides, 499d-500c / Theaetetus, 
515a-c 

8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5 [3’’32-4“^ 8a-b; 
CH 6 [4’’23-5*I4] 9 a-c; ch 8 [io^26--ii*i4] 15 d- 
16 b / Physics, bk iv, ch 4 [2ii*29-’’4] 290 c; 
CH 5 [2i2*’3-6] 291 d; bk v, ch 3' [227*10-34] 
307 d- 308 b; bk vi, ch 1-2 312 b,d- 31 Sd / 
Heavens, bk i, ch i [268*6-11] 359 a; bk hi, 
CH 1 [299*1-300*19] 390 b- 391 c: CH 7 [306*26- 
•^a] 397 c-d: ch 8 [yoS^iy-zG] 398 a / Generation 
and Corruption, bk 1, cH 2 [3i5*’25-3i7"i7] 
411 b- 4 I 3 a; bk 11, ch 10 (337*22-34] 439 b-c 
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [983*1 1-20] 'SOlb-c; 
BK 11, CH 2 [994’'23-26] 513 a; bk hi, ch 4 
[iooi’’7-25] 520 b-c; bk v, ch 6 [ioi5’’35-ioi6* 
17] 536 b-c; [ioi6’’^32] 537 a-b; ch 13 [1020“ 
9-14] 541 b; BK viii, ch 3 [i043'’33-i044*i4] 
568 b-d: BK X, ch i [1052*15-37] S 7 Sb,d; ch 3 
[1054*20-29] 581 a; bk xi, ch 12 [io'68*’26- 
1069*18] 597 d- 598 a,c; bk xiv, ch i fio87'’34- 
1088*14] 620 a-b 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk v, definitions, 4-5 
8la; BK VII, DEFINITIONS, 2 127a; 20 127b; 
BK X 191a'300a esp prop i 191b-192a 
11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, as- 
sumptions, 5 404b / Spirals, 484b / Quadra- 
ture of the Parabola, S27a-b 
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811d-812a 
17 Plotinus; Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7, 52c / 
Fourth Ennead, tr ii, cii i, 139d / Sixth En- 
nead, tr 1, CII 4 253b-254b; tr hi, ch 13, 
287d-288a; ch 15 289a-c 

19 Aquinas: Theologica, part i, q 3 , a t, 

REP 1 14b-15b; q 7 , a 3 , rep 3-4 32c-33c: a 4, 
ANS 33d-34c; q 11, a 2 , rep 2 47d-48d: q 30, 
A 3, ANS 169b-170c; q 42 , a i, rep 1 224b- 
225d; Q 48. A 4, REP 3 262a-263a: Q 52 , a r 
278d-279b 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-il. 

, -3 10 3a 

, Q 24, A 4, REP I, 491d'492b;,PART in, q 7, 
A 12, REP I 7S4c-755c 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 139c- 
, ,153a passim; third day, 201a-202a’ ' 

31 Descartes: D/Vcohw, PART iv, 52d-S3a / 

' . Meditations, v, 93b " ' \ 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, scHOL360b- 
’361d'. , • • • 

■ 33 'Paso G eometrical Demonstration,- 434a- 

439b _ 

. 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, '.lemma i 2Sa; 
LEMMA II, scHOL, 31a-32a . • 1 , 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, 

. ■ sect ;9 164b;d; ch.xvi, sect . 3-4 16Sd-166b 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 123-132 
437c-439c 

42 Rant: ■ 'P/w ''66(1-720; '124d-125b; 

13Sa-137a,c; 152a-d; 161d-163'a 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d , 

3. Method in'mathemaiics: the model of math- 
ematical thought 

7 Plato: M(?np, 179d-183a / Republic, bk vi, 

, , 387b-d / Theaetetus, 515b-c 
. r8 Aristotle : 'Prior Analytics, bk 1 , ch 41 
■ 32-5o“4] 63c /'Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 10 
104d-10Sd / Physics, bk ii, ch 9 [20o“i5-29j 
2 / 10 - 6 . J Metaphysics, bk iii, ch 2 [996“22- 
36j 514d-515a; bk ix, cH ip [io5i‘'22-34] 
S77b-c;,BK,xi, ck 3 [io6i®29-'’4] S89c; bk 
XIII, ch 3 609a-610a 

. . 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3 [iii2'’20-24J 
3S'8d 

.,f 11 .Archimedes: Method 569a-592a esp S69b- 
570a ' . , ' 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a-c; 59b-c 
28 Galileo; Two ‘N ew Sciences, fourth day, 
252a-b 

39 'P,Aco-ii: - Advancement of Learning, 65b / 

■ . . Novum Organum, bk i, aph 59 112b'C 

31 Descartes: Rules la-40a,c esp 11 2a-3b, iv, 
5c-7d, xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c / Discourse, part ii, 

, 46c-48b / Meditations, 73a / Objections and 

Replies, 128a-129a / Geometry 295a-3S3b esp 
BK I, 295a'298b, bk 11, 304a-306a, 316a'317a, 

' >BK HI, 331b, 353a 

31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c 

33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-3 I71a-172b / Geometrical 
Demonstration, 430a-434a; 442a-446b / Arith- 
rnetical Triangle, 4Slb-452a; 458b-459b; 464a- 

; 466a , ; 

34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, lemma 2 and 
scHoL 168a:170a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, -BVi iv, ch ii, 
sect 9-10 311b-c; ch hi, sect 18-20 317d- 
319c passim; sect. 29-30 322c-323c passim; 

. , ch iv, sect 6^9 325a-326b; ch.vii, :sect 11, 
340c-341a; ch xii, sect t-8.358c-360c passim; 
sect i4-;i5.362d-363b; ch x'vii, sect ii 378b 
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
, ,iz.4p8a-b; sECT 19 410c ;, sect 118-132 436b- 
439c passim - ■ - : ■ , . 

'57 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sncT rv, div 20 
; " 458a-b; sect VII, pi'v 48 470d-471c; SECT XII, 

' ' • ' Diy '131 508d-509a ., . 

‘‘36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, il8b-119a 
42 Kant: Pure Reason', 5a-8d; 17d-18d; 46a-b; 
211c-218d / Practical Reason, '302d-303b; 
330d-331a / Science of Right, 399a-b • 

/ A3 .tAvLC'.. Liberty, 283d-284a ' 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b 
51 Tolstoy: ‘War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; 

EPILOGUE li, 69Sb-c '• ■ ' 

53 James: Psychology', 17Sa-176a; 874a-878a 

-ia. The conditions and character of demonstra- 
tion in. mathematics: the use of .defini- 
. tions, postulates, axioms, hypotheses 

7 Plato: Meno, 183b'C / Republic, bk vi, 386d- 
'388a; -BK vii,:397c-d 

8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk 1, ch 41 [49’* 
32-37] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 1 
[7i“i-i 6] 97a-b; ch 2 [72“22-24] 98d; ch 5 

' 101b-102b; ch 10 104d-105d; ch 12 106c-107c; 

ch ■ 23 [84’’6-9] llSb-c; ch 24 [85‘'20-3i] 
116b-c; [85*>4-i4] ll6d-117a; [86''22-3o] 117d- 
118a; CH 31 I87'^33-39j 120a; bk ii, CH 3 [91“!- 
5] 124b; CH 7 [92''i2-25] 126c-d; ch 9 [93'’2i- 
25] I28a-b / Topics, bk i, ch i [ioi® 5 -i 7] 
143c-d; BK V, CH 4 [132^32-34] 183b; bk vi, 
CH 4 [i4i‘‘3-22] 194d-195a; bk vii, CH 3 [153*6- 
. iij 208a-b; BK viii, CH I [157*1-3] 213a; CH 3 
[i 58'’29-159 “i] 215c / Sophistical Refutations, 
ch II [I7i*>i2-i8]236b;[i7i*'34-i72*7]236d/ 
Physics, BK II, CH 9 [200*15-29] 277c-d / 
Heavens, in, ch 4 \r,o 2 Popj-'yt\ 394a / 
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 [996*21-36] 514d- 
515a; [996^18-21] 515b; ch 3 [998*25-27] 
517a; bk v, ch 3 [ioi4“36-’'i] S34c; bk vii, 
CH 10 [1036*2-13] 559b-c; bk xi, ch 3 [1061“ 
29-*’4] 589c; ch 4 [io6i’^i7-25] 589d-590a; ch 
7 [io63’'36-io64“9] 592b; bk xiii, ch 2 [1077'’ 
i]-CH .3 [1078*32] 608d-609d; bk xiv, ch 2 
[1089*22-26] 621c-d 

9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 6 
■> [742'’23-33] 283d-284a / Ethics, bk vii, ch 8 

.[1151*15-19] 402a 

11 Euclid: Elements la-396b esp bk i, defini- 
tions-common notions la-2a 
11 Archimedes; Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, defi- 
NiTioNS-AssuMPTioNS 404a-b / Spirals, 484b 
/ Quadrature of the Parabola, S27a-b / Method, 
S69b-570a; prop i 571a-572b esp 572b 
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 85, 
A 8, REP 2 460b-461b j 
23 'Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a-c; 
59b-c 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, Ib-c 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
252a-b 

31 Descartes: Rules, li, 3a; xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c 
/ Discourse, part i, 43b-c; part 11, 46d; 47b-c; 

' PART IV, 52d-53a / Meditations, 70b-d; 73a; 

Chapter , 52 : MATHEMATICS 

THE GREAT IDEAS ‘ Zb to -{a 

(3. Method in mathematics; the model of mathe- 
matical thought, ia. The conditions and 
character of demonstration in mathematics: 
the use of definitions, postulates, axioms, 
hjpotheses.) 

V, 93a-d / Objections and Replies, 128a-d / 
Geometry, bk n, 304a'b; 316a-b; bk iti, 353a 

33 Pascal: Pensecs, 1-5 171a-173a / Vacuum, 
365b-366a: 373a-b / Geometrical Demonstra- 
tion, 430a-434a; 442a-446b / Arithmetical 
Triangle, 4SIb-452a; 458b-459b; 464a-466a 

34 Newtom: Principles, la-b 

34 Huygens: Light, pref, S51b-SS2a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi, 
SECT 4 166a-b: BK IV, ch i, sect 9 308c-309b; 
CH n, sect 9-io311b-c: ch hi, sect 29, 322c; 
CH vn, SECT II, 340c-34Ia; ch xii, sect 1-8 
358c-360c passim; sect 14-15 362d-363b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
12 408a-b; sect 15-16 409a'd; sect 118 
436b-c 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
48 470d-471c; sect xh, div 131 508d-509a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 17d-18d; 46a'b: 68a-69c: 
9Ic-d; IlOa; llOd-llla; 2nc-218d / Practical 
Reason, 302d-303b; 330d-331a / Pref. Meta- 
physical Elements of Ethics, 376c-d 

43 Federalist: number 31, 103c 
43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445b-c 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b 
S3 James: Psychology, 869a-870a; 874a-878a 

3b. The role of construction: its bearing on 
proof, mathematical existence, and the 
scope of mathematical inquiry 

7 Plato: Meno, 180b-182c / Republic, bk vi, 
387b-c 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 10 [279*’32- 
aSo^ia] 371b-c / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9 
(i05i“22-34] S77b-c 

II Euclid: Elements, bk i, postulates, 1-3 2a; 
PROP i 2b-3a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 267a-b 
31 Descartes: Rules, xiv-xviii 28a-39d / 
Geometry, bk ii, 304a-306a; 316a-b; bk hi, 
331b-332b 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 373a'b 

34 Newton: Principles, la-b 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 31b-d; 68a'69c; 86b-c; 
9Ic-d: 94b-9Sa: 211c-215a: 217c-d / Science 
of Right, 399a-b / Judgement, 551a-SS3c 
53 James: Psychology, 673b 

3c. Analysis and synthesis: function and vari- 
able 

9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3 (iii2’’20-24j 
358d 

11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk ii, 
PROP 1 434b-435b; prop 3-7 437a-443b / 
Method, 569b-570a: prop i, 572b 
11 Apollonius: Conics, bk ii, prop 44-47 710b- 

713a; prop 49-51 714b-726a; bk hi, prop 54- 
56 793b-798b 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c-7a; vi 8a-I0a; xii, 
20d'23b; 24a-b; xiii 25b-27d; xiv, 31a-33b: 
xvi-xxi 33d-40a,c / Objections and Replies, 
128a-d / Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 296b- 
297b, 298b-304a, bk h, 308a-314b 

33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration^t^ZQa 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma 19 57b-S8b 
/ Optics, BK III, S43a'b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, 
sect 15 363a-b; ch xvii, sect ii 378b 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistr)’, pref, la; 2b 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b; 196a- 
251b 

3d, Symbols and formulae: the attainment of 
generality 

8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 41 
[49’'32-37] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 
10 l76'’39-77“2] 105d 
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832a 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, S6a 
31 Descartes: Rules, xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c / Dis- 
course, PART II, 46d; 47b-d / Geometry 295a- 
353b esp bk i, 295a-298b, bk 11, 314a-b, bk 
HI, 353a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
SECT 19 318b-319a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
16 409b-d; sect 121-122 436d-437c 
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 68a-69c; 211d-212a; 
212d-213a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172b-173b; 181a-b; 
233b-240b 

4. Mathematical techniques 

4a, The arithmetic and algebraic processes 

8 Aristotle: Topics, bk viii, ch 14 [i63’’23-28] 
222b 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk vii-ix 127a-190b 
11 Archimedes: Measurement of a Circle, prop 
3 448b-4Slb / Conoids and Spheroids, lem- 
ma 45Sb-456a; lemma to prop 2 456b-457b 
/ Spirals, PROP lo-ii 488a-489b / Sand- 
Reckoner 520a-526b 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk r, 814b-821d 
26 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 990a-b 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56a; 58a-b 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second' day, 
193b-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, xvi 33d-35c; xviii 36b- 
39d / Discourse, part ii, 46d; 47b-d / 
Geometry, bk i, 295a-296a 
33 Pascal: Arithmetical Triangle 447a-473b esp 
451b-452a, 458b-459b, 464a-466a / Corre- 
spondence with Fermat 474a-487a passim 
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch 
XVII, sect II 378b 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 
19 410c; sect 121-122 436d-437c 

4^ to 5 

42 Kant: 'Reason, 17d-18d; 68a-69c; 212d- 
213a;.217c'd 

S3 James: Psychology, 874b-876b. 

4i. The operations of geometry 

7 Plato: Mend, 180b-183c / Republic, bk vi, 

387b-c' ■ . ' . 

8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7 [ 7 *’ 29 - 33 ] 12c-d 
11 Euclid: Elements, tsk. i-iv la-80b esp bk i, 

POSTULATES 2a, PROP 1-4 2b-4b, prop 9-12 
7a-9a, prop 22-23 13b-15a, prop 31 19b, 

, PROP 42 24b‘-25a, prop 44-46 25b-28a, bk ii, 
PROP 14 40a-b; bk vi 99a-126a esp prop 9-13 
lO0b-lO9a, PROP 18 112a-b, prop 25 119a-b, 
■PROP 28-29 121a-123a; bk xi-xni 301a-396b 
11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i-h 
403a-446a / Measurement of a Circle 447a- 
451b / Conoids and Spheroids 452a-481b / 
^Spirals 482a-S01a / Quadrature of the Parabola 
S27a-537b / Boo\ of Lemmas 561a-568b 
11 Apollonius: Conics 603a-804b esp bk i, 
PROP 11-13 61Sa-620a 

28 Galileo: Ttao New Sciences, first day, 

. 149d-150d ' 

31 Descartes: Rules, xvi 33d-35c; xviii 36b- 
'3gd ! 'Discourse, part iv, 52'd-53a / Geometry 
295a-3S3b esp bk i, 295a-296a, 297b-298b, 
bk II, 304a-308a 

34 Nev^ton: Principles, la-b; bk i, lemma 15- 
' ' PROP ' 29 , scHOL 50a-75b esp lemma 19 S7b- 
58b 

42 Kant: Judgement, S51a-SS2a 
S3 James: Psychology, SSOb [fn i]; 673b; 876b- 
.878a 

Ac, The use of proportions and equations 
8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 17 
• ■' ■ [99“8-io] 135a / Topics, bk viii, ch 3 [i58*’29- 
■ 35 ] 21Sc 

, 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 6 [iio6“26-36] 

3Sld-352a; bk v, ch 3 [ii 3 i‘' 3 o-'’i 5 ] 378d- 
■ .;.379b. 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk v-vi 81a-126a esp bk v, 
DEFINITIONS, 5 81a, 7 81a-b, bk vi, prop 23 
117a-b; bk vii, definitions, 20 127b; prop 
.H-14 ■134b-136a; prop 17-22 137a-140a; 
PROP 33 145a-146a; bk viii, prop 1-13 150a- 
leib; PROP 18-27 163b-170a; bk ix, prop 8-13 
• 174a-180a; prop 15-19 181a-183b; prop 35-36 
.188b-190b; bk x, prop 5-9 195a-198b; prop 
II 199b; prop 14 201a-202a; bk xi, prop 25 
■320b-321b; prop 32-34 327b-332b; prop 37 
335b-336a; bk xii 338a-368b 
. 11 Archimedes: Conoids and Spheroids, prop 4 
459b-460b 

11 Apollonius: Conicr 603a-804b passim 
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i-ii, 821d-831d; 
bk iiV 841c-848d 

’ 16 Kepler: ' Harmonies of the World, 1012b- 
. 1014b • ■ . ■ 

31 Descartes: Rules, vi 8a-10a; xiv, 28b-29a; 
xviii-xxi 36b-40a,c- / Discourse, part ii. 

47b-d / Geometry 295a'3S3b esp bk hi, 332b- 
341b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 590a-c 

4d. The method of exhaustion: the theory of 
limits and the calculus 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk x, prop i 191b-192a; 
BK XII, PROP 2 339a-340b;-PRop 10-12 351b- 
359a; prop 18 367a-368b 

• 11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, as- 
sumptions, 5 404b; PROP 13-14 411a-414a; 
prop 33-34 424b-427a; prop 42 431b-432b; 
PROP 44 433a-b / Measurement of a Circle, 
PROP I 447a-448a / Conoids and Spheroids, 
PROP 4 4S9a-460b; prop 21-22 470a-471b; 
PROP 25-30 473a-479b / Spirals, prop 18-20 
492b-49Sb; prop 24-27 496b-500a / Equilib- 
rium of Planes, bk i, prop 6-7 503b-S04b / 
Quadrature of the Parabola S27a-537b esp 
PROP 16 533b-S34a, prop 24 S37a-b / Method 
569a-S92a passim 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 973a-97Sa; 979b- 
983 b 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
193b-194d; third day, 205b-d; 224b-c 

31 Descartes: Geometry, bk it, 316b-317a 

33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 39Sa-b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma i-ii and 
SCHOL 25a-32a esp lemma 11 , schol, 31a-b; 
BK II, lemma 2 and schol 168a-170a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172b; 177a; 181a'b; 
221a-248b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; 
epilogue ii, 695b 

5. The applications of mathematics to physical 
phenomena: the utility of mathematics 

7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c; bk viii, 
403b-d; bk ix, 424d-42Sb / Timaeus, 448b- 
450a; 453b-454a / Statesman, 585a-b / Phile- 
bus, 633c-d / Laws, bk v, 691d-692a; 695c- 
697a; bk vii, 728b-730d 

8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 9 
[ 76 “ 3 - 25 ] I04b-d; ch 13 [ 78 '’ 3 i- 79 "i 6 ] 108b-c; 
ch 27 [ 87 * 32 - 33 ] 119b / Physics, bk ii, ch 2 
[i 94 “ 7 -ii] 270b-c; bk vii, ch 5 333a-d / 

: Heavens, bk ii, ch 14 [ 297 * 4 - 7 ] 388c / Meteor- 

ology, BK III, ch 3 477a-478a; ch 5 480a- 
‘iSlc/ Metaphysics, bkiii, ch2[997’’i2-998*i9] 
516b-d 

9 Aristotle: Gait of Animals, ch 9 247a-248a 
/ Politics, BK V, CH 12 [ 1316 * 1 - 17 ] 518d-519a 

I .11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of Planes 502a- 
519b / Floating Bodies 538a-560b 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812d-813a 

14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 2S2a-255a 

16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 

. • Spheres, bk i, 510b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 964b-965a 

. 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c- 
28c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29 650d- 
651c - 

60 . THE GREAT IDEAS 5ato5b 

(5. The applications of mathematics to physical 
phenomena: the utility of mathematics.)- 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part j-ii, q 35, 
’ ' ' A 8, ANs 779C'7S0c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part ii-ii, q 9, 
: , ■ ' A 2, REP 3 424b-42Sa 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan , ‘pakt 1 , 73b; part iv, 
267a-b; 268c-d ■ 

24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagniel, bk iv, 

;■ 278b 

...28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131d- 
■I32a; second day-fourth day 178a-260a,c 
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46b-c 
; 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a-b; xiv, 31b-d / 
•Discourse,. Vi\KT i, 43b-c / Objections and Re- 
- , plies, 169c-I70a / Geometry, bk ii, 322b-331a 
34 Newton: Principles, la-2a: def vm 7b'8a; 
• cOROL 11 lSa-16b:. BK I, prop 69, schol, 
■ I3Ia;iBKlii 269a-372a 
34 Huygens: Light 551a-619b 
■, 3 S'Berkelev: Human Knowledge, sect 120 
436d; sect 131 439b-c 

, '35 HuME: -//HWfln Understanding, sect iv, div 
27 460c-d 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78b; part hi, 94b- 
I03a 

40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 661c-662c 
42 1 Kant: Pure Reason, 68a-69c / Practical Reason, 
300d [fn i]; 330d-331a / Judgement, SSla-SS2a 
.•tf4S: Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-173b; 17Sb; 
177a-2Slb esp 183a-184a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 831 b-c 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; bk 
XIV, S89c-590c; 609b; epilogue ii, 694d-695c 
•53' James: Psychology, 348a'359a; 882a-8S4b 

5«, The art of measurement 

■5 Aristophanes: Birds (992-1020] 555a-b 
, 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 70b-c; bk iv, 
139b-c 

7 Plato: Republic , bk x, 431b'd / Statesman , 
, ■ 594a-59Sa / Philebus , 633a-634d / Laws , bk 
' V,' 691d-692a; 695c-697a 
, 8 Aristotle: Physics , bk iv, ch 12 [22o*’i5-3i] 
, 300c-d; oil 14 [223'’i2-224“r] 303c-d; bk vii, 
• - cii 4 330d-333a / Heavens , bk ii, ch 14 
' »[298'‘i5-2o] 389d / Metaphysics , bk hi, ch 2 
,, ' l997'’27-33] 516c; bk v, ch 6 [ioi6'’i8-3i] 

537b; BK X, cn i [i052'’i5-i053“3i] S79a- 
, ■■ ■ S80a 

-ll Euclid: Elements, bk v 81a-98b esp defini- 
. ■ tjons, 5 81a, 7 81b; bk vii, definitions, 20 
127b 

11 hKQMwzozs: Sand-Rec\oner 52Qa-S2Sti < 

13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [ 847 - 853 ] 233b-234a 
' 16 Ptolemy; Almagest, bk i, I4a-28b; bk ii, 
38b-39b: bk v, 143a-144a; 16Sa-176a; bk vii- 
viH, 233a-258b 

•, 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly 
r ':Spheres, bk i, 532b-5S6b; bk ii, S58b-5S9b; 
567b; S86b-621b: bk iv, 705a-725a 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part i, q 3, a 
5, REP 2 17c-l8b; q 10, A 6 , ANs'and rep 4 4Sc- 
46d; Q 66,'^a 4, rep 3 348d-349d ■ • 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk iv, 8Sc-89c; bk v, 
92a-95a ' 

28 Galileo:' Two New Sciences, first’ day, 
I36d-137c; 148d-149c; 164a-166c;-TniRD day, 
207d-208c 

28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 286c-288c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk.ii, aph 44-48 
175d-188b 

31 Descartes; Rules, xiv, 31b-33b / Geometry, 
BK I, 296a 

33 Pascal; Great Experiment 382a-389b ' 

34 Newton: Principles, la-b; laws .of motion, 
SCHOL, 20a'22a; bk ii, general schol 211b- 
219a; prop 40, schol 239a'246b 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, SS4b-557b 

35 Locke; Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvt, 
SECT 8 167c 

39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 14b 

42 Kant: Judgement, 497a-498d esp 498b-d 

45 Lavoisier; Elements of Chemistry, part i, 
I4a-c; 33b-36a; 41a-44d; part hi, 87d-90a; 
91a-9Sa; 96b-103b ' , 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 184b-185b; 249a- 
25Ib 

50 Marx: Capital, 20 b 

5b. Mathematical physics: the mathematical 
structure of nature 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 448b-450a; 453b-454a; 
458a-460b 

8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 9 
104b-d; CH 13 [ 78 *’ 3 i- 79 “i 6 ] 108b-c / Physics, 
BK II, CH 2 [i94“7-ii] 270b-c / Heavens, bk 
III, ch I [ 299 “i- 3 oo“i 9 ] 390b-391c / Meta- 
physics, BK I, fcn 9 \g^ 2 '' 2 g~^gi] SlOc-d; bk ii, 
ch 3 [ 995 “i 5 -i 7 ] 513d; bk hi, ch 2 [ 997 ’'i 2 - 
99 S“i 9 ] 516b-d; bk xh, ch 8 [io 73 '’i-i 7 ] 
603d-604a; bk xiii, ch 3 609a-610a 

11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-d; 813d- 
814a 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, Sb- 6 a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 863b-872b / Har- 
monies of the World, 1023b-1080b passim 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part i, q i, a 
I, REP 2 3b-4a; q 32 , a i, rep 2 17Sd-178a; 
PART I-II, Q 35, A 8, ANS 779c-780c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part ii-ii, q 9, 
A 2, REP 3 424b-425a 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d;'PART iv, 
268c-d 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 
13Ib-132a; 133b; fourth day, 245b-d: 
252a-b ' . ■ 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46b-c / 
Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 8 I40b 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a-c / Discourse, part 
I, 43b-c; PART III, sod / Objections and Replies, 
169c-170a 

33 Pascal: PensSes, 119 19Sa 

5 h Chapter 52 : MATHEIvIATICS ^61 

42 Judgement, 55is.-552k '- ' ’’ 

45 ¥ovm%%: Thebry 6fHeat,l(>9a-h‘, 172a-173b; 

175b; 177a; 183a'184a - 

,45 Faraday: ;n jBfec/na/)', 831 b-c ’ ; 

52 Dostoevsky: Brothers'- Karamazov^ .bk v, 
121 a-b 

53 James: Psychol6gy, 'l2Ba-hi.34%i-ZS9a\ 675b; 

■ ■876a-b;882a'884b * ' '
