CHAPTER: Mechanics

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION' 

M echanics, taken as the name for just 
one of the physical sciences, would 
merit no place on a small list of basic, focal 
terms. But the word “mechanics” means more 
than that. In the tradition of western thought 
it signifies a whole philosophy of nature, and it 
connotes a set of fundamental principles under 
which, it has been thought, all the physical 
sciences can be unified. 

The principles of mechanics have been ap- 
plied not only in statics and dynamics, which 
arc concerned with the action and reaction of 
bodies at rest or in motion, but also in acoustics 
and optics and the sciences of heat, magnetism, 
and electricity. They have been extended to 
astronomical phenomena to constitute what is 
called “celestial mechanics.” They have been 
thought to govern the action or motion of in- 
visible particles or waves as well as the familiar 
bodies of ordinary experience. In the range and 
variety of the phenomena it covers, mechanics 
would seem to be co-cxtenslve with physics. 
Such at least appears to be its scope at one stage 
in the development of natural science. 

We shall presently consider the dissatisfac- 
tion with the mechanical point of view which 
causes scientists in our own day to hail the 
replacement of “classical mechanics” by the 
“new physics” as a great advance in science. 
Tlie intellectual significance of this change can 
be compared with that earlier revolution in the 
17th century when the new natural science 
founded on the achievements of Galileo, Huy- 
gens, and Newton replaced the physics of Aris- 
totle which had long reigned as the traditional 
philosophy of nature. What Einstein calls “the 
rise and decline of the mechanical point of 
view” thus seems to provide an apt title for the 
stor)' of three stages in the history of science, in 
only one of which does the whole of physics 
appear to be dominated by mechanics. 

One way, then, of understanding the impor 
tance of mechanics is~in terms of that stoiy 
Other chapters, such as Astronoxh’, Change 
Element, Matter, Physics, Space, and Tnn 
— and perhaps also Cause and Hypothesis- 
tell part of that story, especially the part whid 
turns on the differences between Aristotle' 
physics (which is neither experimental noi 
mathematical) and modern physics (which i 
both). This chapter focuses on issues which fa!! 
largely within modern physics— issues belong' 
ing to that part of the story which, in the greal 
books, begins with Galileo, Huygens, and New 
ton and runs to Fourier and Faraday. The stot) 
itself does not end there, but the point towhicli 
Faraday carries it suggests the sequel in Clerli 
Maxwell and Einstein, just as Galileo’s point ol 
departure reflects antecedents in Aristotle. The 
great books state the issues sufficiently well, 
though they do not tell the whole story. That 
can be fully documented only by a host of sup- 
plementary scientific classics in various fields, 
such as the works listed in the Additional 
Readings. 

In modern times it is accepted that physics 
should be both experimental and mathematial. 
No one questions the ideal of unifying the 
physical sciences and finding the unity in na- 
ture’s laws. But the question is whether that 
unification can be achieved under the aegis of 
mechanics; and the issue is whether physics 
should gather its e.xperimental findings to- 
gether under purely mathematical formula- 
tions or should also try to give those mathe- 
matical formulae a mechanical interpretation. 

The issue involves more than a question of 
scientific method. It concerns the ultimate aim 
of natural science and the kind of concepts it 
should employ to fulfill this aim. Should the 
scientist seek to do no more than describe the 

Chapter 5 , 4 : MECHANICS 81 

phenomena. of nature'in terms of the simplest 
and most universal mathematical relations? 
Or should he go beyond .description, to an ex- 
planation of the . phenomena in terms of their 
causes? (’•. ■ •, i. -..i!; 

When the issue is thus, stated as a choice be- 
tween. being content with’ description or striv- 
ing for explanation,; it appears to be broader 
than the. question .whether physics should or 
should, not 'be mechanical; Even granted that 
explanation. is desirable, does it necessarily fol- 
low'that physical explanation must employ the 
principles 'and concepts of. mechanics? Aris- 
totle’s physics, it can be argued, provides a 
negative answer. His various, physical treatises 
represent a 'natural science which tries to ex- 
plain the phenomena, without ' doing so me- 
chanically, ijust. as it tries, to describe the phe- 
nomena without'doing so mathematically." 

That the connection'of these two features of 
Aristotle’s physics is, not accidental seems to be 
indicated' by ;the conjunction of their opposites 
in modern! physics. 'When in the 17th century 
the physicist describes natural phenomena in 
mathematical terms; he explains them — if he 
tries to explain them,' at .all — in mechanical 
terms. “The laws of Mechanics,” writes Des- 
cartes, “are the. laws of Nature;” Huygens 
opens his Treatise on. Light by referring to op- 
tics as the kind ofscience “in which Geometry 
is applied to matter”; but he at once. expresses 
the desire to advance this branch of mathe- 
matical physics by investigating “the origin 
and the causes”- of the truths already known, in 
order fo provide “better and. more satisfectory 
explanations;’^ Such explanations, he thinks, 
will be found only, if we. conceive “the causes 
of all natural ■ effects in terms of mechanical 
motions.” He- declares it his opinion that “we 
must necessarily do, this, i or else renounce all 
hopes of ever , comprehending anything in 
Physics.” 

! Galileo and Newton,- as will be noted, do not 
unqualifiedly share Huygens’ view that ft is 
proper 'for the -■ mathematical physicist to in- 
quire about -causes.. JBut' they, would- .agree that 
if any explanation i^ to,-be:giyen for laws of.na- 
ture expressed ini mathematical form, one or 
another type of mechanical hypothesis would 
be required 'to state :the caused 'Postponing for 
the moment the consideration of whether .the 

investigation of causes belongs to mathematical 
physics, let us examine what is involved in giv- 
ing a mechanical explanation -of anything: and 
why, this type of explanation tends to occur in 
the causal interpretation:: of mathernatically 
formulated laws of nature. ,- 

-Two .points seem to constitute -the essence. of 
mechanical theory.' Both are fundamental no- 
tions 'and- both are philosophical, in the sense 
•that they do not seem -to result from the find- 
ings of experimental research. The first point is 
an exclusive emphasis upon efficient causes, 
which means the . exclusion of other types of 
causes, especially ;final and formal .causes, from 
mechanical explanation. As the chapter on 
Cause indicates,, efficient causality consists in 
one thing acting on another. But.'not every sort 
of action by which one thing affects another is 
mechanical. According to the, doctrine, an ef- 
ficient cause is mechanical only if it consists in 
'a moving body acting on another by impact, or 
if it consists in a force exerted by one body to 
cause motion in another or to change its quan- 
tity or direction. The notion of a force which 
does not work through the impact of one mov- 
ing thing, upon another raises the problem of 
action-at-a-distance to which we shall return 
subsequently. 

.The second fundamental point is an exclu- 
sive, emphasis upon quantities. Mechanical ex- 
.planation makes no references to qualities or 
other attributes of things. Paradoxically, this 
point is sometimes expressed in -terms of a dis- 
tinction between primary apd secondary qual- 
ities'^ but? as the chapters on Quantity and 
Quality point out, the primary qualities are 
all quantities.- According to -Locke, they are 
“solidity, extension, figure, motion or, rest, and 
number”: according to Newton, “the universal 
qualities of all bodies whatsoever” are “exten- 
sion, hardness, impenetrability, mobility, and 
inertia.” Others, i -like Galileo and Descartes, 
•give still different enumerations, but the point 
remains that the only attributes of bodies which 
.have.imechanical significance are measurable 
quantities.' Such secondary qualities, for exam- 
ple, as colors and tones belong to the physical 
-world, (as it, is mechanically conceived) only by 
Iteduction to the local motion of particles or 
Iwaves -.-having certain velocities, lengths, or 
.other, quantitative attributes; 

We need not be concerned here with what 
sort of reality is assigned to secondary' qualities, 
or how their presence in experience is ac- 
counted for. These problems are discussed in 
other chapters, such as Quauti' and Sekse. 
However they are solved, the philosophy of 
mechanism excludes from the physical world 
whatever docs not consist in, or cannot be re- 
duced to, quantities of matter (or mass), mo- 
tion, or force, and such related quantities as 
those of time and space (or distance). 

The two points of mechanical theory are ob- 
viously connected, for the kind of cause which 
mechanical explanation employs to the exclu- 
sion of all others consists in a quantity of mo- 
tion or of force. Just as obviously, mechanical 
explanation, dealing only in quantities and in 
causes which are quantitatively measurable, is 
precisely the type of explanation which would 
seem to be appropriate if one felt called upon 
to give an interpretation of the mathematical 
relationships which the mathematical physicist 
formulates as laws of nature. These mathemat- 
ical laws are after all statements of the relations 
among physical quantities which have been 
subjected to experimental determination or 
measurement. 

As A PHILOSOPHICAL theoty the mechanical 
view of nature antedates modern physical sci- 
ence. The atomistic conception of the world, 
which Lucretius expounds, contains both of the 
fundamental points of mechanism— the doc- 
trine of primary and secondary qualities and 
tile doctrine that all effects in nature are pro- 
duced by efficient moving causes. 

The controversy over mechanism is also an- 
cient. Aristotle denies both points of doctrine 
in his criticism of the Greek atomists, Democri- 
tus and Leucippus; and in the exposition of his 
own physical theories he states an opposite 
view. To qualities and qualitative change he 
assigns physical reality. He explains change in 
terms of four types of causes, not one. He does 
not exclude the mcchanic.al type of cause in 
his explanation of local motion. On the con- 
traiy, with respect to local motion his theory 
that a body in motion must be directly acted 
upon by a moving cause throughout the period 
of its motion, seems to be more mechanical 
th.in the modern theory that no cause need be 

assigned for the continuing uniform motion of 
a body along a straight line but only fora 
change in its direction or velocity. 

What is new in modern times is not the phih 
osophical doctrine of mechanism, but the in- 
troduction of mechanical explanation into ex- 
perimental and mathematical physics, and the 
controversy about whether it belongs thereof 
can be defended as useful. The so-called rise 
and decline of the mechanical view in modern 
physics is connected with experimental discov- 
eries and mathematical formulations. Itisnotan 
alternation between success and failure on the 
level of philosophical argument concerning 
the ultimate truth of mechanical conceptions. 
When these conceptions are rejected, ‘it is not 
for the sake pf returning to opposite notions in 
physical theory, such as those of Aristotle, but 
rather because, as Einstein says, “science did 
not succeed in carrying out the mechanical 
program convincingly, and today no physicist 
believes in the possibility of its fulfillment.” 

There is a touch of prophecy in the conversa- 
tion Swift imagines taking place between Aris- 
totle and the physicists of the 17th century, 
According to Swift, when Aristotle was con- 
fronted with Descartes and Gassendi, he “freely 
acknowledged his own mistakes in natural phi- 
losophy, because he proceeded in many thing; 
upon conjecture, as all men must do; and In 
found that Gassendi, who had made the doc- 
trine of Epicurus as palatable as he could, and 
the vortices of Descartes, were equally exploded 
He predicted the same fate to attraction, where- 
of the present learned are such zealous as- 
sorters. He said that new systems of nature 
were but new fashions, which would vary in 
every age; and even those who pretend to dem- 
onstrate them from mathematical principles, 
would flourish but a, short period of time, and 
be out of vogue when that was determined.” 

Both Galileo and Descartes re-state the phil- 
osophical doctrine which first appears' in an- 
cient atomism, but both re-state it in a way 
that suggests its utility for an e.xpcfimcntal 
investigation of nature. It is significant that 
Galileo’s statement occurs in the context of his 
concern -ivith the nature and causes of heat. He 
wishes to explain, he writes in 'll Saggiatore, 
why he thinks that “motion is the cause of 

Chapter 54; MECHANICS 83 

heat.” To do this he finds it'necessary to ques- 
tion a prevalent notion “which is very remote 
from the truth” — the belief that “there is a 
true' accident, affection, or quality, really in- 
herent in the substance by which we feel our- 
selves heated.” He denies the physical reality 
of heat as an inherent quality of bodies on the 
same ground that he dtnies the physical reality 
of other qualities'. “I do 'not believe,” he de- 
clares, “that there exists anything in external 
bodies for exciting tastes, smells, and sounds, 
but size, shape, quantity, and motion, swift or 
slow; 'and if ears, tongues, and noses were re- 
moved, I am of the opinion' that shape, quan- 
tity, and motion would remain, but there 
would be an end of smells, tastes, and sounds, 
which, apart from the living creature, I regard 
as mere words.” 

Descartes’ statement of the doctrine is bold- 
er, perhaps, in its suggestion of a mechanical 
program for physical research. “Colors, odors, 
savors, and the rest of such things,” he writes, 
are “merely sensations existing in my thought.” 
They differ from the real properties of bodies 
just as much as “pain differs from the shape and 
motion of the instrument which inflicts it.” 
The true physical properties, such as “gravity, 
hardness, the power of heating, of attracting 
and purging” consist, in Descartes’ opinion, 
“solely in motion or its absence, and in the con- 
figuration and situation of [bodily] parts.” 

As a philosophical doctrine, the mechanical 
view is not necessarily tied to atomism. Des- 
cartes opposes' atomism as plainly as does Aris- 
totle. Furthermore, Newton, who is ari atomist, 
disagrees with both Descartes and the Greek 
atomists on one fundamental point in mechan- 
ical theory. The ancient atomists make the ac- 
tual motion of one particle in collision with 
another the indispensable cause of a change of 
motion in the latter. Descartes likewise requires 
one motion to be the cause of another and ex- 
plainsgravity in terms of actual bodily motions. 
Newton rejects Descartes’ mechanical hypoth- 
esis of material vortices as the cause of gravita- 
tion. He seems to have this in mind, and to put 
Descartes in the same class with Aristotle, when 
he says that “hypotheses, whether metaphysi- 
cal or physical, whether of occult qualities or 
mechanical, have no place in experimental 
philosophy.” 

The force of gravity, according to Newton, is 
a power of attraction which one body exercises 
on another without the first being in motion or 
coming into contact with the second. Newton 
acknowledges the problem of.action-at-a-dis- 
tance w'hich his theory raises. For the most part 
he lets it stand as a problem which does not af- 
fect the mathematical results of his work. But 
in the Queries he attaches to his Optics he sug- 
gests, by way of solution, the hypothesis of an 
ether as the continuous medium through which 
gravitational force is exerted. In the opinion of 
later physicists, Newton’s hypothesis is no less 
mechanical than Descartes’. Nor does there 
seem to be any philosophical grounds for pre- 
ferring one hypothesis to the other. 

But Newton’s quarrel with Descartes is not 
on a philosophical issue. It turns on which me- 
chanical conception, if any at all is to be of- 
fered, fits best with the mathematical laws of 
terrestrial and celestial motion which Newton 
had succeeded in formulating as universal laws 
of nature. Those mathematical laws, moreover, 
had the merit of fitting the observed phenom- 
ena and so, of realizing the scientific ideal of 
accurate description stated in the most gen- 
eralized form. Newton’s triumph over Des- 
cartes, then, is a triumph in mathematical and 
experimental physics, not a triumph in philos- 
ophy. 

Pope’s couplet 

Nature and Nature’s Laws lay hid in Night, 

God said, Let Newton be, and ail was light 

records that triumph, and celebrates the illu- 
mination of nature by the mechanical as well 
as the mathematical principles of Newton’s 
ph)'sics. Newton’s picture of the world domi- 
nates the mind of a century and controls its 
science. Locke speaks of “the incomparable 
Mr. Newton” and of “his never enough to be 
admired book”; Hume refers to him as the 
philosopher who, “from the happiest reasoning 
. . . determined the laws and forces, by which 
the revolutions of the planets are governed and 
directed”; and even Berkeley, who challenges 
his theories of space, time, and attraction, re- 
grets that he must take issue with “the author- 
ity of so great a man,” a man “whom all the 
world admires” as the author of “a treatise on 
Mechanics, demonstrated and applied to 
nature.” 

84 THE GREAT IDEAS 

Neh^ton’s achievement is to have accom- 
plished an extraordinar)' synthesis of all that 
was good in previous scientific work, and a 
sweeping criticism of all that was considered 
stultifying. That so many and such varied 
phenomena should be organized mathemati- 
cally by a theor)’ as simple as Newton's, is alto- 
gether impressive. Equally astonishing is the 
predictive power of Newton’s laws and the e.\- 
planaiory power of his mechanics, not to men- 
tion the teclinological fruits of die latter in 
mechanical engineering and the invention of 
machinerj' of all sorts. Whatever diflicultics arc 
implicit in the Newtonian mechanics — sub- 
sequently to become, with new discoveries, 
more and more perplexing — the scope and 
grandeur of Newton’s book gives mechanics a 
commanding position with respect to the fu- 
ture of science for at least two centuries. 

In the century between the publication of 
Newton’s Mathematical Prinaples and the pub- 
lication in 1787 of Lagrange’s Mecamqtte analy 
iique, “the notion of the mechanical explanation 
of all the processes of nature,” writes White- 
head, “finally hardened into a dogma of science.” 
In tlic next century, the meclianical dogma 
spreads from physics and chemistry through- 
out the whole domain of natural science — into 
biology and psychology— and even beyond 
that, into economics and sociology. Books bear 
such titles as The Mechanistic Conception of 
Life, The Mechanism of Hitman Behavior, So- 
cial Statics, Social Dynamics. At the end of the 
iptli century, James notes the conquests which 
arc being made on all sides by the mechanical 
idea. “Once tlie possibility of some kind of 
mechanical interpretation is established,” he 
writes, “Mechanical Science, in her present 
mood, will not hesitate to set her' brand of 
ownership upon the matter.” 

James himself testifies to the persuasiveness 
and suceess of the mechanical dogma, though 
not without some resentment. “The modern 
mechanico-physical philosophy, of which we 
arc so proud,” he says, “because it includes the 
nebular cosmogony, the conservation of ener- 
gy, the Idnetic theory of heat and gases, etc-, 
etc., begins by saying that llic only facts arc col- 
locations and motions of primordial solids, and 
the only laws the changes in motion which 
changes in collocation bring. The ideal whicli 

this philosophy strives after,” he continues, 
“is a mathematical world-formula, by .which, 
if all the collocations and motions at a given 
moment were known, it would be possible to 
reckon those of any wished-for future moment, 
by simply considering the necessary geometri- 
cal, arithmetical, and logical implications.” 

Laplace had in fact pictured a lightning cal- 
culator who, given the total configuration of 
the world at one instant, would be able to.bring 
the whole future “present to his eyes.” And 
James quotes Helmholtz to the effect that the 
whole problem of physical science" iSi“to refer 
natural phenomena back to unchangeable at- 
tractive and repulsive forces whose intensity 
depends wholly upon distance. The solubility 
of this problem is the .condition of the com- 
plete comprehensibility of nature.’,’ 1 

In- commenting on this, James "admits that 
“the world grows more orderly, and rational 
to the mind, which passes from' one feature of 
it to another by deductive necessity, as soon as 
it conceives it as made up of so few and so sim- 
ple phenomena as bodies with, no properties 
but number and movement to and. fro.” But 
he also insists that it is “a world with a very 
minimum of rational stuff. The sentimental 
facts and relations,” he complains, “arc butch- 
ered at a blow. But the rationality yielded is so 
superbly complete in form that to many minds 
this atones for the loss, and reconciles the think- 
er to the notion of a purposeless universe, in 
which all the things and qualities men love . . . 
are but illusions of our fancy attached to acci- 
dental clouds of dust which will be dissipated 
by the eternal cosmic weather as careless as tlicy 
were formed.” - • 

r 

With the 2oth century a change occurs. Tlic 
dogma of mechanism may continue to spread 
in other sciences and gain even wider accept- 
ance as a popular philosophical creed, but 
within the domain of the physical sciences, cer- 
tain mechanical conceptions become suspect 
and a wholesale rejection of classical mechanics 
(which becomes identified witli Newtonian 
physics) is called for. 

Einstein, for example, quotes the passage 
from Helmholtz tliat James had cited, in which 
Helmholtz goes on to say that the vocation of 
physics “will be ended as soon as the reduction 

CpfAPTEH 54 :■ MECHANICS 

of natural phenomena to simple forces is 'corn- 
plete;’’, .This ‘‘mechanical view,-, most clearly 
formulated by. Helmholtz,’’ Einstein concedes, 
“played an important role in its time’’; butj he 
adds, it “appears. dull andinaive'to a twentieth 
century physicist.” ■ . . ! .. . . -r 

Eihsteih' reviews' - the':iassumptions which 
physicists had to make in order to construct a 
mechanical' theory of light, gravitation; and 
electricity.’’ “The artificial character of all these 
assumptions,” he says, ‘‘and. the necessity for 
introducing so many of them all quite inde- 
pendent of each other, was enough to shatter 
the belief in the mechanical point of view. . . . 
In the attempt to understand the phenomena 
of nature from the mechanical point. of view,” 
he continues, ^“throughout the whole develop- 
ment of science up to the twentieth century, 
it was necessary to introduce artificial 'sub- 
stances like' electric and magnetic fluids, light 
corpuscles;, or ether.” According to Einstein, 
“attempts to construct an ether in some simple 
way’-’ have been “fruitless”; but what is more 
important in his opinion, such fadures “indi- 
cate that the fault lies in the fundamental as- 
sumption that it 'is possible to explain all events 
in nature from.a mechanical point of view.” 

Does this mean that the contemporary physi- 
cist has found 'another ’and better way of ex- 
plaining nature ? Is there a non-mechanical way 
of explaining the ■ phenomena, which fits' the 
mathematical laws of experimental physics; or 
does I discarding mechanics ’mean relinquishing 
all efforts to explain nature ? ' 

Eddington suggests, an answer. “One of the 
greatest' changes in physics between the nine- 
teenth century and the present day;” he'writes, 
“has been the change in our ideal of scientific 
explanation.’ It 'was the boast of the Victorian’ 
scientist that he would not claim' to understand 
a thing until he could make a model of it; arid 
by a model he meant something constructed of 
levers, geared wheels, squirts, and other appli- 
ances familiar to the engineer. Nature in build- 
ing the' universe was supposed to be dependent 
on just the'same kind of resources as any human 
niechanicl';'. . The man who 'riould make gravi-' 
tation out of cogwheels' would hkve been a hero 
in- the Victorian age. ’’'Today, h'oweve'n'Ed-' 
dington continues, ‘‘we' do not encourage'the- 
engineer to build' the world for us' out ofiiis' 

material, but we turn to the mathematician' to 
build it out of his materiak”. ' '' ' 

■-We-may turn to the' mathematician’s con- 
struction of the world 'in'his terms; but'in-the 
tradition 'of western thought, mathematically 
formulated daws of--'riatuf6'a're not, with -the 
single exception' perhapS’of the Pythagoreans; 
regarded' as exp'lanations'of why thingS-b'ehiive 
as'tney'do or how they Work. The change from 
the-ipth -to the idth century -with re.spect'to 
“our ideal- of scientific -e'xplariation” cannot, 
then, be -the substitution of the' mathematical 
for 'the mechanical account of why and howl 
The shift from mechanics to mathematics' is 
rather a shift from explanation as the scientific 
ideal to the statement of laws which, while hav-'- 
ing maximum' generality, remain purely 'de- 
scriptive. What Eddington means by building 
the world out of the material of mathematics 
seems to 'be the same as what Galileo means, 
fout centuries earlier, when he says that thri 
book of nature “is written ih'fnathema'tical 
language.” The materials' are such symbols 
as “triangles, circles, and other geometrical 
figures.” Without the help of these, Galileo 
writes to Kepler, nature “is impossible to com- 
prehend.” 

But does the mathematical comprehension of 
nature mean a causal explanation of it? More 
explicitly than Eddington, Galileo insists that 
explanatibn-^at least in the sense of stating the 
causes — is not the business of'the mathematical' 
physicist. In-a' passage which carinot be read too 
often or examined toO closely, he names three 
opinions which the philosophers have expressed 
about “the cause of the' acceleration of natural 
motion.” Some, he says, “explain it by attrac- 
tion to the center, others to repulsion between 
the very small parts of the body, while still 
others attribute if to a certain stress in the sur- 
rounding medium 'which closes iri behind the 
falling body and drives it from one of its posi- 
tioris to another. Now all of these fantasies,” 
he continues', “arid others too,' ought to be ex- 
amined,’ but it is riot really worthwhile.” 

They ought to be examined by philosdpliefs;' 
perhaps, biit debating them is not worthwhile 
id' ‘'those sciences' where mathematical demon- 
stfatioris are applied 'to natural _ phenomena; ’’ 
Perfectly defining the'prografn of mathematical 
physics.'^Galile'o' sets himself a limited task: 

S6 THE GREAT IDEAS 

"merely to investigate and to demonstrate 
some of the properties of accelerated motion 
(whatever the cause of this acceleration may 
be).” It should be noted that of the three opin- 
ions about causes which Galileo mentions, the 
first, which anticipates Newtonian attraction, 
is no less summarily dismissed than the third, 
which summarizes the Aristotelian theory. 

“What I call Attraction,” Newton later 
writes, “may be performed by impulse or by 
some other means unknown to me. I use that 
word here to signify only in general any force 
by which bodies tend towards one another, 
whatsoever be the cause.” It is well known, he 
asserts in the same passage of the Optics, “that 
bodies act one upon another by the attractions 
of gravity, magnetism, and electricity”; but, 
he goes on, “how these attractions may be per- 
formed I do not here consider.” 

Newton’s attitude toward causes and c.\pla- 
nation would seem to be identical with Gal- 
ileo’s. Galileo calls opinions about causes “fan- 
tasies” and dismisses them; Newton calls them 
“hypotheses” and seems to banish them as 
resolutely. “Hypotheses arc not to be regarded 
in experimental philosophy,” he declares in one 
place; and in another, having just referred to 
predecessors who feigned hypotheses “for ex- 
plaining ail things mechanically,” he says that, 
on the contrary, “the main business of natural 
philosophy is to argue from phenomena with- 
out feigning hypotheses.” 

The task of the physicist who is both experi- 
mental and mathematical in his method, New- 
ton plainly states, is “to derive two or three 
general principles of motion from phenomena, 
and aftertvards to tell us how the properties 
and actions of all corporeal things follow from 
those manifest principles. [This] would be a 
very great step in philosophy, tJiough the 
causes of those principles were not yet dis- 
covered. And therefore,” he sa 3 's of his own 
work, “I scruple not to propose the principles 
of motion above mentioned, they being of very 
general extent, and leave their causes to be 
found out.” 

The two or three principles of motion men- 
tioned in this passage from the Optics arc the 
foundation of Newton’s other great work, the 
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. 
Its title indicates the clearly conceived inten- 

tion of its author to limit himself to the pro- 
gram of mathematical physics on which both he 
and Galileo seem to agree. He will not try' to 
define “the species or physical qualities of 
forces”; he will only investigate “the quantities 
and mathematical proportions of them.” In 
the General Scholium with which the Mathe- 
matical Principles concludes, Newton disavows 
once more any knowledge of the cause of gniv- 
itj'. “To us it is enough,” he says, “that gravity 
docs really' e.xist, and acts according to the 
laws which we have explained, and abundantly 
serves to account for all the motions of the 
celestial bodies, and of our sea.” Admitting that 
he has “not been able to discover the causes . . . 
of gravity from phenomena,” Newton flatly 
reiterates his policy: “I frame no hypotheses.” 

In view of this policy, how docs the name of 
Newton come to be associated with the tri- 
umph of the mechanical point of view in phys- 
ics.'’ Why do contemporary scientists like Ein- 
stein identify Newtonian physics with classical 
mechanics.? If a mathematical phy'sicist, like 
Newton or Galileo, refrains from guessing at or 
asserting causes, how can he be charged with 
having indulged in the impurity of a mechani- 
cal e.xplanation of the phenomena, and .with 
having foisted a mechanical conception of the 
universe upon manldnd? 

The answer to these questions, so far as New- 
ton is concerned, may be partly found in his 
own writings. He did not, it seems, entirely 
disavow an inquiry into the cause of attractive 
force, as in itself cither misguided or irrclcv.mt 
to science. “We must learn from the phenom- 
ena of nature,” he tells us, “what bodies attract 
one another, and wiiat arc the laws and proper- 
ties of the attraction, before we enquire the 
cause by which the attraction is performed.” 
This statement postpones, but does not c.x- 
cludc, an Inquiry into causes. In another state- 
ment, Newton even gives us a reason for the 
postponement, “In mathematics,” he says, “sve 
are to investigate the quantities of force with 
their proportions consequent upon any condi- 
tions supposed; then, when we enter upon 
physics, we compare those proportions witli 
the phenomena of nature, that we may know 
the several kinds of attractive bodies. And thb 
preparation being made, we argue more safeiy 

8S ' THE GEIEAT IDEAS 

carried with it a doctrine of natural motions to 
different natural places, drawn from the ob- 
scr%-ation of hre rising, stones dropping, air 
bubbling up through water. Such a doctrine 
would prevent the search for laws of motion 
applicable to all bodies; and the general char- 
acter of Aristotle's physics, treating qualities 
as well as quantities, seems to have discouraged 
the application of mathematics even to the 
study of local motions. 

The mathematical expression of the laws of 
motion is Galileo’s objective. His interest in 
the new astronomj' which affirmed the motion 
of the earth led liim, he told Hobbes, to the 
careful study of movements on the earth. His 
aim is simply to describe with precision the mo- 
tions to be found in a child’s play — ^stones 
dropped and stones thrown, the one thenatural 
motion of free fall, the other the violent motion 
of a projectile. It is clear to observation tliat the 
motion of a freely falling body is accelerated. 
But though, as a mathematical physicist, Gal- 
ileo refrains from asking why this is so, he is not 
satished to know simply that it is so. He wants 
to know the properties of such acceleration. 
What is the relation of the rate of increase in 
velocity to the durations and distances of the 
fall ? How much increase in velocity is acquired 
and how fast? What is the body’s velocity at 
any given point in the fall? Similarly, when 
Galileo turns to projectiles, he wants to know, 
not merely that their trajcctor}' is consistently 
curvilinear, but precisely what curve the path 
of die projectile describes. 

Galileo succeeds in answering all these ques- 
tions without being perturbed by any of the 
philosopliical perplexities connected with space 
and time; nor docs he allow questions about die 
forces involved in these motions to distract him 
from his purpose to “demonstrate everything 
by mathematical methods.” With mathemati- 
cal demonstration he combines observation and 
experiment and uses the latter to determine 
which mathematical conclusions can be ap- 
plied to nature — which principles can be em- 
pirically verified as well as mathemarically de- 
duced. 

O.N't or Galileo’s principles, however, seems 
to'outrun ordinary e.xpcricnce and to defy ex- 
perimental verification. In the interpretation 

of his e.xpcriments on inclined planes, Galileo 
expresses an insight which Newton later formu- 
lates as the Erst law of motion, sometimes called 
die “law of inertia.” It declares that “cvety 
body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform 
motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to 
change that state by forces impressed upon it.” 
Though Newton describes his method as one of 
“making experiments and observ'ations, and in 
drawing general conclusions from them by in- 
duction,” the law of inertia seems to be an e.x- 
ception; for it is difficult to say, as Hume does, 
that “we find by e.xperience that a body at rest 
or in motion continues forever in its present 
state”— that is, unless it is acted on by some 
new force. 

The condition introduced by “unless” raises 
Poincare’s question: “Have there ever been ex- 
periments on bodies acted on by no forces?” 
If not, and if they are impossible, then James 
may be right in saying that “the clemcntar}’ 
laws of mechanics” are “never matters of ex- 
perience at alh but have to be disengaged from 
under experience by a process of elimination, 
that is, by ignoring conditions which are always 
present.” Because “the idealized experiment 
[which it calls for] can never be performed,” 
the law of inertia, according to Einstein, can 
be derived “only by speculative thinking con- 
sistent with observation.” 

In any case, the first law of motion initiates a 
new departure in physics. So far as local motion 
is concerned, Aristotle and his followers look for 
the cause which keeps a moving body in motion 
or a stationary body at rest. According to Gal- 
ileo and Newton, uniform motion. continues 
naturally w'ithout cause. Only a change in the 
velocity or direction of that motion requires a 
cause, such as a force impressed upon it. 

How radical this innovation is may be judged 
from its consequences in celestial mechanics, 
which in turn lead to a completely unified 
dynamics for both celestial and terrestrial mo- 
tions. These advances arc the work of Newton’s 
mathematical genius, but the ground for them 
had been laid by the investigations of Galileo. 
Galileo had resolved the curvilinear motion of 
a projectile into the imparted rectilinear mo- 
tion and the deflecting pull of gravity. This 
composition of forces — sometimes called the 
“parallelogram law” — explains why the path of 

Chapter:54: MECHANICS 

the projectile is a' parabola. The path. of the 
planets in their orbits, Kepler had previously 
shown, is ^another xonical curve— an f. ellipse. 
But Kepler, lacking the first law of motion, 
could theorize physically about the cause of the 
planetary orbits only by looking for a force, 
projected outward from the sun,-.which'Would 
sweep around to keep the pknets moving in 
their paths. On the other hand,' a follower of 
Galileo, , as \^Ttitehead points out, would seek 
“for normal forces to deflect the direction of 
motion along the curved orbit.” He would look 
for a force pulling the planet off its own rec- 
tilinear course inward toward the sun. 

That is precisely what Newton did. When 
the problem, which others' had been, able to 
formulate,; was put' to Newton, he simply went 
to his study for the.solution. He Had solved that 
problena some years before. He had found the 
law, of the force which, attracting the .planets 
to the sun, would produce their elliptical paths 
and the other proportionalities stated in-Kep- 
ler’s purely descriptive laws. 

With that single discovery; Galileo’s terres- 
trial dynamics becomes a celestial one, too; and 
the traditional separation of the heavens from 
the earth is overcome. Newton goes even fur- 
ther. He guesses, and then shows by arithmetic, 
that the force deflecting the planets around the 
sun and .the moon around the earth, is the same 
force which makes apples fall and stones heavy 
in the hand. He generalizes this insight in his 
famous inverse-square law: “Every particle of 
matter attracts every other particle 'of matter 
with a force, proportional to the mass of each 
and to the inverse square of the distance be- 
tween them.” .1 

Accordingly; the world can be pictured as 
one in which material particles each have posi- 
tion in absolute space and a determinate veloc- 
ity. The 'velocity of each particle causes the 
change of. its' position, and changes in velocity 
are caused by forces, the amounts of which 
are determined. by positions. From his laws.of 
motion and this simple law of force Newton is 
able, by. mathematical deduction, to account 
for the perturbations of the rnoon, the. oblate- 
ncss of the earth, the precession of the equi- 
no.ves,; the solar and lunar ddts, and, the paths 
of the comets.'.., rr - ; . , ' ■ .'f 

But is Newton’s law of force as simple as it 

appears to be at first? Itk mathematical mean- 
ing is , plain enough, and its application . to 
measured phenomena reveals its'' descriptive 
scope. When we ask, how’ever, about its physi- 
cal significance, we raise difficult questions con- 
cerning tlie nature of this attractive force.and 
how it operates; To call it the “force of gravity”, 
and to point out that; this. is aTamiliar force 
which 'everyone experiences iri his owii person 
hardly answers the question. . ... , ' • . . 

Gauleo wouLn not have tried to answer It. 
In his Dialogues Concerning the Two Great Sys- 
tems of the World, one of the characters, Sim- 
plicio, refers to that manifest cause which 
“everyone knows: is gravity.” To this Salviati 
replies: “You should say that everyone knows 
it is called gravity. I do not question you about 
the name,” he continues, “but about the es- 
sence of the thing”; and that, he concludes, is 
precisely what cannot be defined. 

A physicist like Huygens, who expects the 
explanation of natural effects to be expressed in 
the familiar mechanical terms of bodily impact, 
has other, objections. “I am not at ail pleased,” 
he writes to Leibnitz about Newton, “with any 
theories which he builds on his principle of at- 
traction, which seems to me absurd.” What 
shocks Huygens is a scandal that Newton him- 
self cannot avoid facing. It is the scandal of ac- 
tion-at-a-distance— of the force of gravity be- 
ing propagated instantaneously across great dis- 
tances and producing effects at some remote 
place but no effects along the way. Newton rec- 
ognizes the strangeness of such a force. In a 
letter to Bentley, he echoes Huygens’ protest 
to Leibnitz. “That gravity should be innate, 
inherent and essential to matter,” he says, “so 
that one body may act on another at a distance 
through a vacuum, without the mediation of 
anything else, by and through which their ac- 
tion and force may be conveyed from one to 
another, is to me so great an absurdity, that I 
believe no man who has in philosophical mat- 
ters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever 
fall into it.’’., . • . " 

The 'absurdity of action-at-a-distance seems 
to be. recognized by common sense and philoso- 
phy alike. “No action of, an agent,” Aquinas 
remarks, ‘'however powerful it may be, acts at 
a distance e.xcept through a medium’^; and 

90 THE GREAT IDEAS 

Kant, who regards Newtonian physics as the 
model of a rational science of nature, speaks of 
"a force of attraction without contact” as a 
“chimerical fancy” which “we have no right to 
assume.” How can Newton avoid this absurdity 
v.’ithout violating his rule of method in mathe- 
matical physics— not to frame hypotheses.? 

Newton’s dilemma can perhaps be stated in 
the following alternatives: either the inverse- 
square law of gravitational attraction is to be 
treated as a purely mathematical, and hence a 
purely descriptive, proposition of great sim- 
plicity and generality; or it must be given phys- 
ical meaning by a causal explanation of how 
gravitational force operates. On the first al- 
ternative, Newton can avoid framing hypoth- 
eses, but the physical meaning of the concepts 
he employs to state the mathematical law is 
then left dark. On the second alternative, he 
can solve the mechanical problem created by 
such words in his law as “attracts” and “force,” 
but only by going beyond mathematical phys- 
ics into the realm of mechanical hypotheses. 

Newton seems to take the first alternative in 
his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philos- 
ophy, and the second in his Optics. There he 
proposes the hypothesis of an ethereal medium 
to explain the attractive force of gravity. "Is 
not this medium,” he asks, “much rarer within 
the dense bodies of the sun, stars, planets, and 
comets, than in the empty celestial spaces be- 
tween them .? And in passing from them to great 
distances, doth it not grow denser and denser 
perpetually, and thereby cause the gravity of 
those great bodies towards one another, and of 
their parts towards the bodies; every body en- 
deavoring to go from the denser parts of the 
medium towards the rare ? . . . And though this 
incre.asc of density may at great distances be 
exceeding slow, yet if the clastic force of this 
medium be exceeding great, it may suffice to 
impel bodies from the denser parts of the me- 
dium towards the rarer, with all that power 
which we call gravity.” 

Tlic hypothesis fits the law of gravitation if, 
as Maxwell points out, “the diminution of pres- 
sure [in the ether] is inversely as the distance 
from the dense body.” Newton recognized, ac- 
cording to Maxwell, that it then becomes ncc- 
cssaiy “to account for this inequality of pres- 
sure in tliis medium; and .as he w.as not able to 

do this, he left the explanation of the cause of 
gravity as a problem for succeeding ages. . . . 
The progress made towards the solution of the 
problem since the time of Newton,” Maxwell 
adds, “has been almost imperceptible.” 

The problem of the mechanical properties of 
an ethereal medium occurs in another form in 
the field of optics. Here it is complicated by the 
rivalry between two theories of light— New- 
ton’s corpuscular theory and Huygens’ undu- 
latory or wave theory. Each involves a mechan- 
ical hypothesis— one concerning the motion of 
particles emitted from the light source, and one 
concerning the wave-like propagation of the 
light impulse through a medium. Both theories 
involve the motion of particles. In their ex- 
planation of the oar which appears bent in the 
water, both appeal to the action of the particles 
in the refracting medium on the light corpus- 
cles or the light waves. 

Both theories, furthermore, are expressed by 
their authors in a mathematical form svhich 
permits the deduction of quantitative facts 
like the equality of the angles of incidence and 
of reflexion, the bending of the light ray in re- 
fraction according to the law of sines, and the 
recently discovered fact of the finite velocity 
of light. Huygens’ book gives prominence to 
the e.xplanation of the strange phenomena of 
double refraction found in “a certain kind of 
crystal brought from Iceland” — Iceland spar. 
But both theories seem to be equally compe- 
tent in dealing with the established facts of 
reflexion and refraction, and the new facts 
about dispersion. 

For a century’ at least, their rivalry resembles 
that between the Ptolemaic and Copcrnican 
theories at a time when they seemed equally 
tenable so far as accounting for the phenomena 
was concerned. Later, new discoveries, such as 
those by Young and Fresnel, tend to favor the 
wave theory’ of light; but the rivalry continues 
right down to the present day. It remains un- 
resolved, at least to an extent which prompts 
Eddington, in reviewing contemporary' con- 
troversy about the nature of light and electric- 
ity, to suggest the invention of the word “wav- 
icle” to signify the complementary use of both 
particles and waves in the modern theory of 
radiation. 

Unlike the rivalry between the Ptolemaic 
and Copernican systems, which seemed for a 
while to be entirely a matter of different mathe- 
matical descriptions of the same phenomena, 
the conflict between these two theories of light 
involves from the very beginning an issue be- 
tween diverse mechanical hypotheses to explain 
the phenomena. That issue is argued not only 
ivith respect to the adequacy of either theory to 
explain such phenomena as the rectilinear prop- 
agation of light and its different behavior in 
different mediums; but it is also debated in 
terms of the underlying mechanical concep- 
tions. As gravitational force acting at a distance 
raises a mechanical problem which Newton’s 
ether is not finally able to solve, so Huygens’ 
ether as the, medium through which light is 
propagated in waves raises mechanical prob- 
lems which, if insoluble (as they seem to be), 
contribute even more heavily to the general 
scientific scandal of mechanics. 

The two authors take different attitudes 
toward hypotheses and mechanical explanation. 
Huygens, as we have seen, begins his book with 
the e.xpress intention to “investigate . . . the 
causes’’ and to express them “in terms of me- 
chanical motions.” Newton, on the other hand, 
begins his with a reiteration of his disavowal of 
hypotheses. “My design in this book,” he 
writes, “is not to explain the properties of light 
by hypotheses, but to propose and prove them 
by reason and experiments.” Nevertheless, 
Newton’s explanation of how the prism pro- 
duces from white light the band of colors in the 
spectrum seems to require the assumption of 
a diriinct kind of light corpuscle for each color; 
and, in addition, the assumption that, although 
all light particles have the same velocity when 
they travel together making white light, sepa- 
rate particles for different colors are differently 
refrangible, that is, differently susceptible to 
the action of the particles in the refracting me- 
dium of the glass. 

Terhaps only in Newton’s somewhat arti- 
ficially restricted sense of the tvord “hypoth- 
esis” could these assumptions escape that de- 
nomination. In any case, the existence of Huy- 
gens’ rival theory prevented his escaping a 
controversy about hypotheses. In the Queries 
attached to his Optics, he engages in that con- 
troversy with an acumen which shows another 
side of his genius. 

Huygens’ svave theory requires what any- 
body would have to call an hypothesis and re- 
quires it from the very start. “It is inconceiv- 
able,” he writes, “to doubt that light consists 
in the motion of some sort of matter.” He im- 
mediately rejects the notion that light rays con- 
sist in the “transport of matter coming to us 
from the [luminous] objectvin the way in which 
a shot or an arrow traverse the air”— if for no 
other reason, because “the rays traverse one 
another without hindrance.” The similarity 
between the phenomena of light and the, phe- 
nomena of sound suggests to him the “way that 
light spreads,” and causes him to extend the 
mechanics of sound— conceived as a wave mo- 
tion— to light. 

“We know that by means of air, which is an 
invisible and impalpable body,” Huygens ar- 
gues, “sound spreads around the spot where 
it has been produced, by a movement which is 
passed on successively from one part of air to 
another; and that the spreading of this move- 
ment, taking place equally on all sides, ought 
to form spherical surfaces ever enlarging and 
which strike our ears. Now there is no doubt 
at all that light also comes from the luminous 
body to our eyes by some movement impressed 
on the matter which is between the two. ... If, 
in addition, light takes time for its passage . . . 
it will follow that this movement, impressed on 
the intervening matter, is successive; and con- 
sequently it spreads, as sound does, by spherical 
surfaces and waves; for I call them waves from 
their resemblance to those which are seen to 
be formed in water when a stone is thrown into 
it.” 

Huygens is aware, however, that the analogy 
between light and sound is far from perfect. 
“If one e.xamines,” he says, “what this matter 
may be in which the movement coming from 
the luminous body is propagated, one will see 
that it is not the same that serves for the prop- 
agation of sound. . . . This may be proved,” 
he goes on, “by shutting up a sounding body 
in a glass vessel from which the air is with- 
drawn.” An alarm clock beating its bell in a 
jar without air makes no sound, but a jar with- 
out air is no less transparent than one with air. 
Since when “the air is removed from the vessel 
the light does not cease to traverse it as before,” 
and since waves have to be waves of something, 
and light waves cannot be waves of air, they 

92 THE GREAT IDEAS ' 

must be waves of a substance, says Huygens, 
“which I call ethereal matter.” 

This ether, a transparent medium permeat- 
ing the whole universe, proves to be what Ein- 
stein calls the enfant terrible in the family of hy- 
pothetical physical substances. Postulated by 
Huygens in order to e.xplain light mechanically, 
it in turn calls for a mechanical account of its 
own extraordinary properties. Huygens docs 
not avoid this new problem, but neither does 
he undertake to solve it completely. 

Suppose “one takes a number of spheres of 
equal size, made of some very hard substance, 
and arranges them in a straight line, so that 
they touch one another.” Then, says Huygens, 
“one finds, on striking with a similar sphere 
against the first of these spheres, that the mo- 
tion passes as in an instant to the last of them, 
which separates itself from the row, without 
one’s being able to perceive that the others 
have been stirred.” This type of motion in the 
ether would account for “the extreme velocity 
of light” and yet "this progression of motion 
is not instantaneous,” as the motion of light 
also is not. 

“Now in applying this kind of movement to 
that which produces light,” Huygens contin- 
ues, "there is nothing to hinder us from esti- 
mating the particles of the ether to be of a sub- 
stance as nearly approaching to perfect hard- 
ness and possessing a springiness as prompt as 
we choose.” Beyond this Huygens does not go. 
“It is not necessary to examine here,” he says, 
"the causes of this hardness, or of that springi- 
ness. . . . Though we shall ignore the true cause 
of springiness we still see that there arc many 
bodies which possess this property; and thus 
there is nothing strange in supposing that it 
exists also in little invisible bodies like the par- 
ticles of the ether.” 

But difficulties which Huygens did not fore- 
see make his ether more than a strange supposi- 
tion— almost a mechanical impossibility. Huy- 
gens had thought that light waves arc trans- 
mitted in the ether in the way that sound waves 
arc in the air, that is, longitudinally, the direc- 
tion in which the individual particles vibrate 
being the same as the direction of the wave mo- 
tion itself. But when, in the 19 th century, it 
was found that the phenomena of the polariza- 
tion of light could not be explained by the cor- 

puscular theory, but only by the wave thcoq- 
(thus shifting the scales decisively in fas'or of 
the latter), it was also found that the wave 
theory could explain polarization only on the 
assumption that the motion of the ether par- 
ticles which produce the light waves is not 
longitudinal, but transverse, that is, in a direc- 
tion perpendicular to the waves produced by 
the vibration of the particles. 

As Fresnel pointed out at the time, “the 
supposition that the vibrations were transvene 
was contrary to the received ideas on the nature 
of the vibration of elastic fluids.” They had all 
involved, as in the case of air as the medium for 
sound, a longitudinal transmission. The charac- 
ter of the ether is changed by the requirement 
tliat its particles vibrate transversely. It ceases 
to be an air-like ether and must be imagined as 
a jeily-hke ether. * 

The task which Huygens had postponed— 
that of giving a mechanical explanation of the 
ether he had posited in order to state the me- 
chanics of light— becomes in consequence far 
more difficult, if not impossible. In their efforts 
to construct “the ether as a jelly-like mechani- 
cal substance, physicists,” according to Ein- 
stein, had to make so many “highly artificial 
and unnatural assumptions,” that they finally 
decided to abandon the whole program of me- 
chanical explanation. 

Of Newton’s two objections to the wave 
theory of light, the second by itself seems to 
create an insuperable difficulty for Huygens’ 
ether, even before the realization that it must 
be a jelly-like medium. 

Newton’s first objection is that any wave 
theory is inconsistent with the fact of the rec- 
tilinear propagation of light. “If light consisted 
in pression or motion, propagated either in an 
instant or in time, it would bend into the shad- 
ow; for,” he points out, “pression or motion 
cannot be propagated in a fluid in right lines, 
beyond an obstacle which stops part of tiic 
motion, but will bend and spread every way 
into the quiescent medium which lies beyond 
the obstacle. . . . The svaves, pulses or vibra- 
tions of the air, wherein sound consists, bend 
manifestly, even though not so much ns the 
waves of water.” 

This objection loses its force when, in the 

Cha'pter' 54 : MECHANICS 93 

19th century, light’s bending is experimentally 
discovered. But Newton’s otherobjection gains 
force when,- two centuries after:he made it, a 
•jelly-like, density is, imposed upon the ether by 
the' experimental /facts 'of polarization., This 
second objection does not point to the, inade- 
quacy, of the .wave theory with-respect to the 
phenomena which must be described, but rath- 
er calls attention to its inconsistency with ' ce- 
lestial mechanics. . -1 

Light travels through inter-stellar space. But 
so, also do the planets., Newton’s astronomy ac- 
counts for the motion of the planets with great 
precision, only, on the, supposition of no resistance 
from a mediumi “To, mzkt way for .the regular 
and lasting rnotions of the plane.tsand comets,” 
he writes, ,“it is necessary to empty the heavens 
of all matter, except perhaps . . . such an ex- 
ceedingly; rare ethereal medium as. we de- 
scribed above.'” Here he refers to the ether he 
himself had positedas a possible cause of gravi- 
tational attraction, dts resistance, he thinks, 
is', “so srnall .as to be inconsiderable.” The 
“planets and comets and all gross bodies [can] 
perform their motions more freely in this 
ethereal medium than in any fluid, which fills 
all space adequately without leaving any 
pores,!’ Such “a' dense.'fluid . . . serves only to 
disturb and retard the motions of those great 
bodies, and make the frame of nature languish.” 
Since it “hinders the operations of nature,” and 
since “therelis no evidence for its existence,” 
Newton concludes that “itought to be rejected.’’ 

. The next conclusion follows immediately. 
“If it be rejected, the hypotheses that light 
consists in pression or motion, propagated 
through'such a medium, are rejected with it.” 
Newton would seem entitled to draw these con- 
clusions because,.nomatter,how slight the den- 
sity of ethereal matter, the use of the ether in 
the .wave theory' of light involves some interac- 
tion between the particles of ether and the par- 
ticles of matter. Unless such interaction takes 
place, no /explanation can be given- of the 
change in .the, velocity of light when it enters 
a medium like glass or water. Since in Newton’s 
universe there, is no difference between terres- 
trial, and celestial matter, Newton .cannot ac- 
cept,^an,:ether which interacts, with the matter 
of glass or water, but does not interact with the 
matter of the planets. . , , . 

■ ' This objection of Newton’s, pointing to an 
inconsistency between the kind of ether re- 
quired by- the wave theory of light, and the un- 
retarded- motion of the heavenly bodies, ap- 
pears not- to have 'been answered, but- only 
waived, at the time of the wave, theory’s as- 
cendancy. The famous' Michelson-Morley ' ex- 
periment on ether drift later re-opens Newton’s 
penetrating query . about, the ether.. But this 
occurs at a time when 'physicists are prepared to 
give up.not only the ether, but also with it the 
■■ mechanical explanations of gravity and light 
which it had Brought into conflict with one 
another. ’ ' 

- 1 
Before the mechanical- dogma runs its 
course, it has a career in other fields of physical 
inquiry. The phenomena of heat, magnetism, 
and electricity are explored and explained un- 
der its inspiration. The history of these sub- 
jects is marked by a very rash of hypotheses. 
Each time mechanical explanation is attempted 
for a new domain, of phenomena, new sub- 
stances are added. 

The postulated entities— calorific, magneti- 
cal, and electric fluids— are unobservable and 
without weight. In Newton’s terms, they are 
“occult”; though,, it must be added, they are 
no more occult than the ether Newton himself 
postulated to explain gravity or the ether Huy- 
gens postulated to explain light. In fact, each 
of these new substances seems to resemble the 
aeriform or fluid ether, just as each is con- 
ceived, as the gravitational or optical ether was 
earlier conceived, in the context of the issue of 
action-at-a-distance as opposed to action-by- 
contact. They would seem to be unavoidable 
in a mechanical account of the radiations of 
heat, magnetism, and electricity. 

The phenomena of heat, Lavoisier svrites, are 
“difficult to comprehend . . . without admit- 
ting them as the effects of a real and material 
substance, or very subtle fluid Where- 

fore,” he continues, “we have distinguished 
the cause of heat, or that exquisitely elastic 
fluid which produces it, by the term of caloric.” 
Lavoisier declares himself “unable to determine 
whether light be a modification of caloric, or 
if caloric be, on the contrary, a modification of 
light.” Butin terms of observed effects he does 
attribute ether-like properties to, caloric., “This 

94 THE GREAT IDEAS 

subtle matter,” he says, "penetrates through 
the pores of all known substances”; for “there 
are no vessels through which it cannot escape.” 

The theory of caloric serves its purpose be- 
fore it gives way to the theory of heat as molec- 
ular motion, a conception which can be inte- 
grated with the molecular, or kinetic, theorj' of 
gases. “The development of the kinetic theory 
of matter,” writes Einstein, “is one of the 
greatest achievements directly influenced by 
the mechanical view.” It is all the more strik- 
ing, therefore, that in the opening pages of 
Fourier’s Analytical Theory of Heat — wherein 
he reviews the triumphs of e.vplanation 
achieved by Newton and his successors — 
Fourier should so flatly assert: “But whatever 
may be the range of mechanical theories, they 
do not apply to the effects of heat. These make 
up a special order of phenomena which cannot 
be e.vplained by the principles of motion and 
equilibrium.” 

It is equally striking that Lavoisier seems to 
have anticipated not only the mechanical 
theory of heat, but the possibility of a purely 
mathematical treatment of the phenomena. 
“We arc not obliged to suppose [caloric] to be 
a real substance,” he writes; it is sufficient 
“that it be considered as the repulsive cause, 
whatever that may be, which separates the 
particles of matter from each other, so that we 
are still at liberty to investigate its effects in an 
abstract and mathematical manner.” 

The second of these nvo things is precisely 
what Fourier proposes to undertake, but he 
disavows any interest in the first, namely, the 
explanation of heat in terms of the mechanical 
separation of particles by repulsion. In language 
which resembles Newton's disavowal of concern 
with the cause of attraction, Fourier declares 
that “primary causes arc unknown to us, but 
arc subject to simple and constant laws, which 
may be discovered by observation.” 

In another place he writes: “Of the nature 
of heat only uncertain hypotheses could be 
formed, but the knowledge of the mathemati- 
cal l.nws to which its effects arc subject is inde- 
pendent of all hypothesis.” Fourier’s aim, 
therefore, with respect to “the very extensive 
cL-tss of phenomena, not produced by mechani- 
cal forces, but resulting simply from the pres- 
ence and accumulation of heat,” is “to reduce 

the physical questions to problems of pure anal- 
j'sis” and “to express the most general condi- 
tions of the propagation of heat in differentia! 
equations.” He expresses his indebtedness to 
Descartes for “the analytical equations” which 
that mathematician “was the first to introduce 
into the study of curv’es and surfaces,” but 
“which are not restricted to the properties of 
figures, and those properties which arc the ob- 
ject of rational mechanics.” These equations, 
he insists, “extend to all general phenomena,” 
and “from this point of view, mathematical 
analysis is as extensive as nature itself.” 

This strongly worded statement affirms the 
mathematical character of nature as the sup- 
port and justification for a purely mathematical 
physics. If Fourier’s remarks about causes and 
hypotheses are reminiscent of Newton in his 
mathematical mood, how much more is Fou- 
rier’s faith in pure mathematical analysis rem- 
iniscent of Galileo. Like Galileo, and unlike 
Newton, Fourier never deviates from his indif- 
ference to causes and never softens his judg- 
ment of the incompetence and irrelevance of 
mechanics to the subject he is investigating. 
His trust in mathematical analysis, which is 
able by itself to yield and organize physical 
discoveries, not only revives the spirit of Gal- 
ileo, but also seems to have inspired Clerk 
Maxwell to turn from a mechanical to a mathe- 
matical theory of electricity. 

Certain of Fourier’s mathematical achieve- 
ments, such as his theory of dimensions, prove 
useful to Maxwell. More important, perhaps, 
is the fact that Maxwell’s predictions about the 
prop.igation of electro-magnetic waves, later 
c.xpcrimcntally verified by Hertz, are the result 
of mathcmatic.al analysis. With such a demon- 
stration of the power of mathematics to work 
fruitfully witli experiment, and without any aid 
from mechanical hypotheses., Ma.xwc!l gives up 
the attempt to formulate a mechanics for his 
equations describing the electro-magnetic field. 
He is quite content to let his field theory stale 
the mathcmatic.al structure of the phenomena. 

Between Fourier and Maxwell comes Fara- 
day. One of the greatest experimenters in the 
whole tradition of science, Faraday discovers 
the phenomena whose mathematical structure 
Maxwell later develops. He prepares the way 

Chapter 54: MECHANICS 95 

for Maxwell’s application to. electricity and 
magnetism of the method Fourier had prac- 
ticed. His speculations concerning the relation 
of electrical and gravitational force point ahead, 
beyond Maxwell, to the possibility of a field 
theory which might unify all physical phenom- 
ena under a single set of mathematical laws. 

■ Faraday sees no incompatibility between ex- 
perimentation and speculation. On the con- 
trary he says that “as an experimentalist I feel 
bound to let , experiment guide me into any 
train of thought which it may justify; being 
satisfied that experiment, like analysis, must 
lead to strict truth, if rightly interpreted; and 
believing also that it is in its nature far more 
suggestive of new trains of thought and new 
conditions of natural power.” Faraday’s faith 
seems to have been amply justified. His experi- 
ments not only discovered a stunning number 
of new facts, but the speculations to which they 
led transformed the whole mode of thinking 
about electricity and magnetism, and, to some 
extent, the whole of physics. 

The Elizabethan Gilbert, with his bold and 
brilliantly handled thesis that the earth is a 
magnet, had made magnetism appear some- 
thing more than a random phenomenon occa- 
sionally met with in nature. But not until 
Faraday’s discovery of diamagnetism, an- 
nounced in a memoir On Magnetic Condition 
of All Matter, would anyone have dared to say 
that “all matter appears to be subject to the 
magnetic force as universally as it is to the 
gravitating, the electric and the chemical or 
cohesive forces.” Of electricity, he can only 
predict, as the result of his protracted experi- 
mental investigations, that “it is probable that 
every effect depending upon the powers of in- 
organic matter ... will ultimately be found 
subordinate to it.” 

These remarks indicate the controlling 
theme of Faraday’s researches, namely, the 
convertibility and unity of natural forces. It 
seems to have been suggested to him by the 
discovery that both electrical and magnetic 
forces obey the same simple inverse-square law 
as the .force of gravitational attraction. The 
fact that certain forces obey the same law or 
that their action can be described by the same 
equations, would not of itself reveal whether 
one of these forces is primary or all are de- 

rivative from some other primary force. But it 
would suggest questions to, be asked by experi- 
ment. 

Gilbert compares magnetism and electricity 
but he is not able to convert one into the other. 
Oersted, before Faraday, is the first to establish 
one aspect of their convertibility. He shows 
that an electric current has a magnetic effect. 
Faraday succeeds in showing the reverse — that 
a magnetic current has electrical power.. He 
expresses his fascination with such reversibili- 
ties in his remarks on the electrical' torpedo 
fish. “Seebeck,” he writes, “taught us how to 
commute heat into electricity; and Peltier has 
more lately given us the strict converse of this, 
and shown us how to convert electricity into 
heat. . . . Oersted showed how we were to con- 
vert electric into magnetic forces, and I had 
the delight of adding the other member of the 
full relation, by reacting back again and con- 
verting magnetic into electric forces. So per- 
haps in these organs, where nature has pro- 
vided the apparatus by means of which the 
fish can exert and convert nervous into electric 
force, we may be able, possessing in that point of 
view a power far beyond that of the fish itself, 
to reconvert the electric into the nervous force.” 

Faraday demonstrates still another such re- 
versibility in nature. The nature of his discov- 
ery is indicated by the titles of the papers in 
which he announces it: On the Magnetization 
of Light and the Illumination of Magnetic Lines 
of Force and The Action of Elearic Currents on 
Light. These papers, in his opinion, “established 
for the first time, a true, direct relation and 
dependence between light and the magnetic 
and electric forces”; and he concludes them 
with an explicit statement of the central theme 
of all his researches and speculations. 

“Thus a great addition is made,” he writes, 
“to the facts and considerations which tend to 
prove that all natural forces are tied together 
and have one common origin. It is no doubt 
difficult in the present state of our knowledge 
to express our expectation in exact terms; and, 
though I have said that another of the powers 
of nature is, in these experiments, directly 
related to the rest, I ought, perhaps, rather to 
say that another form of the great power is 
distinctly 'and directly related to the other 
forms.” 

96 '' THE GREAT IDEAS 

One roRM of the "great power” remained to 
be connected witli such “other forms” as those 
of light, heat, electricity, and magnetism. That 
was the power of gravitational force. Faraday 
comes to this last stage of his speculations con- 
cerning the unity of nature’s powers in terms' 
of his conception of “lines of force” and of what 
later came to be called “the field of force.” 

The earliest theories of electricity and mag- 
netism, in an orthodox atomistic vein, had con- 
ceived them as exerting an influence by means 
of the effluvia which they emitted. Newton, for 
c.xamplc, speculates on “how the effluvia of a 
magnet can be so rare and subtle, as to pass 
through a plate of glass without any resistance 
or diminution of their force, and yet so potent 
as to turn a magnetic needle beyond the glass.” 
When electrical conduction is later discovered, 
effluvia arc replaced by fluids, on the analogy of 
caloric as the fluid conductor of heat. But when 
Faraday finds that he can induce from one cur- 
rent to another, he becomes interested in the 
dielectric, non-conducting medium around the 
circuits. He is strongly averse to any thcoiy' 
which involves action-at-a-distance, and so he 
argues that induction takes place by the action 
of contiguous particles. To support that argu- 
ment he shows c.\pcrimcntally that electrical 
induction can “turn a corner.” 

From his study of all tiie phenomena of mag- 
netism, Faraday forms the conception of “lines 
of force” and concludes that there is “a center 
of power surrounded by lines of force which arc 
physical lines essential both to the existence of 
force within the magnet and to its conveyance 
to, and c.xcrtion upon, magnetic bodies at a 
distance.” He says of this “idea of lines of 
force" that “all the points which arc experi- 
mentally established with regard to [m.ngnctic] 
action, r.e., ail that is not hypothetical, appear 
to be well and truly represented by it"; and 
he adds: “Whatever idea we employ to repre- 
sent the power ought ultimately to include 
electric forces, for the two arc so related that 
one e.xprcssion ought to scrs'c for both.” 

Subsequently Faraday satisfies himself as to 
the physical reality of electrical lines of force 
in addition to the magnetic lines. The com- 
pulsion of his interest in the unity of nature then 
drives him to spccul.atc about gravitational 
force. He begins by admitting that, “in the case 

of gravitation, no effect sustaining the idea of 
an independent or physical line of force is 
presented to us; as far as we at present know, 
the line of gravitation is merely an ideal line 
representing the direction in which the power 
is exerted.” But encouraged, perhaps, by New- 
ton’s repeated references to “the attractions of 
gravity, magnetism, and electricity,” and by 
Newton’s letter to Bentley which he interprets 
as showing Newton to be “an unhesitating be- 
liever in physical lines of gravitating force," 
Faraday goes to work experimentally. 

The report of these researches On the Fossibk 
Relation of Gramty to Electricity opens with the 
re-statement of Faraday’s central themc.*“Thc 
long and constant persuasion that all the forces 
of nature are mutually dependent, having one 
origin, or rather being different manifestations 
of one fundamental power, has made me often 
think of establishing; by experiment, a connex- 
ion between gravity and electricity, and so 
introducing the former into the group, the 
chain of which, including also magnetism, 
chemical force and heat, binds so many and 
such varied exhibitions of force together by 
common relations.” His experiments, he tells 
us, unfortunately “produced only negative 
results,” but that docs not sh.ake his “strong 
feeling of the existence of a relation between 
gravity and electricity.” ' 

Though Fauad.w fails to prove “that such 
a relation exists,” he docs bequeath, as a legacy 
to 20th centur)' physics, the problem of a field 
theory- which would embrace both gravita- 
tional and electrical force. But whereas Faraday 
conceives the problem mechanically in terms 
of the physical reality, as well as unity, of all 
lines of force, in uhich contiguous particles 
act on one another, those who inherit the prob- 
lem from him cease to concern themselves with 
the physical existence of “lines of force”, and 
their mechanic.il basis in the action and reac- 
tion of bodies. Influenced by the am.izing gen- 
erality implicit in Maxwell’s field equations, 
they proceed to search for a purely' mathe- 
matical st.itcmcnt of nature’s structure. 

In the judgment of the 20th century physi- 
cist mathematics may at last succeed in doinf 
precisely what mechanics, from Newton tc 
Faraday, kept promising but forever failing tc 

Chapter •54,:/MECPiANICS 

do. 'If the unity of nature .can be" expressed in 
a single set of laws; they, will be; according, to 
Einstein, laws of a type radically different from 
the .laws of mechanics. 'Taking rithe, form of 
Ma.xwell’s equations;- a form which appears: “in 
all other equations of' modern -physics,” they 
will be, he' writes, : “laws representing the 
structure oi the. r ■ . u' , , ' , 

In saying that “Maxwell’s equations are 
structure laws’’ and thatithey provide “a! new 
pattern for the laws of nature,” Einstein means 
to emphasize their nonrmecha'nical character. 
“In Maxwell’s theory,” he writes, “there are no 
material actors.” Whereas “Newton’s gravita- 
tional laws connect the motion of a body here 
and now with the actioni of a body at the same 
time in the far distance,’’ Maxwell’s equations 
“connect events .which happen now and here 
with events which will happen a little later in 
the immediate) vicinity.” Like the equations 
which describe “the changes of the electro- 
magnetic field, our new gravitational laws are,” 
according' to Einstein, “also structure laws de- 
scribing' the changes of the gravitational field.” 
■’ Theheartofthedifference between a “struc- 
ture law” and a mechanical law seems to be con- 
tained in Einstein’s statement that “all space 
is 'the scene of these, laws and not, as for me- 
chanical laws,' only points in which matter or 
changes, are present.” This contrast between 
matter and space brings to mind the difference 
benveeh physics and geometry. Yet Einstein’s 
repeated reference to “changes” in these spacer 
structures.als'o reminds us that the electrical 
arid gravitational fields are not purely geomet- 
rical, but physical as well; 

Theikructure laws of the new physics may 
be geometrical in form, but if they are to have 
any physical iiieaning, can. they entirely avoid 
some coloring by the mechanical conceptions 
which have been traditionally associated with 
the; consideration of matter and motion.'’ At 
least one contemporary physicist appears to 
think that mechanics survives to bury its un- 
dertakers. After describing. the development in 
which geometry progressively “swallowed up 
the whole of mechanics,” Eddington observes 
that “mechanics in becoming geometry re- 
mains none the less mechanics. The partition 
between mechanics and geometry,” he con- 
tinues, “has broken down and the nature of 

each' of them has diffused through. the whole’’; 
so:that, “besides the geometrisation of mechan- 
ics, there has been a riiechanisation, of geom: 
etry;” o,' ' - . ■ . ... 

According ;to, this. view, it is not mechanics, 
but classical mechanics, which the new physics 
has abandoned. The character of the mechanics 
seems to have. altered with the character.of the 
mathematical .forrnulations.,Eield theory, deal- 
ing with contiguous areas and successive events, 
avoids the problem of action-at-a-distance.and 
also apparently that, problem’s classical solution 
in terms of the action of;Contiguous particles. 
But another sort of mechanics may . be implicit 
in the. field equations, which connect events in 
one area with events in the immediate vicinity. 
If those equations had been available to him, 
Newton might have expressed his' theory of a 
variably dense ether— analogous to the modern 
conception of a variably filled or variably 
curved space — in terms of structure laws de- 
scribing the gravitational field. 

We are left with a number of questions. Is the 
story of mechanics the story of its rise and de- 
cline or the story of its changing role— now 
dominant, now. subordinate; now more mani- 
fest, now more concealed— at all stages in the 
development of a physics which is committed 
to being both mathematical and experimental? 
Do the status and. character of mechanical con- 
ceptions change with changes in the form of the 
mathematical laws' which describe the phenom- 
ena? -Can physics be totally devoid of mechan- 
ical insight and yet perform e.xperiments which 
somehow require the scientist to act on bodies 
and to make them',act on one another? Could 
a pure mathematical'physics have yielded pro- 
ductive applications in mechanical engineering 
without thedntermediation of mechanical no- 
tions of cause, and effect? . 

Whichever way these questions are answered, 
we. face alternatives that seem to be equally 
unsatisfactory. Either experimental physics is 
purely mathematical and proclaims its disin- 
terest in' as well as: its ignorance of, causes; or 
physics cannot be experimental and mathe- 
matical without also being mechanical, and 
without being involved in a search for causes 
which are never found. 

To the layman there is something mysterious 

about all this. He stands in awe of the physi- 
cist’s practical mastery of matter and its mo- 
tions, which he naively supposes to depend 
upon a scientific knowledge of the causes, while 
all the time the scientists protest that the causes 
remain unknown to an experimental and 
mathematical physics. Mechanical explana- 
tions may be offered from time to time, but the 
various “forces” they appeal to can be under- 
stood only from their effects, and are nothing 
more than Verbal shorthand for the formulae 
or equations which express the mathematical 
laws. Yet they remain cause-names, and seem 
to stimulate advances in science — both experi- 
mental and mathematical — almost as a conse- 
quence of the exasperating elusiveness of these 
hidden causes. 

Certain philosophers hold a view which sug- 
gests that the clue to the mystery may lie in 
the word “hidden.” Causes exist and we can 
control them to build machines and explode 
bombs, but we cannot with our senses catch 
them in the very act of causing, or perceive the 
inwardness of their operation. If the fact that 
they are thus unobservable means that they 
are occult, then all causes are occult— not least 
of all the mechanical type of cause which con- 
sists in the impact of one body upon another. 
In the century in which physicists tried to 
avoid the scandal of forces acting at a distance 
by postulating mechanical mediums through 
which one body acted directly on another, 
philosophers like Locke and Hume express their 
doubts that such causal action is any less oc- 
cult than Newton had said Aristotle’s causes 
were. 

“The passing of motion out of one body into 
another,” Locke thinks, “is as obscure and un- 
conceivable, as how our minds move or stop our 
bodies by thought. . . . The increase of motion 
by impulse, which is observed or believed some- 
times to happen, is yet harder to understand. 
We have by daily experience, clear evidence of 
motion produced both by impulse and by 
thought; but the manner how, hardly comes 
within our comprehension; we are equally at a 

loss in both.” In Locke’s judgment we will al- 
ways remain “ignorant of the several powers, 
efficacies, and ways of operation, whereby the 
effects, which we daily see, are produced.” If 
scientific knowledge is knowledge of causes, 
then “how far soever human industry may ad- 
vance useful and experimental philosophy in 
physical things, scientifical will still be out of 
our reach.” 

When we try to observe efficient causes at 
work, what do we sec? Hume answers that we 
only see one thing happening after another. 
“The impulse of one billiard-ball is attended 
with motion in the second. This is the whole 
that appears to the outward senses.” Nor can 
we form any “inward impression” of what takes 
place at the moment of impact. “We are ig- 
norant,” he writes, “of the manner in which 
bodies operate on each other”; and we shall 
always remain so, for “their force or energy is 
entirely incomprehensible.” 

As the chapter on Cause indicates, Aristotle 
holds an opposite view of the matter. What 
takes place in efficient causation may be im- 
perceptible, but it is not incomprehensible. All 
causes may be occult so far as the senses are 
concerned, but they are not obscure to the in- 
tellect. But Aristotle would also insist that the 
action of efficient causes cannot be understood 
if they are totally isolated from other causes— 
material, formal, final. A purely mechanical 
physics, in his opinion, defeats itself by its basic 
philosophical tenets, svhich exclude all proper- 
ties that are not quantitative and all causes ex- 
cept the efficient. Only a different metaphysics 
— one which conceives physical substances in 
terms of matter and form, or potentiality and 
actuality — can yield a physics which is able to 
deal with causes and explain the phenomena; 
but such an Aristotelian physics, from the mod- 
ern point of view, stands condemned on other 
grounds. It is not experimental. It is not pro- 
ductive of useful applications. It is not mathe- 
matical; nor is it capable of comprehending all 
the phenomena of nature under a few simple, 
universal laws. 

.


OUTLINE OF . TOPICS 

1. The foundations of mechanics ' ipj 

I a. Matter, mass, and atoms: the primary qualities of bodies 

lb. The laws of motion: inertia; the measure offeree; action and reaction 

ic. Space and time in the analysis of motion 102 

2. The logic and method of mechanics 

■ 2a. The role of experience, experiment, and induction in mechanics 

2b. The use of hypotheses in mechanics lO^ 

2c. Theories of causality in mechanics 

3. The use of mathematics in mechanics: the dependence of progress in mechanics on 

mathematical discovery 

3a. Number and the continuum: the theory of measurement 

3b. The geometry of conics: the motion of planets and projectiles 

3c. Algebra and analytic geometry: the symbolic formulation of mechanical 

problems 104 

3b. Calculus: the measurement of irregular areas and variable motions 

4. The place, scope, and ideal of the science of mechanics: its relation to the philosophy of 

nature and other sciences 

4a. Terrestrial and celestial mechanics: the mechanics of finite bodies and of parti- 
cles or atoms 

46. The explanation of qualities and qualitative change in terms of quantity and 
motion 

4c. The mechanistic account of the phenomena of life 

5. The basic phenomena and problems of mechanics: statics and dynamics 105 

5a. Simple machines: the balance and the lever 

5b. The equilibrium and motion of fluids: buoyancy, the weight and pressure of air, 
the effects of a vacuum 

5c. Stress, strain, and elasticity: the strength of materials 
5d. Motion, void, and medium: resistance and friction 

5?. Rectilinear motion 106 

(1) Uniform motion: its causes and laws 

(2) Accelerated motion: free fall 

5/1 Motion about a center: planets, projectiles, pendulum 

(1) Determination of orbit, force, speed, time, and period 

(2) Perturbation of motion: the two and three body problems 

PACE 

6. Basic concepts of mechanics io6 

6 a. Center of gravity: its determination for one or several bodies 

6 l>. Weight and specific gravity: the relation of mass and weight 

6 c. Velocity, acceleration, and momentum: angular or rectilinear, average or 

instantaneous ' 107 

6 d. Force: its kinds and its effects 

(1) The relation of mass and force: the law of universal gravitation < 

(2) Action-at-a-distance: the field and medium of force 

(3) The parallelogram law: the composition of forces and the composition of 

velocities . 108 

6 e. Work and energy: their conservation; perpetual motion 

7. The extension of mechanical principles to other phenomena: ■'optics, acoustics, the 

theory of heat, magnetism, and electricity 

ya. Light: the corpuscular and the wave theory 

(1) The laws of reflection and refraction 

(2) The production of colors 

(3) The speed of light 

(4) The medium of light: the ether 109 

yi>. Sound: the mechanical explanation of acoustic phenomena 

yc. The theory of heat 

(1) The description and explanation of the phenomena of heat: the hypothesis 

of caloric 

(2) The measurement and the mathematical analysis of the quantities of heat 

yd. Magnetism: the great magnet of the earth 

(1) Magnetic phenomena: coition, verticity, variation, dip 

(2) Magnetic force and magnetic fields 

ye. Electricity: electrostatics and electrodynamics no 

(1) The source of electricity; the relation of the kinds of electricity 

(2) Electricity and matter: conduction, insulation, induction, electrochemical 

decomposition 

(3) The relation of electricity and magnetism: the electromagnetic field 

(4) The relation of electricity to heat and light: thermoelectricity 

(5) The measurement of electric quantities 

REFERENCES 

To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy- type; which are the volume and page 
numbers of the passages referred to. For example, in 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the 
number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the number 12d indicates that the pas- 
sage is in section d of page 12. • ■ 

Page Sections: When the text is printed in one column,- the letters a and b refer to the 
upperand lower halves of the page. For e.xample, inS3 James : Psychology, \\(ia-119h, the passage 
begins in the upper half of page n6 and ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is 
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the left- 
hand sideofthe page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side of 
the page. For example, in 7 Plato: 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half 

of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. 

Author’s Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, 
sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are given in cer- 
tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. 

Bible References : The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When the King James 
and Douay versions differ in title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King 
Jariies version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.. Old Testa- 
ment: Nehemiah, 7:45— (Z)) II Esdras, 7:46. 

Symbols: The abbreviation “esp” calls the reader’s attention to one or more especially 
relevant parts of a whole reference; “passim” signifies that the topic is discussed intermit- 
tently rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 

For additional information concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation of 
Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 

1. The foundations of mechanics 

la. Matter, mass, and atoms: the primary quali- 
ties of bodies 

8 Aristotle: tieavens, bk hi, ch 4 [303’'3-'’8] 
394b-d / Generation and Corruption, bk i, 
CH 2 410d-4I3c; ch 8 423b-425d 

10 Galen: Uatural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [146-328] 
2d-Sa; [483-634] 7a-8d; bk ii [333-568] 19b- 
22b 

, 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 115, 
a I, ans and rep 3,5 585d'S87c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d; part in, 
172a-b; part iv, 269d 

- 28 Gilbert: L oaiffrone, bkii, 29c'34besp29c-30a 

28 Galileo: Tiuo New Sciences, first day, 
134a-153a passim 

30 Bacon: Noviim Organum, bk i, aph 66 H4d- 
115c; BK II, APH 8 140b; aph 48 179d-188b 

31 Descartes: Meditations, ii, 78c-d / Objec- 
tions and Replies, def vii 130c-d; 231a-232a 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 367a-368b 

34 Newton: Principles, def i 5a; def hi 5b; bk 
I, PROP 73, scho'l l33b-134a; bk h, general 
scHOL, 218a-219a; prop 40, schol, 246a-b; 
BK HI, rule"^ Hi 270b'271a; prop 6, corol 
ili-iv 281b; PROP 7 281b-282b / Optics, bk 

II, 479b-48Sb; bk hi, 520a-S22a; 528b; S31a- 
S43a esp 537a-b, 541b-S42a 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 558b-560a; ch iir, 
S66b-569b; CH v, 60Ib-603b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch iv 
129b-131a; ch vhi, sect 7-26 134b'138b 
passim; ch xih, sect 11-27 I50d-154d pas- 
sim; CH XXI, SECT 2-4 178c-179c; ch xxhi, 
SECT 7-17 205d-209a passim; sect 22-32 
209d-212d; ch xxxi, sect 2, 239d; bk hi, 
CH X, SECT 15 29Sa-c 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 9-18 
414d-416c passim; sect 50 422c; sect 102 
432d-433a 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 3b- 
4a; PART I, 9a-15c passim, esp 9b-c, 13a-b; 
I6b-c; 41b-c 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a'170a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 685d-686c; 
850b,d-SS5a,c 

53 James: Psychology, 68a-b 

54 Freud: Narcissism, 400d-401a 

lb. The laws of motion: inertia; the measure 
of force; action and reaction 
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 10 [266'’27- 
267“2i] 354b-d / Heavens, bk hi, . ch 2 
[30i^i-*’3i] 392C'393b 

(l. The foundations of mechanics. \b. The laws 
of motion: inertia; the measure of force; 
action and reaction.) 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 2-4 233C' 
235c / Gait of Animals, ch 3 243d-244a / 
Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 3 [768’’i6-24] 
3I0b-c 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [80-99) 
16a-b; [184-250] 17b-18b 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 894a-895b; 899a- 
900a; 905a-906b; 933b-934b: 936a-937a; 
938b-939a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 84, 
A 3, REP 2 985d-989b 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a; 72a-d; part 
IV, 271d 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 56b-c 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
209a'210a; 224d-225d; fourth day, 240a-d 
30 Bacon: Novum Organiim, bk ii, aph 35-36 
162a-168d passim,' aph 4S 1 T9d-188b 

34 Newton: Principles, def hi 5b; laws of 
MOTION 14a-24a; bk ii, prop 40, schol, 
246a-b / Optics, bk hi, 541b-S42a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch 
XXI, sect 2-4 178c-179c; ch xxiii, sect 17 
209a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect hi, 
434d 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 
27, 460c; sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b 
[fn 2] 

38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, lb 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 695a-c 

Ic. Space and time in the analysis of motion 
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vi 312b,d-325d 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
201a-202a 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 45-46 
176a-179a 

33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 434a- 
439b 

34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol 8b- 
13a; bk hi, general schol, 370a-371a / Op- 
tics, BK HI, 528b-529a; 542a-543a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 110-117 
434b-436a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24a-29d; 74b-76c; 160b- 
163a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 249a-25Ib 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 

2. The logic and method of mechanics 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
179c-d; third day, 200a-b; 202d-203a 
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 34b / No- 
vum Organum, pref 105a-106d; bk i, aph 8 
107c-d; aph 50 mb; aph 64 114b; aph 70 
116b-117a; APH 82 120d-121b; aph 99-100 

Ic to la 

127b-c; APH 121 132b-d; bk ii 137a-195d / 
New Atlantis, 210d-214d 
31 Descartes: Rules, viii, 12b-13a / Discourse, 

PART VI, 61d-62c 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 355a-358b passim; 365b- 
366a 

34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk i, prop 69, 
SCHOL 130b-131a; bk hi, 269a-b; rules 
270a-271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Op- 
tics, BK HI, 531b; 543a-b 

34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a; ch i, 
553b-554a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
SECT 16 317a-c; sect 25-29 321a-323a passim; 
ch xh, sect 9-13 360d-362d 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 104 
433a-b; sect 107 433d-434a 
35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 

23- 27 459a-460d esp div 26-27 460b-d; sect 
VII, DIV 57, 475d'476b [fn 2] 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 6b-c; 17d-18d; 32a; 69c- 
72c esp nb-72a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-170a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 440b, d; 
758a-7S9c; 831a-d; 850b,d-855a,c esp 850b,d- 
851c 

49 Darwin: Origin of Specks, 239c 

53 James : Psychology, 882a-884b 

54 Freud: Instincts, 412a-b 

2a. The role of experience, experiment, and 
induction in mechanics 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-b; bk i, 6a-7a 
esp 6d-7a; bk ii, 27b-c 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
200a-b; 207d-208a 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16a; 33d- 
34b; 42a-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, viii, 12b-13a / Discourse, 
PART VI, 61d-62c 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 356a-357a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 69, schol 
130b-131a; bk hi, rule iv 271b; general 
schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk i, 379a; bk hi, 
542a; 543a-b 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
sect 16 317a-c; sect 25-29 321a-323a passim; 
ch XII, sect 9-13 360d-362d 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 58-59 
424a-b; sect 104 433a-b; sect 107 433d- 
434a 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 

24- 27 459b-460d esp div 26 460b-c; sect 
VII, div 57, 47Sd-476b [fn 2] 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 6b-c; 227b-c 
45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, Ic- 
2b; PART I, 23c; part hi, 87b-c 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 175b; 181b; 184a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 385b-c; 

440b,d; 467a-b; 607a,c; 6S9a; 774d-775a 
S3 James: Psychology, 864a 

2b to 3b 

2b. The use of hypotheses in mechanics 

12 Lucretius : 'Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 
67d-68a 

28 Galileo; Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
240d'241c 

33 Pascal: 'Vacuum, 367a-370a 

34 Newton; Principles, bk hi, rule iv 271b; 
GENERAL scHOL, 371b-372a / Optics, BK X, 
379a; bk hi, 528b; S43a 

34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-S52a 

35 Locke: Human 'Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, 
SECT 16 317a-c; ch xii, sect 12-13 362a-d 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 50 422c; 
SECT 105-106 433b-d 

35 Hume; Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
57 , 47Sd'476b [fn 2 ] 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 

42 Kant: Pure Reason, 227b'C 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 9d- 
10 b 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 181b; 184a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 467a-b; 
607a,c; 758a-759c; 777d-778c; 8S0b,d-855a,c 
esp 8S0b,d-8Slc 

49 Darwin; Origin of Species, 239c 

53 James: Psychology, 884a-b 

54 Freud; Narcissism, 400d-401a 

2 c. Theories of causality in mechanics 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 
67d-68a 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
202d-203a 

31 Descartes; Discourse, part v, 59a 

34 Newton; Principles, def vhi, 7b-8a; bk i, 
PROP 69 , SCHOL 130b-131a: bk hi, rule i-ir 
270a; general schol, 369b-372a / Optics, 
BK HI, 528b-529a; 531b; S41b-542a 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, S53b-SS4a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h, ch xxr, 
sect 1-4 178b-179c; bk iv, ch hi, sect 25-26 
321a'C 

35 Berkeley; Human Knowledge, sect 50-53 
422c-423a passim; sect 60-66 424b-426a; 
SECT 102-109 432d-434b 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 
24-27 459b-460d esp div 26 460b-c; sect vii, 
DIV 55, 474c-d; div 56-57 475a-d esp div 57, 
475d [fn 2]; SECT viii, div 64, 478d 

36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a; 183a-b 

51 Tolstoy: 'War and Peace, epilogue ii, 687d; 
695b-c 

S3 James; Psychology, 885b-886a 

3. The use of mathematics in mechanics: the 
dependence of progress in mechanics on 
mathematical discovery 
8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 9 
104b-d; CH 13 [78'’3i-79“i6] lOSb-c/ Physics, 
BK 11 , CH 2 [i 94 “ 7 -iil 270b-c; bk vii, ch 5 

333a-d / Metaphysics, bk xiii, ch 3 [i078‘'5- 
17 ] 609b-c 

11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of Planes S 02 a- 
S19b / Floating Bodies S38a-560b / Method 
569a-592a 

14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-2S5a 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 964b-965a 
19 Aquinas : Stimma Theologica, part i-ii, q 35, 
A 8, ans ,779c'780c 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d; 73 b; part 
iv, 268c-d 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 
131b-I32a; 133b; second day-fourth day 
178a-260a,c 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46b-c 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a; xiv, 31c-d / Dis- 
course, PART I, 43b-c; PART HI, SOd / Objec- 
tions and Replies, 169c-170a / Geometry, bk ii, 
322b-331a 

34 Newton: Principles, Ia-2a; def vhi 7b-Sa; 
BK I, PROP 1-17 and SCHOL 32b-S0a; prop 30 - 
98 and SCHOL 76a-157b esp prop 6g, schol 
130b-131a; bk n lS9a-267a; bk hi, 269a-b 

35 Hume: Hutnan Understanding, sect iv, div 
27 460c-d 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a 
42 Kant: Judgement, 551a'552a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 172a'173b; 

175b; 177a; 182b-184a; 249a-b 
45 Faraday; Researches in Electricity, 83Ia'd 

50 Marx: Capital, 170a-c 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 

53 James: Psychology, 67Sb; 876a-b: 882a-SS3a 

ia. Number and the continuum: the theory of 
measurement 

11 Euclid: Elements, bk v 81a-98b esp defini- 
tions, 5 81a; bk vii, definitions, 20 127b; bk 
X, PROP 1-2 191b'193a; prop 5-9 I95a-198b 
11 Archimedes: Measurement of a Circle, prop 3 
448b-45]b / Conoids and Spheroids, prop 3-6 
458b-460b / Equilibrium of Planes, bk 1 , 
PROP 6-7 503b'S04b 
16 Ptolemy; Almagest, bk i, 18b'20b 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
197b-200a; 205b-206c 

31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 31b-33b / Geometry, 
BK I, 295a-296b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma i 25a 
42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-SS2a 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 183a-b 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 

3i. The geometry of conics: the motion of 
planets and projectiles 
11 Archimedes; Quadrature of the Parabola 
527a-537b 

11 Apollonius: Con/cy 603a-804b 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 97Sa-979b 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day 
191c-19Sc; fourth day 238a-260a,c passim, 
esp 238b-240a 

• TliE GREAT IDEAS - ScioAc 

(3. Tj^e use of mathematics in mechanics: the de- 
pendence of progress in mechanics on 
mathematical discovery. 5b. The geom- 
etry of conics; the motion of planets attd 
projectiles.) ^ 

31 Descartes: Geometry, bk i-ii, 29Sb-314bj 
34'Newton; Principles, bk i, prop it -29 'and 
scHOL 42b-7Sb esp prop 11-13 42b-46a; bk 
III, PROP 13 286a'b; prop 40 337b-338a 
34 Huygens: Light, ch v, S83b-598a; 604b- 
606b; CH VI, 607b-6na , 

42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a 1 

3t:. Algebra and analytic geometry: the sym- 
bolic formulation of mechanical , prob- 
lems 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, Sc-d; xiv, 30d-33b; 
XVI 33d-3Sc; xviii 36b-39d / Geometry 29Sa- 
353b esp bk i~ii, 298b-314b, bk ii, 322b- 
331a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma 19 57b- 
58b 

34 Huygens: Light, ch vi, 610a-b 
45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, prep, la 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b; I77a- 
351b 

5d. Calculus: the measurement of irregular 
areas and variable motions 
11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of Planes, bk i, 
prop 7 504b / Quadrature of the Parabola 
S27a-S37b 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 973a-975a; 979b- 
g83b ■ •' 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
193b-194d; third day, 205b-d; 224b-c 

33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 395a-b / 
Geometrical Demonstration, 434b-435b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk 1, lemma i-ii and 
scHOL 25a-32a esp lemma ii, schol, 31a-b; 
BK II, lemma 2 and schol 168a-170a 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172b; 177a; 181a-b; 
183a-b; 221a-248b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; 
EPILOGUE II, 695b-c 

4. The place, scope, and ideal of the science of 
mechanics: its relation to the philosophy 
of nature and other sciences 

23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d 

30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16a-b; 33d- 
34b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 74 118b; 

> • bk II, APH 9 140b-c / New Atlantis, >2166.- 
214d 

31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a; v, 8 a / Discourse, 
PART v, 54d-56a; 59a 

34 Newton: Principles, lb- 2 a; bk i, prop 69 , 
schol 130b-131a / Optics, bk hi, 541b-542a 

/ 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553b-554a 

35 Home: Human Understanding, sect i, piv 9, 

4S4c-d < " , 

36 SwirT: Gulliver, part hi, 94b-I03a 
42 Kant; Pure Reason, 32a; 69c-72c esp 71b-72a 
/ Judgement, 563a-564c 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 172a-173b; 
182a-184a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 468d-469a 
53 James: Psychology, 69b-70a; 882a-886a esp 
883a-884b; 889a-890a 

4a. Terrestrial and celestial mechanics: the 
mechanics of finite bodies and of parti- 
cles or atoms 

9 Aristotle : Motion of Animals, ch 3 [699“! i]- 
CH 4 [7oo'’5] 234a-235a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv; 888b-905a passim; 
919b; 929a-933a; 935b; 940b-941a; 959a- 
960a 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
245b-d 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 5 138b- 
139a; aph 35 162a-164a; aph 36, 165c-166c; 
APH 46, 178c; APH 48, 186c-d 

34 Newton: Principles, bk in, rules 270a-271b; 
PROP 7 281b-282b / Optics, bk hi, 539a- 
542 b 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 563a-b; 
EPILOGUE II, 694d-696d 

4b. The explanation of qualities and qualitative 
change in terras of quantity and motion 
8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4 
503c-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch 4 [442“3o- 
’’24] 680a-c 

10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167b- 
168b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 11 [398-521] 
20a-21c; [677-687] 23c'd; [730-1022] 24b- 
28a; bk iv [522-721] 51a-53d 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49b-d; part hi, 
172b 

31 Descartes; Objections and Replies, 231a-b 
34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 431a-455a esp 450a- 

453a 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553b-554a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, 
SECT 4 133d; sect 7-26 134b-138b; ch xxi, 
sect 3 178d; sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect 
8-9 206a-c; sect ii 206d-207a; sect 37 213d- 
214b; CH XXXI, sect 2 239b-d esp 23gd; 
BK III, CH IV, sect 10 261b-d; bk iv, ch ii, 
SECT 11-13 311c-312b; ch hi, sect 6, 314b; 
SECT 12-14 316a-d; sect 28 322a-c 

• 35 Berkeley: Hh/tmu Knowledge, sect 25 417d- 
418a; sect 102 432d-433a 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169b; 182a-b ^ - 

4c. The mechanistic account of the phenomena 
, ,, of life 

7 Plato: Phaedo, 240d-242b / Sophist, 567a- 

568a ^ 

8 Aristotle: Sense and the Sensible ,, ^ch 4 
[442’‘30-'’24] 680a-c 

5 io 5d 

9 Aristotle; Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [640*’ 
. 5-64 i‘'i 9] 163a-164a' / Motion of Animals, 

CH 7 [70i’’i-3o] 236d-237b; ch 8 [702“22]- 
CH io [703*’!] 237c-239a / Gait of Animals 
243a-2S2a,c / Generation of Animals, bk ii, 
CH I [734‘’3-2o] 27Sa-b; ch 5 [74i'’5-io] 282c 
10 Galen; Natural Faculties, bk i, ch i2-bk ii, 
ch 8 172d-195c esp bk i, ch 12 172d-173c, 
BK li, CH 3, 185aj CH 6188c-I9I'a; bk hi, ch 
14-15, 213b-214c ' 

12 Lucretius:' of Things,' bk ii [865- 
1022] 26a-28a; bk hi [94-869] 31b-41a; bk v 
- [783-836] 71b-72a 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b' 

. 28 Harvey; On Animal Generation, 355b-d; 
495c-496d ■ • 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 56a-60b 

34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 384b'385b; 428a'b; 
BK IH, 518b'519b; 522a 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, 
sect II 140b-c; ch x, sect io 143c-d; ch 
XI, SECT II 145d-146a; ch xxvh, sect 5 
220b-c; BK IV, ch hi, sect 25 321a-b 

ZZP.ovs,sv.Axs: .Inequality, 337d-338a / Political 
Economy,' 368d-369a 

iZ Kant: ■ Judgement, 571c-572a; 575b-578a; 
578d-582c 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, I4a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, ' 4401), d; 
540a-541a,c 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 89b-c 
SI Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 449b-c; 
epilogue II, 689c-690a 

53 James: Psychology, Sa-6b; 9a'17b; 44a-S2a; 

' 68a-7la; 95b-98a 

54 Freud: Instincts, 412c-414c / Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle, 651d-657d passim, esp 
651d, 652d; 659d'661c esp 660a / Ego and 
Id, 708d-709b; 711c-d 

5. The basic phenomena and problems of me- 
chanics; statics and dynamics 

5a. Simple machines: the balance and the lever 

8 Aristotle : Physics, bk vih, ch 4 [255“2o-22] 
339d 

10 Hippocrates: Fractures, par 31, 87c 

H AEchimedes: Equilibrium of Planes, bk i, 
postulates, 1-3 502a; 6 502b; prop 1-3 
502b-503a; prop 6-7 503b-504b 
■14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252c-d 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 933b-934b; bk v, 
970b-g72a 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 
178b-180c; third day, 209a-210a; fourth 
day, 258c-d 

33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 390a-394b 

34 Newton: 'P«’nap/e.f, corol h 15a-16b; laws 
of motion, schol, 23a-24a 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 
27, 460c ’ 

so Marx: Capital, 181a 

5b. The equilibrium and motion of fluids: 

• buoyancy, the weight- and pressure of 
' air, the' effects of a vacuum ' • - 

■ 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk iv, ch 6-404d-405a,c 

■ 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 16, 181a'd; 

BK II, CH 1-2, ■183b,d-184c; ch 6 188c-191a; 
bk hi, ch 14-15, 213b-214c 

11 Archimedes: Floating Bodies 538a-560b 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 135b- 
138b; 163a-166c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 180a 

33 Pascal; Vacuum, 359a-365b / Great Experi- 
ment 382a-389b / Equilibrium of Liquids 390a- 
403a / Weight of Air 403a-429a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, prop 19-23 and 
schol 194b'203a; prop 36 226a-231b; hy- 
pothesis-prop 53 and schol 259a-267a; bk 
III, PROP 41, 356b-357b / Optics, bk hi, 518a-b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch 
' xxiii, sect 23-24 209d-210c 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 10c- 
12d; 15c-16d; part hi, 88d-89d; 96b-99a 

5c. Stress, strain, and elasticity: the strength of 
materials 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131a- 
139c; second day 178a-196d passim 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 
180a-d; 187d 

34 Newton: Principles, laws of motion, schol, 
21b'22a; bk h, prop 23 and schol 201b-203a 
/ Optics, bk hi, 540b-541a 

34 Huygens; Light, ch 1, 558b-S59b 

35 Locke: Hitman Understanding, bk h, ch 
XXIII, sect 23-27 209d-211b 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 14c- 
15c; PART HI, 96b-99a 
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 192a-b 

5d. Motion, void, and medium: resistance and 
friction 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 460c-d 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 6-9 292c-297c 
/ Heavens, bk hi, ch 2 [30i°2i-''3i] 392c-393b 
/ Dreams, ch 2 [459^28-34] 703b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [329-448] 
5b-6c; [951-1051] 12d-14a; bk ii [142-166] 
16d-17a; [225-242] 17d-18a; bk vi [830-839] 
91b-c 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 857a-b 
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, Q 84, 

A 3, REP 2 985d-989b 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 110c 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 134a- 
135b; 157b-171b; fourth day, 241d-243c 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 8 140b; 

APH-36;’167b-c; aph 48, 186a; 187a; 187c 
34 Newton: Principles, bk ii 159a-267a passim, 
esp GENERAL SCHOL 211b'219a; bk hi, prop 
6, corol hi 281b; prop io 284a-285a / 
Optics, bk hi, 521b-522a; 527a-528b 

(5. The basic phenomena and problems of me- 
chanics: statics and dynamics. 5d. Motion, 
void, and medium; resistance and Jrictioni) 
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk n, ch xiii, 
SECT 22-23 153b-d; ch xvii, sect 4 168b-d 
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 71b-72a 

5e. Rectilinear motion 

8 Aristotle : P/yw'dr, bk v, ch 4 (228’’i5-229®7] 
309d-310a; bk viii, ch 8 [26i*’27-263’'3] 348b- 
349c / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 (268'’i5-24] 359d 
28 Galileo: Two Hew Sciences, first day, 157b- 
171b; THIRD DAY 197a-237a,c 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 
186b-c 

34 Newton: Principles, law i-ii 14a-b; bk i, 
PROP 32-39 81a-88a; bk ii, prop 1-14 159a- 
189a passim 

5e(l) Uniform motion: its causes and laws 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 162c- 
163a; third day, 197b-200a 
34 Newton: Ptinciples, def iii-iv 5b-6a; law i 
14a; COBOL iv-v lSa-19a; bk ii, prop i, 
COROL lS9a; prop 2 lS9b-160a; prop 5-6 
165a-167a; prop 11-12 183a-184b 

5e(2) Accelerated motion: free fall 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8 [2r5“24- 
2 i6''2i] 295a-d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2 (301*’ 
16-31] 393a-b 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [225-242] 
17d-18a 

16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, lOb-llb 
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 115, 
A I, REP 3 585d-587c 

28 Galileo: Ttvo New Sciences, first day, 157 b- 
171 b; third day, 200 a- 237 a.c 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
166 b-c; APH 48, 181 d 

34 Newton: Principles, def iv 6a; law ii 14a-b; 
COROL VI 19b; bk i, prop 32-39 81a-88a; bk 
II, prop 3-4 160b-16Sa; prop 8-10 170a-179a; 
prop 13-14 184b-189a; prop 32-40 and schol 
219a-246b esp prop 40, schol 239a-246b; 
prop 41-50 and schol 247a-259a 

5f. Motion about a center: planets, projectiles, 
pendulum 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 8-10 348b- 
355d / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 359d-360d; ch 4 
362a-c; bk ii, ch 3-12 377c-384c / Metaphys- 
ics, bk XII, ch 8 603b-605a / Soul, bk i, ch 3 
[4 o 6’’26-407 ’’i 3] 636b-637b 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 89Sb-90Sa passim; 
913a; 914b 915a; 918b-928a passim; g33a- 
946a esp 939a-940b; bk v, 965a-966a / Har- 
monies of the World, 101Sb-1023a 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 
240a-d 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
167b-o: APH 46, 177c-178a; aph 48, 186b-d 

5e to 6b 

34 Newton: Principles, def v 6a-7a; laws of 
MOTION, SCHOL, 19b-20a; bk i, lemma i-n 
and SCHOL 25a-32a; prop 1-3 and schol 32b- 
35b esp PROP 3, SCHOL 35b; prop 46 lOla-b; 
bk II, PROP 51-53 and schol 259a-267a esp 
PROP 53, SCHOL 266a-267a; bk hi, phenom- 
ena 272a-275a; prop 13 286a-b 

5/(1) Determination of orbit, force, speed, 
time, and period 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [614-649] 
69a-c 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 905a-907a; bk v, 
968a-985b esp 975a-979b 

28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 
166d-168a; 171b-172d; third day, 203d- 
205b; 235b-d; fourth day 238a-260a,c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 
186b-d 

34 Newton: Principles, laws of motion, schol, 
19b-22a; bk 1, prop 1-17 and schol 32b-50a; 
prop 30-31 and schol 76a-81a; prop 40-42 
88b-92b; prop 46-47 and schol 101a-102a; 
PROP 51-56 105b-llla; bk ii, prop 4 161b- 
165a; prop 10 and schol 173b-183a; lemma 
3-PROP 18 lS9b-194b; prop 24-ceneeal 
schol 203a-219a; bk hi, prop 1-5 and schol 
276a-279a; prop 13 286a-b; prop 20 29Ib- 
294b; LEMMA 4-PROP 42 333a-368b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, 
sect 21 159a-d 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect hi, 
434d 

5/(2) Perturbation of motion: the two and 
three body problems 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 920b-921b: 922b- 
926a; 957b-959a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 54c-d; 55c-56b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 43-45 92b- 
101a; mb; prop 57-69 and schol lllb-131a; 
BK HI, prop 5, COROL III 279a; prop 12-14 
and SCHOL 285a-287b; prop 21-39 294b-333a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 817a-b 

6. Basic concepts of mechanics 

6a. Center of gravity: its determination for one 
or several bodies 

11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of Planes 502a- 
519b / Method, prop 6 578a-S79a; prop 8-9 
S80b-582b 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 231c-d 

33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 393b-394a 

34 Newton: Principles, corol iv 18a-19a; bk hi, 
hypothesis i-prop 12 285a-286a 

6b. Weight and specific gravity: the relation of 
mass and weight 
7 Plato: Timaetis, 462d-463c 
S Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8 [2i6“i2-2o] 
295c-d / Heavens, bkh, ch 3 [afig’^ifi-ayo^ia] 
360d-361b; ch 6 [273“22-274“i8] 364c-365b; 

6c to 6d{2) Chapter 54 : MECHANICS 1 07 

BK ill, CH 2 [30i'‘2i-'’32] 392c-393b; bk iv, 
CH 1-3 399a-402c 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk r [358-369] 
5c; BK H [80-108] 16a-b: [294-296] I8d 
16 Copernicus; Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres, bk i, 521a 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 970b 
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologiea, part i-ii, q 26, 

A 2, ANS 734d-735c 
23 Hobbes: Leviathan,. vakt iv, 271d 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi; 115d-116a 
28 Galileo: Two New ■ Sciences, ■ first day, 
158b-c; I60a-164a passim 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, fk ii, aph 24, 
154d'155a; aph 35, 163c-d; aph 36, 166b-c; 
APH 40, 172a-b 

31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 231b-232ay 

' 34 Newton; Principles, def 1 5a; bk ii, prop 24 

203a-204a; bk hi, prop 6 279b-281b; prop 8 
282b'283b; prop 20 291b'294b passim 
45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part hi, 
88d-89d ' 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 249a-251b 
45 Faraday; Researches in Electricity, 632a 

6 c. Velocity, acceleration, and momentum; an- 
gular or rectilinear, average or instan- 
taneous 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8 [2i5“24- 
2 i6"2i] 295a-d; bk v, ch 4 [228“2o-229'‘7] 
309b-310a; bk vi, ch 1-2 312b,d-315d; bk 
VII, ch 4 330d-333a 

28 Galileo; Two New Sciences, first day, 166d- 
168a; third day, 197b-c; 200a-207d; 209a- 
210a; 224b-22Sd; fourth day, 240a-d; 243d- 
249b 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 177d- 
178d 

34 Newton: Principles, def ii Sb; def vii-viii 
7a-8a; law ii 14a-b; corol hi 16b-17b; laws 
OF motion, schol, 20a-22a; bk i, lemma 10 
28b-29a; lemma ii, schol, 31b-32a; prop i, 
COROL I 33a / Optics, bk hi, S40a-541b 

35 Home: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 
27 , 460c 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 470d-471a; 
BK XIV, 589d 

6d. Force: its kinds and its effects 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 5 333a-d; 
BK VHI, CH 10 [266''25-267“20] 353c-354d / 
Heavens, bk hi, ch 2 [3oi*’2-32] 392d-393b 

9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 3 234a-c 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 93Sb-93ga; bk v, 

, 969a'971b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologiea, part i, q 105, 
A 4, rep I 541c- 542a; part i-ii, q 23, a 4 
726a-727a 

20 Aquinas; Summa Theologiea, part hi, Q 84, 
a 3, rep 2 985d-989b 

28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-40b passim 

31 Descartes: Rules, ix, 15c / Objections and 
Replies, 231c-232a 

34 Newton: Principles, def ih-vhi 5b-8a; def- 
■ iNiTioNs, SCHOL, lla-13a; law ii 14a-b; bk i, 
LEMMA 10 28b-29a; prop 6 37b'3Sb; bk hi, 
PROP 6, COROL V 281b; general schol,' 371b- 
• 372a / Optics, bk hi, S31b; 541b-542a 
■35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 103-106 
433a-d 

36 Swift; Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 
45 Faraday; Researches in Electricity, 338a-b; 
514d-532a; 595a; 603d; 646b-65Sd; 670a- 
. 674a; 6S5d-686b; 817a-818d; 819b,d; 850b,d- 
855a,c esp 855a,c 
54 Freud; Narcissism, 400d'401a 

6t7(l) The relation of mass and force: the law 
of universal gravitation 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 910b 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 5Ic-52c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk h, aph 24, 
154d-155a; aph 36, 166b-c; aph 40 170c-173d 

31 Descartes; Objections and Replies, 231C'232a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk 1, prop 69-93 and 
schol 130a-152b esp prop 75-76 134b-136a; 
BK HI, PROP 1-7 276a-282b esp prop 7 281b- 
282b; GENERAL schol, 371b / Optics, bk hi, 
531b- S43a esp 541b-542a 

35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 103-106 
433a-d 

35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
57, 475d [fn 2] 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 850b, d- 
855a,c esp 855a,c 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 695c 
54 Freud; Narcissism, 400d-401a 

6d{2) Action-at-a-distance: the field and medi- 
um of force 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vih, ch 10 [266'’27- 
267*21] 354b-d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2 
[30i'’i6-3i] 393a-b / Dreams, ch 2 [459*28- 
34] 703b 

12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk vi [906- 
1089] 92b-94c 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 897b-90Sa esp 900b- 
901b: 906a-b; 922a-b: 934b 
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologiea, part i, q 8, a 
I, REP 3 34d-35c 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, lOa-c; bk ii, 26d- 
40b esp 30a-32c; 42b-43c; 45d-47b; 51a-c; 
54d-55c; bk v, 102d-104b; bk vi, 112d 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 202d 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 37 168d- 
169c; APH 45 176a-177c; aph 48, 183a-c; 186a 

31 Descartes: Rules, tx, 15c / Discourse, part 
V, 5Sc 

34 Newton: Principles, def v-vhi 6 a- 8 a; bk i, 
prop 69 , schol 130b-131a; bk hi, general 
schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk hi, 507a-516b; 
S20a-522a esp 521a-b; 531b-542a passim 

35 Home: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 
57 , 47Sd [fn 2 ] 

42 I^nt: Pure Reason, 227b 

THE GREAT IDEAS 6^3) to 7a(3) 

(6ci. Force: its hinds and its effects. 6d(2) Action- 
at-a-distance; the field and tnedinm of 
, force.) 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, Qb-c 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 441a-442b: 
451a-4S4a; 463d-465d; 5I3d-514c; 521a-524a; 
528c-532a; 604b-c; 63Ib-c; 648b-d; 685d' 
686c; 816b,d-819a,c; 819a-d; 824a-b: 832a-c: 
840c'842c; 855a, c, 

f 

6d(3) The parallelogram law: the composition 
of forces and the composition of veloci- 
ties 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 969a'970a 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 
224d-225c; fourth day, 240a-d; 243d-249b 
passim 

34 Newton: Principles, corol i-ii 15a-16b 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 691b-692a; 
788c-793c; 817a-b 

SI Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xm, 570d 
S3 James : Psychology, 105a 

6e. Work and energy: their conservation; per- 
petual motion 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 56b-c 
31 Descartes: Rules, xin, 27c 

33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 392b-394b 

34 Newton: Principles, corol ii ISa-16b; laws 
OF motion, schol, 23a-24a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 582b-S84a; 

837b-c; 837d-840c 
S3 James : Psychology, 884a 

7. The exceasioa of mechanical principles to 
other phenomena: optics, acoustics, the 
theory of heat, magnetism, and electric- 
ity 

la. Light: the corpuscular and the wave theory 

8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch 7 [4i8'‘26-4i9''24] 
649b-650b 

12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk iv [364- 
378] 48d-49a 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 896b; 901a-g03a; 
922b-926a passim 

17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr v 183a-189b 

19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 53, 
A 3, ANS and REP 2 283b-284d; Q 67 349d- 
354a; q 104, a i, ans and rep 1,4 534c-536c 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 92, A 1, REP 15 I025c-1032b 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 43a'b 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
167a-b; aph 37, 169a-c; aph 48, 18Sa-c / New 
Atlantis, 212d-213a 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-S5b 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 366b-367a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 94-98 and 
SCHOL 152b-157b; bk ii, prop 41-42 247a- 
249b; PROP 50, schol, 2S7b / Optics 377a- 

544a passim, esp bk i, 379a, bk 11, 492a-495bi 
BK III, 525b-531b 

34 Huygens: Light 551a-619b passim, esp ch i 
S53a-563b 

35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch iv, 
sect 10 261b-d; bk iv, ch ii, sect 11-13 Sllc- 
312b 

45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 
lOb-c 

45 Faraday; Researches in Electricity, S95a- 
607a, c; 817b-c 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c 

7a(l) The laws of reflection and refraction 

7 Plato: Timaetis, 4S4c-455a 

8 Aristotle: Meteorology, bk hi, ch 2-6 476b- 
482d / Soul, bk II, ch 8 [4i9’’28-33] 651a 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv I269-323] 
47d'48b; [436-442] 49d-50a 

20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, 
Q 82, A 4, rep 5 972d-974c 

21 Dante; Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv [i6- 
24] 75c 

31 Descartes; Rules, viii, 12b-13a/ Geometry, 
BK II, 322b-331a 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 94 152b-153b; 
prop 96-98 and schol 154b-157b / Optics, 
bk I, 379a-423b passim, esp 379a-386b, 409a- 
412a; bk II, 478b-479b; 485b-495b; bk hi, 
520b; 522b-S30b passim 
34 Huygens: Light, ch h-vi 563b-619b esp CH 
H-Hi 563b-575a 

la{i) The production of colors 

7 Plato: Meno, 177b-c / Timaeus, 46Sb-d 
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [730-841] 
24b-25c; bk vi [524-526] S7b ■ 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 901b 
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti, q 14, a 
6, ANS 80a-81c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 23, 
154a-b 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55c-d / Objec- 
tions and Replies, 231b 

34 Newton: Optics, bk i-ii 379a-506b passim, 
esp BK I, 424a-428b, 440a-441b, 453a-455a, 
bk ii, 481a-482a; bk hi, S19a-b 
48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 144b-145a 

7<i(3) The speed of light , » 

12 Lucretius; Nature of Things, bk iv [176-208] 
46c-47a; bk vi [164-172] 82b-c 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 148b- 
149c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 
178a-b 

31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 96, schol, 
155a / Optics, bk 1, 379b; bk ii, 488b-492a 
34 Huygens: Light, ch 1, 554b-557b; ch hi, 
570a-S75a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 817b 

7ai^)to7d{2) Chapter 54: MECHANICS 109 

7<»(4) The, medium of light: the ether 

8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch 7 [4i8“27-4i9“24] 
649b-650b; bk hi, ch 12 [434*’22-43g‘'ii] 
667c-668a / Sense and the Sensible, ch 3 676a- 
678b; ch ,6 [446“20-447 ''i 2 ] 684c-685c 
12 Lucretius: Na/wre of Things , v [449-508] 
67a-c 

• 16 Kepler: Epitome,. bk. iv, 857a-b; QOla-b 
19 Aquinas: Stmma .Theologica,VAi>.r 1 , q 14 , a 
6, ANS 80a-81c • • 

30, Bacon: Novum ' Organum, bk 11 , aph 48, 
186a ■ ,1 

33 Pascal: Vacuum, 366a-367a 

•34 Newton: bk hi, 'general'.schol, 

372a / Optics, BK in, 520a-522b; 525b-S29a 

34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 5S3b-560b esp SS7b- 

560b . - . . - 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, S95b [fn 2] 

7a. Sound: the mechanical explanation of 
acoustic phenomena 

, 7 Plato: Meno, 177b-c / Timaeus, 471b 

8 Aristotle: Soul, bk 11 , ch 8 650c'652c 

9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk v, ch 7 
. , , 328c-330b • 

12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [ 524- 
• 614] 5Ia-52b ‘ 

17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr v, ch 5 186b-d 
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 
172b-177a,c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk 11 , aph 46, 
178a; APH 48, 185a-c; 186a / New Atlantis, 

... 213b . . . • 

31 Descartes: Rules, xiii, 25c 

34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, prop 41-50 and 
schol 247a-259a passim / Optics, bk hi, 
525b-526a 

, 34 Huygens : Light, ch i, 554b-558b passim 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 485b-486b 

7c. The. theory of heat 

7c( 1) The description and explanation of the 
phenomena of heat: the hypothesis of 
caloric 

7 Plato: Timaeus, 462c-d / Theaetetus, 533b-c 

8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 7 380c-d 

12 LucRETius:- Nfl/«rc of Things, bk v [ 592- 
613] 68d-69a; bk vi [ 132-322] 82a-84c; [848- 
905] 91c-92b 

19 Aquinas: Siimma^ Theologica, part i, q 67, 
A 3, ANS and REP 1,3 351b-352a; q 104 , a i, 
ANS 534c-S36c ' 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 10-20 
140c-153a; aph 24, 154c-d; aph 26, 157a; 
APH 33, 161c; aph 36, 168b'd; aph 48, 182b; 
183d; 184d-185a; aph 50, 190b-192b 

31 Descartes:' Objections and Replies, 231a-b 
34 Newton: Principles, bk iii, general'schol, 

372a / Optics, bk iii, 516b-518b; 520a-b; 
S41a-b 

- 42 KANT:/«dgeDjenf, S45b-546b 
, 45. Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 
. 9a-16d 

45 Fourier: Theory of Heat l^^o-ISVo passim . 

• 45 Faraday: in Electricity, 812b-c; 

813b-815b; 857a-858d ' 

51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, S87b-c; 
EPILOGUE II, 687d 

7c(2) The measurement and the mathemati- 
•• -■ ; cal analysis', of the quantities of heat 

33 Pascal: Great Experiment, 388a 

■ 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 
14a-c; 33b-36a;' part iii, 99d-103b‘ 

• 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 184b-lS5b 

7d. Magnetism: the great magnet of the earth 
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 14, 177a- 
178c 

12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk vi [906- 
1089] 92b-94c 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 23b'25d; bk vi 
106a-121a,c 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 
166c-167a: aph 45, 176b-c; aph 48, 183b-c 
36 Swift: Gulliver, part iii, 100a-102a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 286a-294a; 
697b-757d 

7</(l) Magnetic phenomena: coition, verticity, 
variation, dip 

7 Plato: Ion, 144b / Timaeus, 471b-c 

8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vhi, ch 10 [266’’3o- 
267’‘2] 354b-c 

16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 897b-898b; 935a- 
936a; 941b-942a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i-v 3a-105d pas- 
sim 

30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 25, 
155c-d: aph 35, 163c-d; aph 36, 166c-167a; 
aph 37, 169b'C; aph 42, 174b-c; aph 45, 
176b-c; APH 48, 182c; 183b'C; 184a; 185a-d 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 595a-600a; 
607a-669d; 673b,d-757d; 812b-c; 813b-815b; 
85Sa-866a,c 

7</(2) Magnetic force and magnetic fields 
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 897b-898b; 935a- 
936a: 941b-942a 

28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 26d'43c esp 38a- 
39b: 45d-47b; S4d-55c; bk v, 102d-10Sd 
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 37, 
169b-c; APH 45, 176b-c 

34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 69 , schol, 
130b; BK II, PROP 23 , schol 202b'203a; bk 
III, PROP 6 , COBOL V 281b; prop 7 , corol I 

, 282a,/ Optics, bk hi, 531b 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 281c-282c; 
298d-301a; 302a-d; S28c-532a; 603d-604c; 
679a-b; 690a'697b: 7S8a-795d; 816b,d-824b; 
830b-848a,c 

48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 376b-379a 

110 THE GREAT IDEAS 7f/o7e(5 

( 7 . The extension of mechanical principles to 
other phenomena; optics, acoustics, the 
theory oj heat, magnetism, and electricity!) 

7e. Electricity; electrostatics and electrody- 
namics 

28 Gilbert; Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-34b 

34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop 7 , corol i 
282a; general schol, 372a / Optics, bk m, 
531b; 542a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 514d-528c 

7 e(l) The source of electricity: the relation of 
the kinds of electricity 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 269a-273a; 
277a-31Ca esp 281d-282c, 302a-d, 31Sd-316a; 
386c-422a,c; 433a-440a,c; 532b-539b; 541b,d' 
594d; 813a-b; 824b-830b esp 826a-b, 829d' 
830a 

49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 89b-c 

7e(2) Electricity and matter: conduction, in- 
sulation, induction, electrochemical de- 
composition 

30 Bacon; Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48 , 
18Ib-c 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 265a- 
269a; 273a-277a;306a; 309a-312a;312c-3I3d: 
314b; 31Sa-b; 319b,d-34Sd; 361a-432d; 

440b,d-514c; 5I5a-d; 522b,d-532d; S4lb,d 
584a, c; 824b-830b; 84Sb,d-855a,c 

7e(3) The relation of electricity and magnet 
ism: the electromagnetic field 
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-34b 
34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop 7, corol 
282a 

45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 266b-d 
269a-302d; 305d-306a; 307a'309a; 3I3d 

314c; 315a; 520b-521a; S28c-532a; 595c 
615a-619c; 658b,d-667c; 685d-686b; 7S9( 
7S8c; 795b,d-813a; 816b,d'8I9a,c 

7e(4) The relation of electricity to heat an 
light; thermoelectricity 
34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schoi 
372a / Optics, bk hi, 5I6b-S17a 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 30Sb-c 
306d-307a: 313d-314a; 314c-d; 315a; 4041 
405a; 476a-506a; 51Sd-516a; 518a-d; 561b, c 
569b; 580d-582b; 595a-607a,c 
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 687 

7e(5) The measurement of electric quantities 
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 277d- 
279a; 316b-318c; 366d-371d; 377d-390d; 
444a-451a; 465d-467a,c; 768d-773d; 778b,d- 
788c
