[1a]
[página ilustrada]

[1b]
[página ilustrada]

[2a]
Introductory  Volumes: 1. The Great Conversation 2. The Great Ideas I 3.
The   Great   Ideas   II  4.  HOMER  5.  AESCHYLUS  SOPHOCLES  EURIPIDES
ARISTOPHANES  6.  HERODOTUS  THUCYDIDES  7.  PLATO  8.  ARISTOTLE  I  9.
ARISTOTLE  II  10.  HIPPOCRATES  GALEN  11. EUCLID ARCHIMEDES APOLLONIUS
NICOMACHUS

[2b]
12.  LUCRETIUS  EPICTETUS  MARCUS  AURELIUS  13. VIRGIL 14. PLUTARCH 15.
TACITUS 5^^ 16. PTOLEMY COPERNICUS KEPLER 17. PLOTINUS 18. AUGUSTINE 19.
THOMAS  AQUINAS  I  20. THOMAS AQUINAS II 21. DANTE ^^^\ ^^^ 22. CHAUCER
23.   MACHIAVELLI   HOBBES  yS^g^  24.  RABELAIS  25.  MONTAIGNE  ^  26.
SHAKESPEARE I vS^ 27. SHAKESPEARE II

[3a]
?^5S?vS^5^^v5^vS^^S^v^^S>5^pS>vS>5^7^v^  28.  GILBERT GALILEO HARVEY 29.
CERVANTES  30. FRANCIS BACON 31. DESCARTES SPINOZA 32. MILTON 33. PASCAL
34. NEWTON HUYGENS 35. LOCKE BERKELEY HUME 36. SWIFT STERNE 37. FIELDING
38. MONTESQUIEU ROUSSEAU 39. ADAM SMITH 40. GIBBON I

[3b]
41.  GIBBON  II  42. KANT 43. AMERICAN STATE PAPERS THE FEDERALIST J. S.
MILL  44. BOSWELL 45. LAVOISIER FOURIER FARADAY 46. HEGEL 47. GOETHE 48.
MELVILLE  49.  DARWIN  50.  MARX  ENGELS  51. TOLSTOY 52. DOSTOEVSKY 53.
WILLIAM JAMES 54. FREUD

[4a]
[página ilustrada]

[4b]
[página ilustrada]

[5a]
I I

[5b]

[6a]
[página ilustrada]

[6b]
[página ilustrada]

[7a]
»«>»  Mortimer  J. Adler, Associate Editor Members ofthe Advisory Board:
Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, Clarence H. Faust,
Alexander Meiklejohn, Joseph J. Schwab, Mark Van Doren.

[7b]

[8a]
[página ilustrada]

[8b]
[página ilustrada]

[9a]
THE  GREAT IDEAS VOLUME I CHICAGO • LONDON • TORONTO - GENEVA • SYDNEY •
TOKYO

[9b]
• ? ' A.

[10a]
9 A ^ M'^ .J V: ^ 1952 ,

[10b]
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  The  Great  Books  is  published  with the
editorial  advice of the faculties of The University of Chicago © : ./ :
..  '  >..;.  ^  I  kJ  /I  ^  BY  Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. ' -^ '
^^^>-v>iHj  Copyright  under International CoPYRidnV' IIFnion All Rights
Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright Conventions by
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. .. . ^

[11a]
Mortimer J. Adler, Editor in Chief William Gorman, General Editor Donald
Hollenhorst  Robert  Anderson Aaron Bell Leonard Olsen Saul Bellow Janet
Pollak  John Sledge Joan Bernick Seymour Cain Robert Campbell Ursula von
Eckardt  Frederic  Camper  Eleanor  Frank  White  Joyce Connor Mary Jane
Deiches   Gordon  Dupee  Raymond  Ellinwood  Benjamin  Zimmerman  Thomas
Cosgrove  William  Gerhard  James  Doyle Robert Hemenway James Ellington
Executive  Editor  Assistant  Editors George Bryson Virginia Colton Ruth
Gustafson  Bibliographical  Assistants  Supervisors  Martha Dubois Marie
Sachey  Lorraine  Heath  Joseph J. Roddy Robert Malim Gladys Moore James
Vail

[11b]
Daniel  Fetler  Norman  Atwood  Garis  John  Harmon Gertrude Jaeger Jack
Landau  Richard  Lewis Werner Low Charles Nelson Heloise Olsen Mary Reis
lOLA  SCOFIELD  Shirley  Shapiro  Margaret  Stern  Editorial  Assistants
Rosalie  Gittelson  MiYo  Urakawa Special Consultants Arthur Hyman Janet
Kalven Herbert Lamm Milton Mayer Joseph Schwab

[12a]
[página ilustrada]

[12b]
. Verret Sl axi0H Hie oe sa2iO aaamMoal AALIOL TAMAL toni ae tail PAAATS
MALLY ) zaoHyaTosod IISETMAD T: ya “ov anveatS Pate 1

1A *

nav. t ays ahaa }

[13a]
GENERAL  CONTENTS Preface ......... xi VOLUME I Explanation of Reference
Style  ....  xxxiii Chapters 1-50: Angel to Love .... .1-1082. VOLUME II
C/^^^z-^rj-  51-101: Man /<? World .... .1-1140 Explanation of Reference
Style  .  . . . ix Appendix L Bibliography of Additional Readings . 1143
Appendix  II.  The  Principles and Methods of Inventory of Terms .......
1303

[13b]

[14a]
[página ilustrada]

[14b]
ses ae a

AUIOV pee

gixviTé avandia A 1O MOITAY . avol ot as0u“A :02—-F e

emi ats

MULIOV  ©.  * : gay¥T2 sovaastaA 10 1 oT en — an0W ot “aM :20%- oe raA 1
vucasooriar I

ana aasaroviad baie WYOIToy AT2MOD +

[15a]
CONTENTS  Preface  xi  Explanation  of Reference Style xxxiii Chapter i.
Angel  i  2.  Animal  19  3. Aristocracy 50 4. Art 64 5. Astronomy 87 6.
Beauty  112  7.  Being 126 8. Cause 155 9. Chance 179 10. Change 193 11.
Citizen  218  12.  Constitution  233  13.  Courage  252  14.  Custom and
Convention  268  15. Definition 286 16. Democracy 303 17. Desire 323 18.
Dialectic 345 19. Duty 358 20. Education 376 21. Element 400 22. Emotion
413 23. Eternity 437 IX

[15b]
Evolution  Chapter  24.  451  Experience 25468 Family 26. 486 Fate 27515
Form  28.  526  God 29, 543 Good and Evil 30. 605 Government 31637 Habit
32.  665  Happiness  684  33History 34711 Honor 728 35Hypothesis 36. 749
Idea 37761 Immortality 38. 784 Induction 805 39Infinity 816 40. Judgment
41835 Justice 850 42. Knowledge 880 43Labor 921 44Language 941 45Law 962
46. Liberty 991 47Life and Death 1013 48. Logic 1035 49Love 1051 50.

[16a]
[página ilustrada]

[16b]
[página ilustrada]

[17a]
PREFACE  I.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SYNTOPICON BY function it performs in
relation  to  the  set  as  a whole, and to assert its originality as an
intellectual  instrument. The relation of these two volumes of The Great
Ideas  to the rest of the set is the key to the nature of the Syntopicon
and its originahty as an instrument. Apart from this relation, The Great
Ideas,  though  to  some extent readable in itself, does not perform the
function  for  which  it  was  created—to  show that the 443 works which
comprise  Volumes  4 to 54 can be seen and used as something more than a
collection of books. tradition its life and light. The unity of this set
of books does not consist merely in the fact that each member of it is a
great  book  worth reading. A deeper unity exists in the relation of all
the  books  to  one  tradition,  a  unity shown by the continuity of the
discussion  of common themes and problems. It is claimed for this set of
great  books  that  all the works in it are significantly related to one
another  and that, taken together, they adequately present the ideas and
issues,  the terms and topics, that have made the western tradition what
it is. More than a collection of books, then, this set is a certain kind
of  whole  that  can  and should be read as such. books. The aim of this
"syntopical reading" was to discover the unity and continuity of western
thought  in the discussion of common themes and problems from one end of
the tradition to the other. The Syntopicon does not reproduce or present
the  results  of  this reading in a digest to save others the trouble of
reading  the  great  books for themselves. On the contrary, it only lays
down  the  lines along which a syntopical reading of the great books can
be done, and shows why and how it should be done. The xi

[17b]

[18a]
xii  THE  GREAT IDEAS it reveals the unity and continuity of the western
tradition. about which the discussion of each of these ideas revolves.

[18b]
a  various  uses  of  the  Syntopicon,  described in Section III of this
Preface,  all derive from its primary purpose—to serve as a guide to the
reading  of  Great  Boo\s  of the Western World as a unified v^hole. The
lines  along  v/hich  a  syntopical  reading  of the great books can and
should be done are the main lines of the continuous discussion that runs
through   the  thirty  centuries  of  western  civihzation.  This  great
conversation  across  the  ages is a Tiving organism whose structure the
Syntopicon  tries  to  articulate.  It tries to show the many strands of
this conversation between the greatest minds of v^estern civilization on
the  themes which have concerned men in every epoch, and which cover the
whole  range  of man's speculative inquiries and practical interests. To
the  extent  that  it succeeds, It was with these considerations in mind
that  the  editors  called  The  Great  Ideas  a syntopicon of the great
books—literally, a collection of the topics which are the main themes of
the  conversation  to  be  found  in  the books. A topic is a subject of
discussion. It is a place at which minds meet —to agree or disagree, but
at least to communicate with one another about some common concern. Just
as  a number of minds, or what they have to say, can be related by their
relevance  to  a  common  theme, so a number of topics can be related by
their  relevance  to  a  common  term—  single concept or category which
generates  a  number  of  problems  or  themes for discussion. Hence the
Syntopicon  is  organized, first, by a listing of the ideas that are the
important  common  terms  of discussion; and, then, by an enumeration of
the topics that are the various particular points The full title of this
work  The  Great  Ideas,  a  Syntopicon  of  Great  Boo\s of the Western
World—thus  indicates  not only that its structure consists of terms and
topics,  but  also  that it functions as a guide to the great books from
which its terms and topics are drawn. But the title may fail to indicate
another equally important function which the Syntopicon performs when it
is  taken  together  with  the great books. By serving as a guide to the
syntopical  reading of the great books, it does more than transform them
from a mere collection of books into a unified whole; it transforms them
into  a new kind of encyclopaedic whole—a new kind of reference library.
Without  in any way interfering with all the values the great books have
as books to be read individually, the Syntopicon gives

[19a]
them  the  further  utiHty of a unified reference hbrary in the realm of
thought and opinion. Because of the traditional and proved importance of
the thought and opinion contained in the great books, the Syntopicon, in
the  editors'  opinion,  creates  an  intellectual  instrument  which is
comparable  to,  though  quite  distinct  from,  the  dictionary and the
encyclopaedia. The dictionary is a basic reference work in the sphere of
language.  The  general  encyclopaedia  is a basic reference work in the
sphere  of fact, concerned with all matters ascertainable in the present
state  of  historical and scientific knowledge. The Syntopicon—these two
volumes  taken  together  with  the rest of the set—is a basic reference
work  in the sphere of ideas, comprehending the wisdom and understanding
accumulated  thus  far in all major fields of inquiry. As its utility is
realized,  it  will,  the  editors  hope,  take  its  place  beside  the
dictionary  and  the  encyclopaedia  in a triad of fundamental reference
works.  II.  THE STRUCTURE OF THE SYNTOPICON The Great Ideas consists of
102  chapters,  each  of which provides a syntopical treatment of one of
the basic terms or concepts in the great books. As the Table of Contents
indicates,  the chapters are arranged in the alphabetical order of these
102  terms or concepts : from Angel to Love in Volume I, and from Man to
World  in  Volume  11.  Following  the  chapter  on World, there are two
appendices.  Appendix  I  is  a  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings.
Appendix  II  is  an  essay  on the Principles and Methods of Syntopical
Construction.  These two appendices are in turn followed by an Inventory
of  Terms.  THE  I02-  CHAPTERS  Each of the 102 chapters is constructed
according   to   the  same  pattern.  Each  consists  of  five  parts—an
Introduction,  an  Outline  of Topics, References, Cross-References, and
Additional   Readings.   The   inner  structure  of  the  Syntopicon  is
constituted  by  the  order and relation of these five parts, and by the
integral  relation  of  the  Inventory of Terms to the 102 chapters as a
whole.

[19b]
PREFACE xiii

[20a]
xiv THE GREAT IDEAS in the tradition of western thought. the relation of
particular  topics  to  one  another. ics in a chapter to as many as 76.
phrasing of the topic, is implied by it.

[20b]
(i)  INTRODUCTION.  Each  chapter begins with an essay which comments on
the  various meanings of the idea under consideration, and takes note.of
the  problems  it has raised and the controversies it has occasioned The
Introduction  to  a  great  idea  is designed to serve as a guide to its
topics  and, through them, to the content of the references. For certain
of  the  most  important topics, it frequently provides, in the words of
the  authors themselves, a foretaste of the great conversation contained
in  the  passages  referred  to. The Introduction usually expands on the
necessarily  brief  statement  of the themes or issues in the Outline of
Topics,  and furnishes some comment on the structure of the Outline as a
whole,  and  on  The Introduction serves one other purpose. It indicates
some  of  the  connections between the idea it discusses and other great
ideas, thus functioning as a commentary on the Cross-References. In some
cases, the Introduction also calls attention to the way in which certain
works  recommended  in the Additional Readings supplement the references
to  the  great  books  in  the discussion of certain aspects of the idea
under consideration. (2) OUTLINE OF TOPICS. In each chapter, the Outline
of  Topics  follows  the Introduction. It states the major themes of the
conversation to be found in the great books on the idea of that chapter.
It  exhibits the internal structure of the idea by presenting its topics
in  relation  to  one  another.  There  are  about  3000  topics  in the
Syntopicon  as a whole, an average of 30 to a chapter, though the actual
number  varies from as few as six topThe 3000 topics provide a statement
of  the scope and variety of subjects wath which the great books deal in
a  substantial  and  significant  fashion.  Since the topics are divided
among  102 chapters, according to the great ideas under which they fall,
the user of the Syntopicon can find a particular topic by turning to the
chapter  on  the idea which is a central term expressed in the statement
of  that  topic or, if not actually present in the Almost all the topics
involve  one  or  more terms other than the name of the great idea under
which  they fall. Hence, by consulting the Inventory of Term^s, the user
of  the Syntopicon can ascertain whether the particular subject in which
he is interested is represented by one or more of the 3000

[21a]
topics. As will be seen below, the prime function of the Inventory is to
enable  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  to  find  topics  in which he is
interested and which he could not otherwise find except by examining the
Outlines  of  Topics,  chapter  by  chapter. Since the references to the
great books are organized by topics, the individual topic, rather than a
great  idea,  is  the  elementary  unit  of  the  Syntopicon.  From  the
standpoint of the references, the great ideas are collections of topics.
The  same  is  true  of  all  the other terms listed in the Inventory of
Terms.  For  each  of  these,  one or more topics are the headings under
which the discussion of the subject can be found in the great books. The
user of the Syntopicon must, therefore, always use a topic rather than a
term  to  discover  what  the  great  books  have to say on a particular
subject. However, with the help of the Inventory of Terms, he can always
use  a  term  to  find  the  topics  which either state or approximately
represent  the  subject  of  his  interest.  For  the convenience of the
reader,  the  Outline of Topics in each chapter is keyed to the pages of
the  Reference  section  which  immediately follows. In the Outline, the
number to the right of a particular topic indicates on which page of the
Reference  section  it  begins.  (3)  REFERENCES. The References are the
heart of each chapter. As the Introduction and the Outline of Topics are
designed  to  help  the  reader  use  the References, so the References,
organized  topically,  are  designed  to enable him to turn to the great
books  for  the  discussion of a particular subject. For each topic they
locate,  by  volume  and  page, the relevant works and passages in Great
Boo\s  of  the  Western World, There are about 163,000 references in the
Syntopicon  as  a  whole,  an  average  of 1500 to a chapter, though the
actual  number  varies  from as few as 284 references in a chapter to as
many as 7065. Under each topic, the references are arranged in the order
in  which  the  authors  and  their  works  appear in Great Boo^s of the
Western  World, References to the Bible, when present, are always placed
first. The order of references enables the user of the Syntopicon either
to  follow  the  discussion of some theme through the great books in the
historical sequence, or to select particular authors or the authors of a
particular period, according to his interest.

[21b]
PREFACE XV

[22a]
xvi THE GREAT IDEAS issue. ml t)i.*i ?.dk|o3 siom to ; cedures. ences.

[22b]
Ideally,  a  syntopical  reading  of  the great books in relation to any
single  topic  should  cover  all the works or passages cited under that
topic.  Ideally, such a reading should proceed, in the first instance at
least,  in  the order in which the references are presented. Reading the
materials in chronological order enables the reader to follow the actual
development  of  thought  on  a  topic.  In many passages, later authors
explicitly  refer  to  earlier  ones;  and  even  more  frequently,  the
expression  of later views presupposes an understanding of earlier ones,
on  which  they  are  based  or  with which they take But the individual
reader  may  deviate  from  this  ideal  procedure  in a number of ways,
according  to  his  particular interests. He may wish only to sample the
materials  referred  to  under  a given topic; or he may wish to examine
what  a  certain group of authors have to say on a particular topic. The
reader may know sufficiently well the position of certain authors on the
topic  in question, and so may turn his attention to other authors whose
works are cited there ; or he may wish to examine thoroughly the thought
of  certain  authors,  while merely forming a general impression of what
others  have  to  say.  The  Reference section is so constructed that it
permits  the  reader,  almost  at  a glance, to follow any one of a wide
variety  of  proA  brief  explanatory note, repeated at the beginning of
every  Reference  section,  gives  the  minimum necessary directions for
going  from  the references to the passages to which they refer. For the
sake  of  brevity, it oilers only such information as is uniform for all
of the works cited. If the reader wishes complete information concerning
the  way  in  which each particular work is cited, he will find this set
forth,  by  authors  and  titles, in the Explanation of Reference Style,
which  immediately  follows  this  Preface  (see pg. xxxiii) and is also
printed,  for the reader's convenience, at the opening of Volume II. The
Explanation  of  Reference  Style contains a complete account of all the
symbols  and  abbreviations  used  in  the  Reference  section and gives
examples  of  the  usual typographical form of the referOnly one further
point  requires  comment here. In some chapters, a few topics contain no
references.  These  topics  serve  in  the Outline as headings for other
topics  grouped  analytically under them. The user of the Syntopicon who
wants  to know what the great books have to say on a particular subject,
and finds that subject represented by a topic without reference

[23a]
content,  will  find  in  its subordinate topics references to the great
books  on  various  aspects  of  the general subject he has in mind. (4)
CROSS-^REFERENCES.  The  Cross-References  follow the References in each
chapter.  They  direct  the reader to other chapters in which similar or
related matters are considered. By relating the topics of one chapter to
those  of  other chapters, the Cross-References show the interconnection
of  the  great  ideas.  In  general,  the  order of the Cross-References
follows  that  of  the  Outline  of  Topics.  Each  entry  in the Cross-
References  indicates,  by  its  phrasing, the subject of the topic in a
given  chapter to which topics in other chapters are related or similar.
The  phrasing  of  the  Cross-References enables the reader to determine
whether  the  topics  in  the  other  chapters  mentioned are similar or
related  to  the  topic in this chapter. The related topics will usually
offer  a  quite  different set of references. The user of the Syntopicon
will  find that topics in different chapters often resemble one another,
both  in their phrasing and in the references set forth under them. In a
few  cases  they  are  identical or almost identical. But similar topics
will  usually differ in their reference content because the meaning of a
topic  is partly determined by the idea under which it falls, and by the
surrounding  topics  which  form  its context. Hence, in most cases, the
reader  who  turns  to  similar  topics in other chapters will find some
proportion  of  different references. comprises 443 works by 74 authors;
if  we  add  the  77  books of the Bible, which are syntopically treated
along  with  these  published  works,  the number is 520. But this large
number  docs not represent all the books which make signal contributions
to  the great conversation in the sphere of each of the great ideas. The
list  of Additional Readings which is the last part of each chapter is a
list  of books recommended as companions to the works and passages cited
in the Reference section. For die ideas and topics of each chapter, they
supplement  or  amplify  the  discussion to be found in the great books.
They  represent  some  of the works in the wider field of literature, in
which the great books occupy a central position.

[23b]
PREFACE xvii

[24a]
xviii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS panied by the title in the original language. I
143). of its construction. for the Syntopicon as a reference book.

[24b]
In  each list of Additional Readings, the recommended titles are divided
into  two  groups:  first, works written by authors represented in Great
Boo\s  of  the  Western World \ and second, works by other authors. Each
group   is   listed   chronologically.   Whenever  they  are  available,
translations  of  foreign  works  are suggested. The existence of EngUsh
translations is always indicated by the use of English titles; these are
usually  accomThe 102 lists of Additional Readings, each constructed for
the  idea and topics of a particular chapter, contain in all 2603 titles
by  1181  authors.  For  the  convenience of the reader, the authors and
titles  in  the  102  separate lists of Additional Readings are compiled
into  a  single Ust in the Bibliography of Additional Readings, which is
Appendix  I  (see  Volume  II,  pg.  In  the  Bibliography of Additional
Readings,  the authors' names are in alphabetical order and the works of
each  author  are  Hsted alphabetically under his name. In addition, the
Bibliography  provides  useful information concerning authors and works,
such  as  birth and death dates of authors, date and place of writing or
publication,  names  of editors or translators, names of publishers, and
names  of standard collections in which individual works appear. A note,
preceding  the  Bibliography,  explains  the principles THE INVENTORY OF
TERMS  The  Inventory  of  Terms  is  an integral part of the Syntopicon
placed for convenience at the end of Volume II. The Syntopicon is both a
book  to  be read and a reference book. The Table of Contents sets forth
its  contents  as a book to be read. But since this is limited to hsting
the 102 great ideas chapter by chapter, it cannot indicate the scope and
range  of  the  Syntopicon  as  a reference book. The Inventory of Terms
performs  that function; it serves as a table of contents The person who
wishes to use the Syntopicon as a reference book, in order to learn what
the  great  books  have  to say on a particular subject, must be able to
find  that  subject  among  the 3000 topics. The primary function of the
Inventory  of  Terms  is to enable him to find the topic or topics which
either  clearly  express  or  approximately represent the subject of his
inquiry. It does so by citing, for each term listed, the topics in which
that

[25a]
term  is  a  principal element. It cites these by giving the name of the
chapter  in which the topic appears, and the number of the topic in that
chapter.  The  reader  can  find  the topic in which he is interested by
looking  in  the  hiventory for the term or terms that would appear in a
statement  of the subject. The user of the Syntopicon may have a broader
interest  than  can  be  expressed in a particular topic. He may wish to
examine  the  whole range of discussion of a basic concept, whether that
be  one of the great ideas or some other term. This may involve, not one
or  two  topics,  but  a  large number, as is certainly the case for the
great  ideas,  and  for many other important concepts as well. Since the
Inventory  of  Terms  cites  all  the  topics  in  which  each  term  is
significantly  involved,  it enables the reader to investigate the whole
range  of the discussion in the great books relevant to that term. Among
the  terms listed in the Inventory are the names of the 102 great ideas.
This  does  not  dupUcate  the  information  furnished  by  the Table of
Contents.  For  each  of  the great ideas, the Table of Contents locates
only  the  whole  chapter  which deals with that great idea; whereas the
Inventory  of  Terms  usually  cites  topics  in many other chapters, in
addition  to  the chapter on that idea itself. For the reader who wishes
to explore the discussion of a great idea as thoroughly as possible, the
Inventory  of Terms supplements the topics to be found in the chapter on
that  idea,  and  even  those  mentioned in the Cross-References of that
chapter.  The  1800 terms in the Inventory are Hsted alphabetically, and
for each term the relevant topics are cited in the alphabetical order of
the chapters in which the topics occur. Sometimes the topics are divided
into two groups, of primary and secondary importance. Within each group,
the  chapters  are  alphabetically  arranged. The Inventory is likely to
present  only  one  difficulty to the person who consults it in order to
find  a  particular  topic. The first step in the location of a topic is
accomplished  when the reader turns in the Inventory to the term that he
thinks  is  involved in a statement of the subject of his interest. But,
finding a number of topics cited there, he must choose among them. There
are two ways for him to proceed: (i) he can examine the topics one after
another,  until  he  finds the one which satisfies him as z statement of
the  subject;  or  (2) he can use the names of the chapters in which the
topics occur as a clue to finding the topic which states the subject of

[25b]
PREFACE xix

[26a]
XX THE GREAT IDEAS

[26b]
his   inquiry.  Since  the  content  of  particular  topics  is  largely
determined  by  the idea under which they fall,.tlie.cbapter nanies will
quite  frequently  prove a reliable guide. ' -Wrrj-f, ,,; -jir-r] --rf-t
ly^jj  ,.n-, r A brief note, at the beginning of the Inventory of Terms,
explains  its construction and furnishes directions for its use. Nothing
more need be said here of its structure, or of its utility in making the
Syntopicon  a  reference  book.  But  a  word should be added about, the
significance  of  the Inventory in relation to the great ideas, r^'j^ ^^
o^The  division of the Syntopicon into 102 chapters may give rise to the
action that its editors think there are only 102 ideas worth discussing.
The  number  of  really  great, that is, primary or pivotal ideas may be
smaller or larger than 102. That number represents an editorial judgment
which  was made in the course of constructing the Syntopicon. How it was
reached  is  explained elsewhere (see Appendix II, Section I) ; but here
it  should  be said that it does not represent a judgment by the editors
that the 102 terms selected by them are the only concepts or ideas which
have  notable  significance  in  the  tradition  of western thought. The
Inventory  of  Terms  manifests  exactly the opposite judgment. Its 1800
words  or  phrases express important concepts. Though many of these will
immediately  be seen to have much less comprehensive or critical meaning
than  the  102  major  terms  of  the  Syntopicon, they all have general
currency  or  importance  in  some  special  field of inquiry. They also
represent  notions  or  topics  which  fall under one or more of the 102
great  ideas.  jr  THE PRINCIPLES AND METHODS OF SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION
The  essay  on  the Principles and Methods of Syntopical Construction is
Appendix II (see Volume II, pg. 1219). It is intended as a supplement to
this  Preface.  The  foregoing  brief  descriptions  of the parts of the
Syntopicon  indicate  its  structure, but they do not explain how it was
constructed.  The  work  of  creating each part of the Syntopicon raised
many  difficult intellectual and editorial problems. These problems, and
especially  the principles and methods by which they were solved, may be
of  interest to the reader after he has had some experience in using the
Syntopicon,  but  probably  not  before. The editors decided to make the
essay  on  the Syntopicon's construction an appendix to the work, rather
than  burden  the Preface with an account of the methods employed and an
exposition of

[27a]
the  principles  adopted.  While  freeing the Preface from the burden of
fuller  explanations,  they  nevertheless  hoped  to  provide systematic
answers  to questions which might arise in the reader's mind as a result
of  using  the  Syntopicon.  III.  THE  USES  OF  THE  SYNTOPICON i' The
foregoing  discussion  of the nature and structure of die Syntopicon has
expressed  the  purpose for which it was designed, but it does not fully
state  all  its  possible uses. There are four basic types of usefulness
which  the  editors  hope  the  Syntopicon  will have. Two of these have
already  been  mentioned. It has been pointed out that the Syntopicon is
both  a reference book and a book to be read. But the Syntopicon is also
intended to serve as an instrument of liberal education, through the aid
it  can give to a certain kind of study and teaching of the great books.
It  is  not  inconsistent  with its primary function as a reference book
that  it  should, in addition, prove to be an instrument of research and
discovery. i . ..j. ^ The description (in Section II of this Preface) of
the  parts-  of  the  Syn-  (i) The Syntopicon as a reference book ^.,.^
^^^,^  topicon,  and  their  function  in  the  structure  of the whole,
includes some indication of how it may be used as a reference book. Here
we  are  concerned  with  its  general character as a reference work, as
evidenced  by  the types of questions it has been constructed to answer.
In  contradistinction  to  books  of  other  sorts,  reference books are
designed  to  help  the  reader  who  comes  to  them  with inquiries on
particular  subjects.  If,  in  addition  to  answering the questions he
brings,  they  raise  further  questions  in  his mind and excite him to
further  inquiries,  which,  in turn, they are able to satisfy, they are
more  than  answer-books.  They  are  pedagogues,  leading the mind from
question  to  question  in  the  pursuit of learning. Reference books at
their  best  perform  an  educational  function, not simply by answering
questions,  but  by  arousing  and sustaining inquiry. Nevertheless, the
field  of  any  reference book is defined, in the first instance, by the
types  of  questions  it is able to answer. The specific type of inquiry
which  the Syntopicon is able to satisfy, and which gives it its special
character as a reference book, can be formulated by the question, What

[27b]
^'- PREFACE MT xxi :0

[28a]
xxii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS phrases listed in the Inventory of Terms. erence
library  in the sphere of thought and opinion. types of questions now to
be considered.

[28b]
do  the  great  books  have to say on this subject? This is not the only
question  the  Syntopicon  is  designed to answer, but it is the primary
one.  The topics are the units through which the Syntopicon functions as
a  reference  book,  since it is under the topics that the references to
the  great  books are assembled ; and it is through reading the works or
passages  recommended  by  these references that the person who consults
the Syntopicon finds the answer to his question, What do the great books
have to say on this subject ? ii The range and variety of the particular
subjects  of  inquiry  on  which  the  Syntopicon  can  be consulted, is
indicated  quantitatively by the number of topics and terms: 2987 topics
are  covered in the 102 chapters; 1798 terms are listed in the Inventory
of  Terms.  Qualitatively,  the  range  and variety of the inquiries the
Syntopicon  is  able to satisfy, can be seen only through an examination
of  the  topics, chapter by chapter, or by an examination of the chapter
titles  in  the  Table  of  Contents  and the words or To every question
expressed  in  this  way—What  do  the  great  books have to say on this
subject?—the  Syntopicon  helps  the  reader  to discover the answer for
himself  by  a syntopical reading of the great books in the light of the
topics  and  guided  by  the  references assembled under them. This fact
distinguishes  the  Syntopicon  from all other familiar reference books,
which  contain  within  themselves xht answers to the questions on which
they  are  consulted.  The  Syntopicon does not contain the answers, but
only a guide to where the answers can be found in the pages of the great
books. The references which constitute this guide do not tell the reader
what the great books have to say on a particular subject. They only tell
him  where  to  read in the great books in order to discover for himself
the  thought  and  opinion,  the  imagination  and emotion, in which the
authors  of  these  books  have  expressed  their  minds on this or that
particular  subject. For this reason it was said earlier in this Preface
that  only  when  it  is taken together with the great books themselves,
does  the Syntopicon create a refWhile this is true for the primary type
of  question  which  the  Syntopicon  is  designed to answer through its
system of references to the great books, it is not true, at least not to
the same extent, for the subordinate

[29a]
The  question,  What  themes  have  been  discussed  in the tradition of
western  thought  under  this idea? is answered in the first instance by
the  OutHne  of Topics in the chapter on each of the great ideas. If the
reader  becomes interested in the actual content of the discussion under
one  or more of these topics, he will then be asking the primary sort of
question, to which the references, assembled under these topics, provide
the  beginning of an answer, and the great books the fullness of it. The
question, To which of the other great ideas is this idea related and how
is  it  related?  is  answered by the Cross-References in the chapter on
each  of  the  great ideas. The Cross-References enumerate the topics in
other  chapters  which  are related to the topics covered by the idea in
question.  The  introductory  essay  on  the  idea also usually contains
references to other Introductions in which related ideas are considered.
By reading the Introduction and examining the Cross-References, a person
can  use the Syntopicon to discover, at least initially, the connections
between  one  great idea and others. The question. What hoo\s other than
those  published in this set contain important discussions of this idea?
is  answered,  to  some extent, by the Additional Readings listed in the
chapter on each of the great ideas. The question. What is the history of
the idea, its various meanings, and the problems or controversies it has
raised?  is  answered,  at  least  initially, by the Introduction to the
chapter  on  each  of  the  great ideas. Here as before, if the reader's
interest is aroused to further inquiry, the topics, the references under
them,  the passages in the great books referred to, and the books listed
in  the  Additional Readings, provide the means for a fuller exploration
of  the  idea,  in varying degrees of thoroughness and ramification. (x)
The  Syntopicon  as a book to be read. With respect to its 102 essays on
the great ideas, the Syntopicon is first of all a book to be read. These
essays  are  arranged  in  the alphabetical order of the ideas, but they
need  not  be read in that order. Each is intended to be intelligible in
itself,  independently  of  the  others.  The reader can therefore begin
according  to  his  interests  with  any one of the Introductions to the
great ideas. No matter where he begins, he will find that the reading of
no  other  Introduction  is presupposed. But he will also find that each
Introduction  traces some of the connections between the particular idea
which it treats and other great ideas.

[29b]
PREFACE xxiii

[30a]
xxiv  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  an  instrument of liberal education. reading of
great books.

[30b]
With  whatever  idea  he  begins,  the  introductory essay will at least
suggest  other ideas as subjects of related interest. These in turn will
turn  his  attention,  tOy and may arouse his interest in^ still others.
Since  each  of  the great ideas is directly or remotely related to many
others—perhaps  to  all  through a network of connections radiating from
each idea as a point of origin, the reader, starting at any point in the
realm of thought, can explore the whole of it by going from any one idea
to  all  the  rest by circuits or pathways of his own choosing. ^ •iM \o
^•:i\tVvw  o'V .nohiioup The reading of one or more Introductions should
also  turn  attention to the Outlines of Topics in these same chapters ;
and,  through them and the references organized under them, to the great
books themselves. As integral parts of the Syntopicon, the Introductions
to  the  great  ideas are not intended to satisfy the reader's interest,
but rather to arouse it, and then direct it to the great books. The name
"Introduction"  specifies  the  function  these  essays were designed to
perform. When they function effectively as introductions to the Outlines
of  Topics and the References, they implement the use of the Syntopicon,
not  simply  as  a  reference  book,  but  as  (3)  The Syntopicon as an
instrument  of  liberal  education.  The  Syntopicon  serves  the end of
liberal  education  to the extent that it facilitates the reading of the
great  books  and,  beyond that, the study and teaching of them. To make
the  nature  of  this educational contribution clear, it is necessary to
distinguish  between  the  integral  and the syntopical Integral reading
consists  simply in reading a whole book through. But syntopical reading
does  not  consist  simply  in  reading  parts of a book rather than the
whole. It involves the reading of one book in relation to In some cases,
as  the  References show, whole works are cited along with passages from
other  works,  which  may  be  as  short  as a paragraph or as long as a
chapter or a series of chapters. For the most part, a syntopical reading
consists  in reading passages of varying length rather than whole works;
but the point remains that the essence of syntopical reading lies in the
juxtaposition of many authors under the same topic and, in conse-

[31a]
Neither  of  these two types of reading can ever be a substitute for the
other, nor can either be taken as sufficient in itself. On the contrary,
each is incomplete v^ithour the other. Those who begin by reading in the
great  books and reading them syntopically must eventually read at least
some  of  them integrally. Those who have already read some of the great
books  through  must read them syntopically to discover what an integral
reading  of the great books seldom reveals, except, perhaps, to the most
mature  student or conscientious scholar. For each of these two sorts of
persons   the   beginning  reader  and  the  more  advanced  student  or
scholar—the  Syntopicon functions differently and the syntopical reading
of  the  great  books  serves  a  different  purpose.  For the beginning
reader—in  the  extreme  case,  a  person who has read none of the great
books—a syntopical reading, done in accordance with the references under
even  a few topics, works in three ways: initiatively, suggestively, and
instructively.  IiJw no' It works initiatively by overcoming the initial
difficulty that anyone faces when confronted by a collection of books as
vast  and,  in  a  sense, as overpowering as Great BooJ^s of the Western
World. The problem is where to begin and in what order to proceed. There
are  many  solutions  to this problem, usually in the form of courses of
reading  based  on  different principles of selection; but these usually
require the reading of whole books or, at least, the integral reading of
large parts of them. It is a matter of general experience that this kind
of solution seldom achieves the intended result. A syatopical reading of
the  great  books provides a radically different sort of solution, which
promises  to  be  more  effective. It initiates the reading of the great
books  by enabling persons to read in them on the subjects in which they
are interested; and on those subjects, to read relatively short passages
from a large number of authors. It assumes only that every educable mind
has  some  interest  in one or more of the themes, problems, or ideas on
which  the  great  books  touch.  A  syntopical  reading  may  also work
suggestively. Starting from a reader's existing interest in a particular
topic,  itmay  arouse  or  create an interest in other topics related to
those  which  initiated  his  reading in the great books. The syntopical
reading  of  a  collection of authors under a particular topic niay also
impel the reader to look beyond the passages cited. Except rAm tjiqijiui
.^oiqoJ ln:>i3Bib -^i ni \bn.^v:ii\ih inriwamoe

[31b]
PREFACE XXV

[32a]
xxvl THE GREAT IDEAS passages or works being read. It does this in three
ways. ond author.

[32b]
when   they  cite  whole  works,  the  references  cite  passages  which
necessarily  exist  in  a  context,  ultimately the context of the whole
book.  Few  of  these passages are absolutely self-contained. For few of
them  can  it  be said that it will be finally satisfactory to read them
without  looking  further  into  the author's thought. Hence, proceeding
along the natural lines of his own interests, the reader may be led from
reading  small  parts  of  certain  books  to  reading larger parts and,
eventually,  to  reading  whole books. If this process is repeated, each
syntopical  reading  may  occasion  and  stimuWorking  initiatively  and
suggestively,  syntopical  reading opens the great books at the pages of
maximum  interest  to  the  individual and, by the force of the passages
read  and their dependence on context, carries him from reading parts to
reading  whole  works.  Syntopical  reading  works instructively when it
guides  the  mind in interpreting and understanding the Firsty the topic
in  connection  with  which  the  passage  is  being read serves to give
direction  to  the  reader  in interpreting the passage. But it does not
tell him what the passage means, since the passage cited may be relevant
to  the topic in any one of a number of ways. Hence the reader is called
upon  to discover precisely what relevance the passage has to the topic.
To  Second,  tlie  collection of a number of passages on the same topic,
but  from  different  works and different authors, serves to sharpen the
reader's  interpretation  of each passage read. Sometimes, when passages
from  the same book or author are read in sequence and in the context of
one  another,  each  becomes clearer. Sometimes the meaning of each of a
series  of  contrasting  or conflicting passages from different books or
authors  is  accentuated  when  they  are  read against one another. And
sometimes  the  passages from one author, by amplifying or commenting on
the   passages   cited   from  another,  materially  help  the  reader's
understanding  of  the  secThird,  if  the  individual does a syntopical
reading  of  the great books under a number of distinct topics, the fact
that the same passage will often be found cited under two or more topics
will  have  its  instructive effect. As relevant to distinct topics, the
passage  must  have an ampUtude of meaning which the reader will come to
perceive  when  he  interprets  it  somewhat  differently in relation to
different topics. Such multiple inter-

[33a]
pretation  not  only is a basic exercise in the art of reading, but also
tends  to  make the mind habitually alert to the many strains of meaning
which  any  rich  or complex passage can contain. In this description of
the  ways  in which a syntopical reading instructs in the art of reading
the  great  books,  we  have  emphasized only the influence of the topic
under which the reading is done and the effect of reading one passage in
relation  to  another  or in relation to several distinct topics. But to
assure  or  reinforce  its  instructive  effect,  two  other factors may
operate  in  the  background  of  a syntopical reading. One is the whole
Outline  of  Topics,  which  places a particular topic in the context of
other  topics under the same idea. The other is the Introduction to that
idea,  which  may  help  the  reader  to interpret the particular topic,
thereby  increasing  the  effectiveness  of that topic as a guide to the
interpretation of the works or passages referred to under it. If we turn
now  from  the beginning reader to the more mature student or scholar—in
the extreme case, a person who has read through many, if not all, of the
great  books—we shall see that a syntopical reading works in a different
way.  It  no longer need function initiatively or suggestively; nor, for
the  competent  reader, need it serve instructively, to develop skill in
the  art  of reading. But it does provide the occasion and the materials
for  a more intensive and critical reading of passages already read; and
it  supplements  the reading of whole works independently of one another
by  requiring  an  examination of these works, or passages from them, in
mutual  relation,  as  relevant  to  the  same  topic. It is the general
experience  of  highly  competent  readers that a great book can be read
through  many times without the attainment of such complete mastery that
the  reader knows the relevance of every passage in it to every theme it
touches.  On  the  contrary,  the integral reading of a great book, even
when  done  more  than  once,  seldom  reveals  even a large part of its
meaning. Only the most intensive scholarly study of a particular book or
author ever arrives at such mastery. Short of that, reading a great book
through one or more times will inevitably leave unnoticed or only partly
recognized  many passages of critical significance to a particular theme
or  problem.  Only when the book is read with that particular subject in
mind will these passages, hitherto unobserved, be found.

[33b]
PREFACE XXV ii

[34a]
xxviii THE GREAT IDEAS theme. or issues on which it bears.

[34b]
The  truth  of this can be verified by accomplished readers of the great
books if they will examine, under particular topics, passages from books
they  have  already  read  or  even studied to some extent. Unless their
previous  reading  of the books w^as done in the light of the particular
intellectual interest represented by this topic, they are likely to find
some  passages  that  they  never  saw  before,  or at least never fully
recognized   as   having   the  significance  they  take  on  when  read
syntopically—in  the  light of this topic and in relation to other works
and  passages  relevant  to the same The Syntopicon can thus serve those
who  have already done, to a greater or less extent, an integral reading
of the great books. The method of syntopical reading not only provides a
different  and rewarding way of reading them, but also carries the study
of  them  to deeper and deeper levels of understanding. It overcomes the
defects  of  the  ordinary integral reading in several ways. It involves
reading  the  great  books  in  relation  to  one another rather than in
isolation.  It supplements the knowledge of whole works by concentration
on the significance of parts. Taking each of 3000 topics as the occasion
for  a  purposeful reading in all the great books, it makes possible the
close  study of each work in relation to all the problems There is still
another  way  in  which the method of syntopical reading can advance the
study of the great books, or rather a studious use of them. Here the aim
is  not  to  study the books themselves, but to consider a problem or an
issue  to  the  solution  or clarification of which they contribute. The
particular  problem  may involve many topics in one or more chapters. It
may  involve  a  number  of  great ideas and many subordinate terms. The
organization  of the Syntopicon enables the student of such a problem to
discover the range of the terms and topics traditionally involved in its
consideration.  The  References enable him to examine systematically, in
their  chronological  order  or  in  any  order he wishes, the record of
western  thought  concerning  this problem, so far as it is contained in
the  great  books. The Additional Readings supplement these materials by
citing  'It  does  not seem an exaggeration to say that a person who has
done  all  the  syntopical  reading  suggested by the References and the
Additional Readings on a particular problem^ will have a fairly adequate
knowledge  of that problem and its proposed solutions in the development
of western

[35a]
thought.  The  Syntopicon  should  be  able  to  save  the person who is
beginning  his  inquiry  into  a certain problem much of the preliminary
labor  of  research,  and  advance him rapidly to the point where he can
begin  to  think  independently about it, because he knows what thinking
has  been  done.  For the scholar, already advanced in his research on a
given problem, it may still be possible for the Syntopicon to serve some
good  purpose as a reminder or a check ; it may even uncover a neglected
passage,  or  throw  new  light upon one by placing it in the context of
other  passages. What has just been said about the studious or scholarly
use  of  the  Syntopicon  suggests  how it may serve as an instrument in
teaching  the  great  books, or in using them as teaching materials. For
the  most  part,  the  great  books  enter  the curricula of schools and
colleges  engaged  in  Uberal  education only by way of courses in which
some  of  these  books,  or most of them, are read integrally. Even when
they  are  read  in  selections rather than as wholes, they are, for the
most part, used as materials in a general course of study rather than as
appUcable to the study of particular subject matters. Without detracting
from  or competing with the unquestionable value of such procedures, the
Syntopicon offers another pedagogical use of the great books. The method
of  syntopical  reading  makes them available in the teaching of courses
concerned with particular subject matters, or in the conduct of seminars
devoted  to  the  study of particular problems. In certain cases, it may
encourage  the  reading  of the great texts in place of textbooks. For a
particular  problem  or  subject matter, whose name is either one of the
great  ideas  or  a major term in the Inventory of Terms, the Syntopicon
suggests  some,  if  not all, of the topics which deserve to be studied,
and  some, if not all, of the works which deserve to be read in whole or
part.  It  thus  provides  a  set  of  materials  organized  so as to be
adaptable  to  the  method  and  interest of the individual teacher. For
example,  at one extreme, the teacher can use the Syntopicon merely as a
guide  to  supplementary reading; at the other extreme, he can use it to
construct his own set of textual materials, selected from the References
and the Additional Readings and organized in the framework of a sequence
of topics.

[35b]
^; PREFACE xxk

[36a]
XXX THE GREAT IDEAS adapted. the scholar engaged in the historical study
of ideas.

[36b]
(4}  The Syntopicon as an instrument of discovety and research. What has
already  been  said  about  the  use  of  the  Syntopicon by the serious
student,  or  even  the  advanced scholar, in the sphere of a particular
problem  or  subject  matter,  obviously covers part of the Syntopicon's
utility  as  an instrument of research or discovery. But there are three
special  types  of inquiry for the pursuit of which the Syntopicon seems
to  be  especially  The  first  of  these is the study of the history of
ideas. The chapter on each of the 102 great ideas presents the record of
thought  in  the  form of references to the great books, organized under
each  topic. Since the references are arranged in the order in which the
authors  and works appear in the set of great books, and since, with few
exceptions,  this  is  a  strictly  chronological  order,  the record of
thought is presented in an order suited to the historian's interest. The
Additional Readings, which supplement the great books in the record, are
also   arranged   chronologically.  Hence  the  Syntopicon  provides  an
organization of materials eminently useful to The second type of special
inquiry  concerns  the  thought  of  a  single author, in its historical
relation to the thought of predecessors who influenced him and followers
influenced  by  him.  If that author happens to be one of the authors of
the great books, the Syntopicon can facilitate such research, since, for
hundreds  of  distinct  topics,  it places references to the work of the
particular  author  in  the  context  of  references  to  other  authors
—earlier,  later, or contemporary—whom he may have influenced or by whom
he  may  have  been  influenced.  The  third  type of special inquiry is
limited  to  the thought of a particular period rather than a particular
author.  Within  this  limitation, the historical interest may extend to
all  the  great  and  near-great  minds  who  formed the thought of this
period, as well as to all the ideas with which they dealt. So far as the
formative  minds  of the particular period are represented by authors of
the  great  books and by other authors cited in the Additional Readings,
the Syntopicon can assist such research. Instead of using its references
vertically,  from  one  end  of the tradition to the other, as would the
student  of  the  history of an idea, the student of an epoch of thought
would  cut  through  the  references horizontally. He would take all the
authors and books which fell within the period under considera-

[37a]
tion  ;  he  would examine the materials referred to under every idea or
topic  which  appeared  to  have  been  considered  by the minds of that
period. In these three types of historical inquiry, the Syntopicon is at
best an auxiliary instrument in the service of scholarship. If it proves
to  be more than that for the ordinary student, it will probably be less
than  that for the accomplished scholar whose documentary resources in a
particular field are more extensive than those from which the Syntopicon
is constructed. This is especially true of those problems in the history
of  ideas  which  have been investigated by prolonged research. But some
problems  have  not  been  so  investigated, and the Syntopicon may have
something  to contribute to the study of these. It is even possible that
the  Syntopicon  may  uncover  or call attention to new problems, or may
cause  the  re-formulation  of  old  problems  in  a  new way. The grand
research suggested by the existence of the Syntopicon is not historical,
however, but philosophical. Stated simply, it is the project of creating
in  and  for  the  twentieth century a synthesis or summation of western
thought,  past  and  present, which will serve the intellectual needs of
our  time,  as  analogous syntheses or summations have served antiquity,
the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  period of the enlightenment. The 102 great
ideas, the 1800 other terms, and the 3000 topics of the Syntopicon are a
fair  representation of the objects, as the materials to be found in the
443  works  here  published  and  the  2600  otlier  works listed in the
Additional Readings are a fair representation of the content, of western
inquiry  and  discussion.  The  Syntopicon  is, therefore, an instrument
adapted  to  the  sort  of  research  which might produce a summation of
western thought from the beginning to the present. Because the existence
of  the Syntopicon makes it possible and suggests that it be undertaken,
the  project envisaged might be called a Program of Syntopical Research.
Because  the method of this research, like the method which produced the
Syntopicon,   would   be   thoroughly   dialectical  in  character,  the
intellectual  summation  which  would  be  its product could be called a
Summa Dialectica. Chicago, 1952

[37b]
PREFACE xxxi Mortimer J. Adler, Editor

[38a]
nt  iaieal Me peal ~ al payin ad ef sayusg W Ibquiley mal sed: certyzzol
of  _gliladoy  id  aocttaRy  wa  ni  aoguahOerT Th ow oh mOriqutyRe cals
alotely  epsbiie  yrotaid  ot  ad  ecunld  arrddoqiamine aud. slowest od
ustiilaniny  det) yout ao3lq yan adorn anny aliases oldiz mudssliseor cm
cals seune peste

Jon.  nooigoing?  edt. orn Yo qaajony orks at si selqamie: be Io noimmpe
ws aroedyrgst

stow  Jostsraunnr  Et  i  anise  serocest  Ten  emiatwrads:  2b, suow lo
pdupmenue 6.

[38b]
stan.  squeal  I silrilqnonom, oght rir) peouls mpalt gyigdsixe act 116.
soil? Joon ylleiseqes at etd Tl cho oiony ye) bessgiesval nosed orn, did
2 ot bas bainuigsryt va.anad 2.3 neg 24 aeacl) do pclae atl nia snaleony
was  oLanigsire  liza  338 5 RE FER Gat enriginre He 25 oye emt_ oe saat
yd,  banana  sean geo a 2 Anoiclqouslid sud asvawod Linas anos, Azitogw)
sch  Toh  byus,ni,  gstiean  ree  Jnseg,  has  toy  jdyvods  camesw i 10
aaraddinye  euoyolens  ps  ree  ils  49, boing ads, bane gon 2h 1 roslto
go8x)  ada,  xeghi IQ ae Jo noiserear mugen tied. ois soon i» badaiiderg
sid  edaow  eye.  ors  at  by  not  ash, Bois epaileaA. enh see olay 2dT
.noietapth  bas  yuuupui  typ  im  daider dorms to. sce ato} bose (otros
gainaiad  wb)  cpa  tguosl  opqeunyennris  Io sanpteics als sauRoofl: vg
Sopjougadls  ,noAssrobawy, adisigegs ci cd}: a Shinsio A, lepigazaye, Jo
nooigonnye.  9  basuboug. doidw, onan noijecneaue [purzolloia ody 91: on
sta  elidel  aivliar aa ye eqga oJ ada fete at a | ihe Pei pc) tm bhest,
he cmd ROT eenegie ) ota Fter tah Caen ik: wom) faikoe

Th caeey q hue «mal yah =f Pie -w Pe *

[39a]
:   EXPLANATION  OF  REFERENCE  STYLE  THE  references  have  a  uniform
typographical  style,  but  the  manner of referring to particular works
varies in certain respects. The Explanation of Reference Style describes
the  typographical  construction of the references, with some comment on
the  variations.  It is divided into four parts I. General Typographical
Style   II.   Style  of  Bible  References  III.  Punctuation,  Symbols,
Abbreviations IV. Table of Authors, Titles, and Author's Divisions Cited
I.  GENERAL  TYPOGRAPHICAL  STYLE  The two examples below illustrate die
general  typographical  pattern  of the references to Great Boo\s of the
Western  World  \  and the headings above the examples call attention to
the   five   elements  commonly  present  in  the  construction  of  the
references.  Volume  Author's  Page  Number  Name Title of Work Author's
Divisions  Sections  35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  ch  xxi
178a-200d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall^ (i) Volume Number: The volume
number indicates in which volume of Great Boo\s of the Western World the
work  or passage referred to can be found. Most volumes contain the work
of  one  author.  When a single volume contains the works of two or more
authors, the volum.e number is given for each author. When the work of a
single author is contained in two volumes, the volume number is assigned
according  to  the  contents  of  the volume. (2) Author's Name: mioV m)
^bo:.  now  3fiio3 23on'Ji3iv: The author s name immediately follows the
volume  number,  except in the case of the American State Papers and the
Federalist,  which are included in Volume 43. Authors' names are usually
given in shortened form. xxxiii

[39b]
, .,. ^ , . , ; ,3,65Jdt3784 : r ^ ., >~ - .*

[40a]
xxxiv  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (3) Title of Work: in which the works appear in
the  volume.  (4)  Author's Divisions: example, do not. tive for all the
tales written in verse.

[40b]
The  title  follows  the  author's  name,  with the two exceptions above
noted.  Titles are also frequently abbreviated or shortened. When two or
more  works  are cited for a single author, the titles are listed in the
order  By  "author's divisions" is meant all such subdivisions of a work
as  book,  part,  section,  chapter,  paragraph, line number. The phrase
"author's  divisions"  does  not  necessarily mean divisions made by the
author;  they  may  have  been  made  by an editor of his work. Author's
divisions  are  given only for some works, according as, in the judgment
of the editors, their inclusion would prove meaningful or helpful to the
reader.  References  to  Locke,  for instance, as in the example, always
cite  author's  divisions;  whereas  references to Gibbon, as in the For
some  works,  author's divisions are completely given, as for Locke. For
other  works,  only  the  most important or largest divisions are given.
Thus  for  Rabelais  only  the  book  but not the chapter is given. Line
numbers, in brackets, are given for all works of poetry, including those
published  in  prose  translations. For Goethe's Faust, the line numbers
cited  refer  to  the  lines of the EngUsh translation as well as to the
lines   of   the   original   German.   For   other  poetical  works  in
translation—the works of Homer, the Greek dramatists, Lucretius, Virgil,
and  Dante—the  line  numbers  cited  refer to the lines of the works in
their  original  languages; for these works, the line numbers printed on
the  pages of this edition furnish only an approximate indication of the
location  of  the  equivalent  lines in the English translation. For all
poetical  works  written in English, the line numbers are the numbers of
the  EngHsh  Unes.  In  the  case  of  Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales, the
numbering of the lines is consecuIn references to the works of Aristotle
(in  Volumes  8 and 9), the figures and letters enclosed in the brackets
signify  the page, column, and approximate line in the Berlin edition of
the  Greek text edited by Immanuel Bekker. In references to the American
State Papers (in Volume 43),

[41a]
:  the  bracketed  line  numbers  refer to the hnes on the pages of this
edition  only.  In  references to the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas
(in  Volumes  19  and  20), the author's division "Part I-II" stands for
Part  I  of  the Second Part, and "Part II-II" stands for Part II of the
Second Part. In the case of the Summa Theologica, the author's divisions
cited  may include not only questions and articles, but the subdivisions
of  articles.  In  such  cases the page sections correspond in extent to
that of a w^hole article, to enable the reader to see the subdivision of
an  article,  when it is cited, in the context of other parts to v^^hich
it  is  related.  Author's divisions precede page sections except in the
case of footnote and note numbers, which follow page sections. When more
than  one  passage  is  cited  within  the  same  author's division, the
author's  division is not repeated ; as, for example 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  ii,  403a-404a; 405d-406a (5) Page Sections: The pages of
Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World  are  printed in either one or two
columns.  The  upper and lower halves of a one-column page are indicated
by  the  letters  a  and b. When the text is printed in two columns, the
letters  a  and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand
column,  the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand column. These half and quarter page sections are based on divisions
of  a full text page. Page sections give the page numbers and locate the
sections  of  the page in which the passage referred to begins and ends.
For  example, in the reference: 53 James : Psychology, 1 1 6a- 1 19b the
passage cited begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half  of  page 119. In the reference: ... 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b- 164c
the  passage  cited  begins in the lower half of the left-hand column of
page  163  and  ends  in the upper half of the right-hand column of page
164.  In  references  to works printed in two columns, the format of the
page

[41b]
REFERENCE STYLE xxxv

[42a]
xxxvi  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the upper half of page 77. cated in the body of
that  text.  a  (D),  follows.  For  example:  Old  Testament:  Ejco^wI,
6:1-4,16-10

[42b]
sometimes  places  continuous  reading matter in the a and c sections of
the upper half of the page, or in the b and d sections of the lower half
of  the  page. This occurs when a work or an author's division begins in
the  lower,  or  ends  in  the upper, half of the two-column page. Where
continuous  reading  matter thus appears in discontinuous.page sectipns,
it  is  indicated  by  a,c  or  b,d.  For  example: r 'nlj .^Mv-o^o-iiXT
v.t^m^^?.  Dfb  1-:^ 'v-:.', 14 Plutarch: Solon 64b,d-77a,c ^ K '/ means
that  the  work  cited  begins  in the lower half of page 64 and ends in
-:fii  Footnotes or notes are sometimes specifically cited by themselves
in  the  references, in which case the page sections given correspond to
their  location  on  the pages referred to. When a footnote or a note is
not  specifically  cited, the page sections given mark the beginning and
the  end  of the text referred to. The reader is expected to consult the
footnotes or notes indiChaucer's works (in Volume 22) are printed in two
columns;  tlie  inside  column  of  each page contains the Middle EngUsh
text,  the  outside  column a Modern English version. Since both columns
contain  equivalent  passages, the references to this volume employ page
sections,  (a and b) which ^^'' II. STYLE OF BIBLE REFERENCES ^^ bniirl-
iHlrH:  All Bible references are to book, chapter, and verse in both the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  of the Bible. When the King James and
Douay  versions  differ  in  the  title  of books or in the numbering of
chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first and the Douay,
indicated by Old Testament: Nehemiah, 7:45— (Z)) 11 Esdras, 7:46 -t - .)
In  references  to  the  Bible,  a colon is used to separate chapter and
verse  numbers;  and a comma separates the numbers of verses in the same
chapter. For example: :ij 10 lliUi iy/.oi >

[43a]
:  :  :  :  III.  PUNCTUATION,  SYMBOLS,  ABBREVIATIONS  (i) Punctuation
Diagonal  line:  When a series of references to one iauthor includes two
or  more  of  his  works pubhshed in the same volume, a diagonal line is
used  to separate references to one work from references to another. The
diagonal  line  is  used  in  the  same  way  to  separate references to
different  books  of  the  Bible. For example Si* Old Testament: Exodus,
33:12-23  I Job, 11:7-9 Semi-Colon: When a series of references includes
the  citation  of two or more passages in the same work, a semi-colon is
used  to  separate  the  references  to  these passages. For example Old
Testament: Genesis, 1:12-14; 9:1-11 38 RovssEAu: Social Contract, bk 11,
403a-404a;  405d-406a Comma: When a comma separates the title of a work,
or  an author's division of a work, from the page sections which follow,
passages  cited  are  only  a  part of the whole work or of the author's
division   indicated.  For  example,  in  the  references  14  Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-b;  44d-45c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii, 73a-74b the
passages from Plutarch are only a part of LycurguSy and the passage from
Swift  is  only a few pages from Part II of Gulliver s Travels. When the
title  of a work, or an author's division of a work, is not separated by
a  comma  from  the  page sections which follow, the reference is to the
whole  work  or  to  the  whole  of the indicated author's division. For
example,  in  the  references  14  Plutarch: Ljr«r^M^ 3 2a-48d 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part ii 45a-87b the whole of Lycurgus and the whole of Part II
of Gulliver s Travels are cited.

[43b]
REFERENCE STYLE xxxvii

[44a]
:  :  XXXVlll  THE GREAT IDEAS (2) Symbols sage or a whole work that has
just   been   cited.   example   example   intermittently   rather  than
continuously.  For example: (3) Abbreviations used for both singular and
plural words.

[44b]
esp:  The  abbreviation  "esp"  precedes one or more especially relevant
passages  w^hich  are  contained  within the page boundaries of a larger
pasWhenever  passages contained within a single reference are especially
referred  to,  a comma after the page sections separates these passages.
For  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-441d  esp  435c-436b,  437c-d,
438d-441d  Whenever  passages contained within a single reference to the
Bible are especially referred to, a comma is also used to separate these
passages.  For New Testament: Romans, 1-8 esp 2:11-16, 2:27-29, 7:21-25,
8:27  passim: The word "passim" following a reference signifies that the
work or passage referred to discusses the topic under which it is cited,
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7 461d-463c passim / Athenian The
following  is a list of the abbreviations used in the references. Unless
an   abbreviation   for   the  plural  is  listed  below,  the  singular
abbreviation is A . . ARTICLE
[nj
.  .  note  AA . ARTICLES OT. . Old Testament ANS ANSWER par . paragraph
APH  APHORISM PREF PREFACE BK . . BOOK PROP PROPOSITION CH . . CHAPTER Q
. . QUESTION COROL . COROLLARY QQ . . QUESTIONS {D). . . DOUAY REP REPLY
DEF . DEFINITION SC . SCENE DEMONST DEMONSTRATION SCHOL . SCHOLIUM DIV .
DIVISION SECT SECTION EXPL . EXPLANATION SUPPL . SUPPLEMENT
[fn],
. . footnote TR . TRACTATE INTRO . . INTRODUCTION

[45a]
IV. TABLE OF AUTHORS, TITLES, AND AUTHOR'S DIVISIONS CITED The following
pages present a tabulation of the contents of Great Boo\s of the Western
World,  Volumes  4-54.  The authors are enumerated in the order in which
they  appear  in  the  successive  volumes  of  the set ; and under each
author's  name  the titles of his works are listed in the order of their
appearance.  In  the  references,  the  name of the author is frequently
given  in  shortened  form.  In  this table, their full names are given,
followed  by their life dates when these are ascertainable. Because some
volumes contain the works of two or more authors who may be separated by
centuries,  the  order  in which the authors are cited in the references
sometimes  departs  from  the strict chronological order. The life dates
help  the  reader  to  place  the  authors  and their works in the right
chronological  order.  In  the  references,  the  title  of  a  work  is
frequently given in an abbreviated or shortened form. In this table, the
titles  are  first  given  exactly  as  they  appear  in the references.
Whenever  this  is  an  abbreviated  or  shortened title, the full title
follows.  The  table  also includes a notation of the author's divisions
that  are  used  in references to particular works. A dash in the column
headed  "Author's  Divisions Cited" means that references to the work or
works  in question cite page sections only. Where the author's divisions
cited  are the same for several titles, they are named only once, either
opposite the set of titles as a whole, or opposite the last title in the
group.  Titles  in  brackets  are  collective titles which appear on the
title  page  of the work, but do not appear in the references. The names
of  the  authors  of The Federalist (in Volume 43) are bracketed because
they do not appear in the references. Volume Number, Author, and Title 4
Homer  The Iliad The Odyssey 5 Aeschylus {c. 525-456 b.c.) The Suppliant
Maidens  Agamemnon  The  Persians  Choephoroe  The  Seven Against Thebes
Eumenides Prometheus Bound

[45b]
REFERENCE STYLE xxxix Author's Divisions Cited BOOK, Line Line

[46a]
z?x/x  THE  GREAT IDEAS Volume Number, Author, and Title 5 Sophocles {c.
495-406 BvC.-)' • Oedipus the King -.-.. Oedipus at Colonus Antigone rlJ
io  i\  '  Ajax  5  Euripides  {c. 480-406 B.C.) Wiesus ^ ;^^>^-a. Medea
Hippolytus  Alcestis  ;3fi5iJpu  Heracleidae  The  Suppliants The Trojan
Women  ; ; _. i : ' > Ion f , , -r,,... Helen Andromaclie 5 Aristophanes
(r. 445-r. 380 B.C.) T/t<? Acharnians - The Knights The Clouds The Wasps
The  Peace  The  Birds  6  Herodotus  {c. 484-r. 425 e.g.) The History 6
ThUCYDIDES  {c.  460-r.  400  B.C.) Peloponnesian War The History of the
Peloponnesian  War  7  Plato {c. 428-r. 348 B.C.) Charmides Lysis Laches
Protagoras  Euthydemus  Cratylus  \i-3\i'  Phaedrus  Ion  Symposium Meno
Euthyphro Apology Crito

[46b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited r ^ r. Trachiniae Philoctetes Line J ?^ytt><\
griEwoHol 3flT <"¥ »i:yX«lbiO Electrd 3 fh ->;-/a fin The Bacchantes '^^
Hecuba  Heracles  Mad  The  Phoenician  Maidens  I  Orestes  '''  '^-'^^
Iphigenia  Among ^he Tauri Iphigenia at Aulis 'iO c The Cyclops Line The
Frogs  The  Lysistrata  t  -  - -- '-• i ill The Thesmophoriamsae ^ .^jj
Ix^n"^'  The Ecclesiazusae r .i\. . The Plutus Line ollol aliii \[u\ ^A^
Mii^  BOOK  BOOK Phaedo Gorgias The Republic _. ill i,:liLj..' . Ttmaeus
.\.-'^^   Critias  ..':,:  T  Parmenides  Theaetetus  Sophist  Statesman
Philebus  Laws The Seffenth Letter except Republic I •/ v:'.v >'.r.a-^i.
and LawSy book 'ttn«oa ..

[47a]
,  Volume Number, Author, and Title Author's Divisions Cited 8 Aristotle
(384-322  b.c.)  Categories I . . ^ r Prior Analytics ) Topics ) Physics
Heavens  On  the  Heavens  Generation  and  Corruption  On Genaation and
Corruption  .  ,  Metaphysics Soul On the Soul Sense and the Sensible On
Sense   and   the   Sensible  Memory  and  Reminiscence  On  Memory  and
Reminiscence   Sleep   On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness  Dreams  On  Dreams
Prophesying   On  Prophesying  by  Dreams  Longevity  On  Longevity  and
Shortness  of  Life  Youth, Life, and Breathing On Youth and Old Age, On
Life  and  Death,  On  Breathing  9 Aristotle History of Animals \ ^ } .
Motion  of  Animals On the Motion of Animals Gait of Animals On the Gait
of  Animals  (  Generation  of  Animals  On  the Generation of Animals )
Politics  ).,... The Athenian Constitution chapter, paragraph Poetics On
Poetics  chapter.  Line  10  Hippocrates  {fl. 400 b.c.) ...... The Oath
^ix^X  "Xo n^w^iiyi ^A\ «0 -.ni^i Ancient Medicine On Ancient Medicine )
Airs, Waters, Places On Airs, Waters, and Places > paragraph Prognostics
The  Boo{  of Prognostics ) .uo-yavi •i!^ v Regimen in Acute Diseases On
Regimen in Acute Diseases paragraph, appendix Epidemics Of the Epidanics
book,  section,  paragraph, case Injuries of the Head On Injuries of the
Head   Surgery  On  the  Surgery  Fractures——On  Fractures  \  paragraph
Articulations On the Articulations Instruments of Reduction

[47b]
REFERENCE STYLE xli ' *" * T*

[48a]
xlii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Volume Number, Author, and Title 10 Hippocrates
(continued)  Aphorisms  The  Law  Ulcers  On Ulcers Fistulae On Fistulae
Hemorrhoids On Hemorrhoids Sacred Disease On the Sacred Disease 10 Galen
{c.  130-r.  200  a.d.)  Natural  Faculties  On the Natural Faculties 11
Euclid  {fl.  c.  300  b.c.)  Elements  The  Thirteen BooJ^s of Euclid's
Elements  11  Archimedes  (c  287-212  b.c.)  Sphere and Cylinder On the
Sphere  and  Cylinder,  Books  I-II  Measurement of a Circle Conoids and
Spheroids  On  Conoids  and  Spheroids Spirals On Spirals Equilibrium of
Planes  On  the  Equilibrium  ofPlaneSy  Books  I-II  The Sa7id-Reckpner
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola  Floating Bodies On Floating Bodies, Books
I-II  Book^  of Lemmas Method The Method Treating of Mechanical Problems
11  Apollonius of Perga (c. 262-^. 200 B.C.) Conies On Conic Sections 11
NiCOMACHUS  OF  GeRASA  (/?.  C.  100  A.D.)  Arithmetic Introduction to
Arithmetic  12  Lucretius  {c.  98-c.  55  b.c.) Nature of Things On the
Nature  of  Things  12  EpICTETUS  {c. 60-C. 138 A.D.) The Discourses 12
Aurelius  (Marcus  Aurelius)  (121-180  a.d.)  The Meditations 13 Virgil
(70-19 b.c.) The Eclogues The Georgics / The Aeneid

[48b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited  section,  paragraph  paragraph book, chapter
book,  definition,  postulate,  COMMON  notion, PROPOSITION, LEMMA BOOK,
DEFINITION,   ASSUMPTION,   PROPOSITION,  COROLLARY,  LEMMA  PROPOSITION
DEFINITION,  LEMMA, PROPOSITION PROPOSITION, DEFINITION BOOK, POSTULATE,
PROPOSITION  PROPOSITION,  DEFINITION  BOOK,  POSTULATE,  PROPOSITION  >
PROPOSITION  BOOK, DEFINITION, PROPOSITION BOOK BOOK, Line BOOK, CHAPTER
BOOK, SECTION Number of Eclogue, Line Number of Georgic, Line BOOK, Line

[49a]
Volume Number, Author, and Title 14 Plutarch {c. 46-r. 120 a.d.)
[The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans]
Cimon  Theseus  Romulus  Lucullus  Romulus-Theseus  Romulus  and Theseus
Compared  Lycurgus  Numa Pompilius Nicias Crassus Lycurgus-Numa Lycurgus
and  Numa  Compared  Nicias  Compared  Solon Sertorius Eumenes Poplicola
Poplicola-Solon  Poplicola  and  Solon  Compared  Themistocles Agesilaus
Pompey  Camillus  Pericles  Fabius  Fabius-Pericles Fabius and Alexander
Pericles  Compared Caesar Phocion Alcibiades Cato the Younger Coriolanus
Alcibiades-   Coriolanus   A  Icibiades  Agis  and  Coriolanus  Compared
Cleomenes  Timoleon  Tiberius  Gracchus  Aemilius  Paulus Caius Gracchus
Aemilius Paulus-Timoleon Aemilius Paulus and Timoleon Compared Pelopidas
Demosthenes Marcellus Marcellus-Pelopidas Marcellus Cicero and Pelopidas
Compared Aristides Marcus Cato Demetrius Aristides-Marcus Cato Aristides
Antony  and  Marcus  Cato  Compared  Philopoemen  Dion Flamininus Marcus
Brutus  Flamininus-Philopoemen  Flamininus and Philopoemen Compared Dion
Compared  Pyrrhus  Aratus  Caius  Marius  Artaxerxes Galba Lysander Otho
Sulla Lysander-Sulla Lysander and Sulla Compared

[49b]
REFERENCE STYLE xliii Author's Divisions Cited Eumenes-Sertorius Eumenes
and  Agesilaus-Pompey  Agesilaus  and Pompey Compared Caius and Tiberius
Gracchus-Agis  and  Cleomenes  Caius  and Tiberius Gracchus and Agis and
Demosthenes- Cicero Demosthenes Antony-Demetrius Antony and

[50a]
xiiv  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Volume Number, Author, and Title 15 Tacitus, P.
Cornelius  {c.  55-^.  117 a.d.) The Annals The Histories 16 Ptolemy {c.
ioo~c.  178  a.d.)  The  Almagest 16 Copernicus, NicoLAus (1473-1543) 16
Kepler,  Johannes (1571-1630) Epitome Epitome of Copernican Astronomy:\\
and  V  The  Harmonies of the World: W 17 Plotinus (205-270) First-Sixth
EnneadThe  Six  Enneads  18  Augustine,  Saint (354-430) The Confessions
TheCityofGod  Christian Doctrine On Christian Doctrine 19 Aquinas, Saint
Thomas  {c.  1225-1274)  The Summa Theologica, First Part; Part I of the
Second   Part,  Questions  1-48  Aquinas,  Saint  Thomas  20  The  Summa
Theologica,  Part  I  of  the Second Part (continued), Questions 49-114;
Part  II  of  the  Second  Part,  Questions  1-46,  179-189; Third Part,
Questions  1-26,  60-65;  Supplement  to the Third Part, Questions 69-99
Dante  Alighieri  (1265-1321)  21  The  Divine  Comedy, hell, purgatory,
paradise Chaucer, Geoffrey {c. 1340-1400) 22 Troilus and Cressida
[The Canterbury Tales]
The  Prologue  The Knight's Tale The Miller's Prologue The Miller's Tale
The  Reeve's  Prologue  The  Reeve's Tale The Cool(s Prologue The Cool(s
Tale  Introduction  to the Man of Law's Prologue The Prologue of the Man
of Law's Tale

[50b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited  BOOK  BOOK'I  BOOK  tractate,  chapter BOOK,
paragraph  BOOK, preface, chapter PREFACE, BOOK, CHAPTER PROLOGUE, PART,
QUESTION,  ARTICLE,  ANSWER,  CONTRARY,  REPLY prologue, part, question,
article,  answer,  contrary,  reply  Number  of Canto, Line BOOK, STANZA
Line,  except prose parts (see below) The Tale of the Man ofLaw The Wife
of Bath's Prologue The Tale of the Wife of Bath The Friar's Prologue The
Friar's  Tale  The  Summoner's  Prologue The Summoner's Tale The Cler}(s
Prologue  The  ClerJ(s  Tale The Merchant's Prologue The Merchant's Tale
Epilogue to the Merchant's Tale -/'- ,v'

[51a]
Volume Number, Author, and Title 22 Chaucer, Geoffrey (continued)
[The Canterbury Tales]
The  Squire's  Tale  The  Words  of  the  Franl^lin  The Monk's Tale The
Franklin  s  Prologue The Franklin s Tale The Physician's Tale The Words
of  the Host The Prologue of the Pardoner's Tale The Pardoner's Tale The
Shipman's  Prologue  The  Shipmans  Tale  The  Prioress's  Prologue  The
Prioress's  Tale  Prologue  to  Sir  Thopas The Parson's Tale Sir Thopas
L'Envoi  Prologue  to  Melibeus  23  Machiavelli, Nicolo (1469-1527) The
Prince  23  HoBBES, Thomas (1588-1679) Let'iathan Leviathan, or, Matter,
Form,  and  Potver  of  a  Commonwealth,  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  24
Rabelais,   pRANgois   {c.  1495-1555)'.  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel  25
Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem de (1533-1592) The Essays . . ., Shakespeare,
William  (1564-1616) 1st Henry VI The First Part of King Henry the Sixth
2nd  Henry  VI  The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth 3rd Henry VI The
Third  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth Richard III The Tragedy of King
Richard  the Third The Comedy of Errors Titus Androriictis The Taming of
the  Shrew  The  Two  Gentlemen of Verona Love's Labour's Lost Romeo and
Juliet Julius Caesar

[51b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xlv Author's Divisions Cited paragraph The Prologue of
the  Nun's  Priest's  Tale The Nun's Priest's Tale Epilogue to the Nun's
Priest's   Tale   The   Canon's   Yeoman's  Prologue  paragraph  chapter
INTRODUCTION,  PART, CONCLUSION Richard II The Tragedy of King King John
The  Life and Death of King John The Merchant of Venice 1st Henry IV The
First Part of King Henry the Fourth 2nd Henry IV The Second Part of King
Henry  the  Fourth Much Ado About Nothing Henry V The Life of King Henry
the Fifth As You Like It prologue, act, scene, epilogue, Line

[52a]
xlvi  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Volume Number, Author, and Title 27 Shakespeare,
William  Twelfth  Night Tu^elfth Night; or, What You Will Hamlet Hamlet,
Prince of DenmarJ^ The Merry Wives of Windsor Troilus and Cressida All's
Well  That  Ends  Well  Measurefor  Measure Othello Othello, the Moor of
Venice  King  Lear  Macbeth  Sonnets  28  Gilbert,  William  (1540-1603)
Loadstone  On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies  28 Galileo Galilei
(1564-1642)  Two New Sciences Concerning the Two New Sciences 28 Harvey,
William  (1578-1657)  Motion of the Heart On the Motion of the Heart and
Blood  in  Animals  Circulation  of  the Blood On the Circulation of the
Blood  On  Animal  Generation On the Generation of Animals 29 Cervantes,
Miguel  de  (1547-1616)  Don  Quixote  The  History of Don Quixote de la
Mancha  30  Bacon, Sir Francis (1561-1626) Advancement of Learning Novum
Organum  New  Atlantis Descartes, Rene (1596-1650) 31 Rules Rulesfor the
Direction  of  the  Mind  Discourse  Discourse on the Method Meditations
Meditations  on  First  Philosophy  Objections  and  Replies  Objections
Against  the  Meditations  and Replies The Geometry Spinoza, Benedict de
(1632-1677) 31

[52b]
Author's Divisions Cited Antony and Cleopatra Coriolanus Timon of Athens
Pericles  Pericles,  Prince  of  Tyre  Cymbeline  The  Winter's Tale The
Tempest  Henry  VIII  The  Famous  History of the Life of King Henry the
Eighth  prologue,  act,  scene, epilogue, Line Number of Sonnet PREFACE,
book  PART  preface,  book,  aphorism  Number  of  Rule  part  Number of
Meditation  DEFINITION,  POSTULATE, AXIOM, PROPOSITION BOOK ethics part,
preface,   definition,   axiom,  proposition,  demonstration,  scholium,
corollary, lemma, postulate, explanation, appendix

[53a]
Volume  Number,  Author, and Title Author's Divisions Cited Milton, John
(1608-1674) 32
[English Minor Poems]
Christs  Nativity  On  the  Morning  of  Christs Nativity and The Hymn A
Paraphrase  on  Psalm  114  Psalm  136  The  Passion  On  Time  Upon the
Circumcision  At  a  Solemn  Musicl{^  An  Epitaph on the Marchioness of
Parliament  Winchester  Song  on  May Morning On Shakespear. 1630 On the
University  Carrier  Another  on the Same U Allegro Younger II Penseroso
Arcades  Lycidas  Comus  Paradise  Lost  Samson  Agonistes  Areopagitica
Pascal,  Blaise  (1623-1662)  33  The  Provincial Letters Pensees Vacuum
Preface to the Treatise on the Vacuum and New Experiments Concerning the
Vacuum  Great  Experiment Account of the Great Experiment Concerning the
Equilibrium of Fluids Equilibrium of Liquids and Weight of Air Treatises
on  the  Equilibrium of Liquids and on the Weight of the Mass of the Air
Geometrical  Demonstration  On  Geometrical  Demonstration  Arithmetical
Triangle  Treatise  on  the  Arithmetical  Triangle Correspondence tvith
Fermat  Correspondence  tvith  Fermat  on  the  Theory  of Probabilities
Newton,  Sir  Isaac (1642-1727) 34 Principles Mathematical Principles of
Natural Philosophy Optics

[53b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xlvii  Line, except Sonnets and Psalms Death of a Fair
Infant  On  the  Death  of  Vacation Exercise At a Vacation Exercise The
Fifth  Ode  of  Horace  The Fifth Ode Sonnets, i, vii-xix New Forcers of
Conscience  On  the  New  Forcers of Conscience under the Long Lord Gen.
Fairfax  On  the  Lord Gen. Fairfax at the siege of Colchester Lord Gen.
Cromwell  To  the  Lord  Generall Sr Henry Vane To Sr Henry Vane the Mr.
Cyriacl{  Skjnner  To  Mr.  Cyriacl^ Skinner upon his Blind?iess Psalms,
i-viii,  Lxxx-Lxxxviii  BOOK,  Line  Line  Number  of Pensee definition,
scholium,  law,  COROLLARY,  BOOK, RULE, LEMMA, PROPOSITION, PHENOMENON,
HYPOTHESIS BOOK

[54a]
xlviii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Volume Number, Author, and Title 34 HlTYGENS,
ClIRISTIAAN   (1629-1695)   Light  Treatise  on  Light  35  Locke,  John
(1632-1704)  Toleration  A Letter Concerning Toleration Civil GovernmejU
Concerning  Civil  Government, Second Essay Human Understanding An Essay
Concerning  Human  Understanding  35  Berkeley, George (1685-1753) Human
Knowledge  The  Principles  ofHuman Knowledge 35 Hume, David (1711-1776)
Human  Understanding An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 36 Swift,
Jonathan  (i  667-1 745) Gulliver Gulliver's Travels 36 Sterne, Laurence
(1713-1768) Tristram Shandy 37 Fielding, Henry (1707-1754) Tom Jones The
History  of  Tom Jones, A Foundling 38 Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat,
Baron  de  (1689-1755)  The  Spirit  ofLaws  38  Rousseau,  Jean Jacques
(1712-1778)  InequalityOn  the Origin of Inequality Political Economy On
Political  Economy The Social Contract 39 Smith, Adam (1723-1790) Wealth
of  Nations  An  Inquiry  Into  the  Nature  and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations  40  Gibbon, Edward (1737-1794) Decline and Fall The Decline and
Fall  of  the  Roman Empire, Chapters 1-40 41 Gibbon, Edward Decline and
Fall The Decline and Fall ofthe Roman Empire (continued), Chapters 41-71

[54b]
Author's Divisions Cited PREFACE, CHAPTER CHAPTER, SECTION INTRODUCTION,
BOOK,  CHAPTER,  SECTION  preface,  introduction,  section introduction,
section, division part BOOK introduction, BOOK

[55a]
REFERENCE  STYLE  Volume  Number,  Author,  and  Title 42 Kant, Immanuel
(1724-1804)  Pure  Reason  The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals
Practical  Reason  The  Critique  of  Practical Reason Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics Preface and Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics With a Note on Conscience Intro. Metaphysic of Morals General
Introduction  to the Metaphysic of Morals The Science of Right Judgement
The  Critique  ofJudgement 43 Declaration of Independence 43 Articles of
Confederation 43 Constitution of the U.S. 43
[Hamilton, Alexander (1757-1804), Madison, James (1751-1836),
Jay,  John  (1745-1829)] The Federalist 43 Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873)
Liberty   On   Liberty   ,on\i\\  \s>"»i\'aO  Representative  Government
Utilitarianism  44  Boswell,  James  (1740-1795)  Johnson Life of Samuel
Johnson, L.L.D, ;y 45 Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent (1743-1794) Elements of
Chemistry  •  ' • ' ' 45 Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph (1768-1 830) ,; j
Theory  of  Heat  Analytical  Theory  of  Heat  :r.  45 Faraday, Michael
(1791-1867)   Researches   in  Electricity  Experimental  Researches  in
Electricity 46 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-1831) The Philosophy
of  Right  The  Philosophy  of  History  47  Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
(1749-1832)  Faust,  Parts I and II 48 Melville, Herman (1819-1882) Moby
Dicl{ Moby Dic\; or, The Whale t

[55b]
xlix  Author's  Divisions  Cited  Line  Number of Article, Line article,
section,  amendment.  Line  Papers,  by  number  preface,  part preface,
introduction,  part,  paragraph, addition introduction, part dedication,
prelude, prologue, part, Line

[56a]
Volume  Number,  Author, and Title 49 Darwin, Charles (1809-1882) Origin
of  Species  The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection Descent
of Man The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex 50 Marx, Karl
(1818-1883)  Capital  50  Marx,  Karl  and Engels, Friedrich (1820-1895)
Communist  Manifesto  Manifesto  of  the Communist Party 51 Tolstoy, Leo
(1828-1910) War and Peace 52 DosTOEVsKY, Fyodor Mikhailovich (1821-1881)
The  Brothers  Karamazov  53  James,  William (1842-1910) Psychology The
Principles  of  Psychology  54 Freud, Sigmund (1856-1939) The Origin and
Development  of  Psycho-Analysis  Hysteria  Selected Papers on Hysteria,
Chapters  i-io  The  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children Psycho-Analytic
Therapy  The  Future Prospects of PsychoAnalytic Therapy " Wild" Psycho-
Analysis  Observations  on ''Wild" Psycho-Analysis The Interpretation of
Dreams   Narcissism   On   Narcissism   Instincts  Instincts  and  Their
Vicissitudes

[56b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS Author's Divisions Cited book, epilogue BOOK, epilogue
Repression  The  Unconscious General Introduction A General Introduction
to  Psycho-Analysis Beyond the Pleasure Principle Group Psychology Group
Psychology  and  the Analysis of the Ego The Ego and the Id Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety  War  and Death Thoughtsfor the Times on War and
Death  Civilization  and  Its Discontents Netv Introductory Lectures New
Introductory Lectures on PsychoAnalysis

[57a]
5 ata fie Bee 8-1

4b al ° ‘ i ;

it. {

- Cha pict tA

Ra  TEI  Ti  EPS LO Re A IN AI A 8 AA ti I i I ae Ne ge GR em Ge te ne =
nem

INTRODIK

PLUENCED  by.a  long  trad:ticn ol. rch of 4 gous symb: MISA EN PR Mting
and poetiy, OW pina tion responds to the wax at ) ryt 2a

ring 2 Wi eed. fig

ure aad hav sae tac he FHR GREAT IS nage, commun eH iweb AS

etsy, contains ,catures - fthe elements of meaning in the abstract con

ool angels etic ss fe Yio thes if < ax “

E Jewish and ¢ Sheistian. the Gians

iv Giscussians BY Thc PoLosepA ii Sranpearance suggests that anges. |]

Be  persans;  thar  they  are nacst essentially chas } Merized. by their
intelligence. The wings sug re

thesfuaction of aagels—their service. a3 ar

: ngers from God to man. The aura ol leche ae

thsurrounds them signifies, according to di

his ed conventions oi emaleciine: the err su

lity.of angels..J¢ sug

als with bodies istouscapictanal metaphor si bothersinterpretation might
be put upem = Cc

of light sf onc considers the role which — th

“ notices ofange! bast play din. the history of us

bt. Wherev er that Notion has catesed i p

ete ons of God anti man, of

and.soul,.af knowledge and: love, and

Be  af  time  spsce; andymtowon, it-has.cast + Rupon these other topics.
Phe ilucinaanoe

eh has } peer ened: cal ies derived aT é

fen of angels asa speual kand of being or mature

in po way affected by doubts or dentulyet

"sts that. to umepgine th

:  txisfence. Whether such beings exist or act, the act = bb ea they are
conceivable  has  SPM  TCANCEe  frac  re ber’ and analysis: Those who do
notbekeve  pp  Phe  existenée-—oreven  the posuble exist ly of WEOPIAS 7
jevertheless rei wr Gheanas x ins useful sanalytically; ig appraising ac
th  ed. reahitzes; What an ideal society wean bei lk e cAn be considered
apart from the « yUIeNTON it,

cs . Sho os sith

“y= Ae. ®, o2 ache OS are a) eee Paes ee ee

[57b]
gptums  Mirae  2" bes EP Oar ant? in Vie tT soe encigeint fier lar * iy.
he, wt ind se ion F tac, ne he e-¥

IN id iT eo Pe =e ee ah =:

By  ive  a  velvet shy He ar, Nistence; i Rebbe ety WS arn oe hypothesis
in,  polaical. and conaomic 4 yt: What sort at being an angel would be 7
cma pp

pie ot 2 wide shania of aman

shattebne of what man is, how his mind os, what the soul is, what oeanes
af ex- a »atd-action anything would haveapars A uawer, Hence it suggescs
how matter and oa nicins in time and ‘space determine” tie | ay terptics
of  corporeal existence, Pascal’ ‘ Stet emthat “sas is neither angel aor
brave,  a  cuntireynate  thing  is chat he who would ao. c angelscts the
brute’’—~points to "the =)

ot conceptions of man which mesulwfnom

ing him to be cither angel or brumirathes

either,  Such  wewsof  humaa  nature.com - lan the. chapeeesion: Antidar
and: Maat; i be fuliy explooed withour refedence se isof the hitman mind
orsoul  in  iteselat | patter and-to body, A¢the chaptersd@ = | and Sour
indicate;  theanes carrying ui _ of Piato-tme Descarres; which actnbute.
bussan  cied  crsonb  the  berg  and post agurely spintua! substance. on
entity,  ae a pine? rotn pn fhe-company of the angels. ey teatvten Locke
applics the word /"spim q quality vo epee weet wae toy meee a yi

Se ccaactininadianns soiheateih ain thee sages in primaitya consantetion
of the invenred for heic ana

perpen meshasinty Sesh cbekr eo

[58a]
ve) Miiay.. Mi ia Sea Gop!

oo hago Baan, ngeb Kini sii ee me

Mt Baars, Lao itaiage . Wer wos Pence: : JUNHC

«bie  Minton while ines yn ahs EIA <P a Neg iigee: Hee a bak tir Fas eal
* ae .

[58b]
[página ilustrada]

[59a]
Chapteri: ANGEL INTRODUCTION INFLUENCED by a long tradition of religious
symbolism  in  painting and poetry, our imagination responds to the word
"angel"  by picturing a winged figure robed in dazzling white and having
the  bodily  aspect  of a human being. - This image, common to believers
and  unbelievers, contains features which represent some of the elements
of  meaning in the abstract conception of angels as this is found in the
writings  of Jewish and Christian theologians and in related discussions
by  the  philosophers.  The  human appearance suggests that angels, like
men,  are persons; that they are most essentially characterized by their
intelligence. The wings suggest the function of angels— their service as
messengers  from  God  to  man.  The  aura of light which surrounds them
signifies,  according  to  established  conventions  of  symbolism,  the
spirituality  of  angels. It suggests that to imagine angels with bodies
is to use a pictorial metaphor. Another interpretation might be put upon
this  aura  of light if one considers the role which the notion of angel
has  played  in the history of thought. Wherever that notion has entered
into  discussions  of  God  and  man,  of  niatter,  mind,  and soul, of
knowledge  and  love,  and  even of time, space, and motion, it has cast
light  upon  these other topics. The illumination which has been and can
be  derived from the idea of angels as a special kind of being or nature
is  in  no way affected by doubts or denials of their existence. Whether
such  beings  exist  or  not,  the  fact  that  they are conceivable has
significance  for  theory  and analysis. Those who do not believe in the
existence—or  even the possible existence—of Utopias nevertheless regard
them  as  fictions useful analytically in appraising accepted realities.
What  an  ideal  society  would be like can be considered apart from the
question

[59b]
of  its  existence; and, so considered, it functions as an hypothesis in
political  and economic thought. What sort of being an angel would be if
one  existed can likewise serve as an hypothesis in the examination of a
wide  variety  of  theoretical problems. The idea of angels docs in fact
serve  in  precisely  this  way  as  an analytical tool. It sharpens our
understanding  of  what man is, how his mind operates, what the soul is,
what  manner  of  existence  and  action  anything would have apart from
matter.  Hence  it suggests how matter and its motions in time and space
determine  the  characteristics of corporeal existence. Pascal's remark—
that  "man is neither angel nor brute, and the unfortunate thing is that
he  who  would  act  the  angel  acts the brute"—points to the different
conceptions of man which result from supposing him to be either angel or
brute rather than neither. Such views of human nature, considered in the
chapters  on  Animal and Man, cannot be fully explored without reference
to  theories  of the human mind or soul in its relation to matter and to
body.  As  the chapters on Mind and Soul indicate, theories carrying the
names  of Plato and Descartes, which attribute to the human mind or soul
the  being and powers of a purely spiritual substance or entity, seem to
place  man in the company of the angels. In this tradition Locke applies
the   word   "spirits"   equally   to  human  minds  and  to  suprahuman
intelligences. It would be misleading to suppose that the idea of angels
is  primarily  a construction of the philosophers—a fiction invented for
their  analytical  purposes;  or that it is simply their conception of a
supra-mundane  reaUty, concerning the existence and nature of which they
dispute.  In the literature of western civilization, angels first appear
by name or reference in the Old

[60a]
and  the  New Testaments. Readers of the Bible will remember many scenes
in  which  an  angel of the Lord performs the mission of acquainting man
with  God's  will.  Among  the  most memorable of such occasions are the
visits  of  the  angels  to  Abraham and Lot and the angelic ministry of
Gabriel  in  the  Annunciation to Mary. In one book of the Bible, Tobias
(Tobit, as it is called in the King James Apocrypha), one of the leading
characters is the angel Raphael. Through most of the story he appears as
a man, but at the end, after he has accomplished his mission, he reveals
his  identity.  "I am the angel Raphael," he declares, one of the seven,
who  stand  before  the  Lord. And when they had heard these things they
were  troubled;  and being seized with fear they fell upon the ground on
their  face.  And the angel said to them: Peace be to you. Fear not. For
when  I  was  with you, I was there by the will of God: bless ye him and
sing praises to him. I seemed to eat and to drink with you; but I use an
invisible  meat  and  drink,  which  cannot  be  seen by men. It is time
therefore  that I return to him that sent me. . . . And when he had said
these  things,  he was taken from their sight; and they could see him no
more.  As  A  RESULT  of  scriptural exegesis and commentary, the angels
become  a  fundamental  topic  for  Jewish  theologians  from  Philo  to
Maimonides,  and  for  such  Christian  theologians as Augustine, Scotus
Erigena,  Gregory  the  Great,  Aquinas,  Luther,  Calvin,  Pascal,  and
Schleiermacher.  They  figure in the great poetry of the JudaeoChristian
tradition—in the Divine Comedy of Dante, in Paradise Lost of Milton, and
in  Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales  and  Goethe's Faust. The philosophers,
especially  in  the 17th and 1 8th centuries, are motivated by Scripture
or  provoked  by theology to consider the existence, the nature, and the
activity  of  angels.  Hobbes, for example, attacks the supposition that
angels  are  immaterial  on  the  ground  that the notion of incorporeal
substance  is self-contradictory, and undertakes to re-interpret all the
scriptural  passages  in  which  angels  are described as spirits. After
examining  a  great many, he says that "to mention all the places of the
Old  Testament  where  the  name  of  Angel is found, would be too long.
Therefore  to  comprehend  them  all at once, I say, there is no text in
that part of the

[60b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS Old Testament, which the Church of England holdeth for
Canonical,  from  which we can conclude, there is, or hath been created,
any  permanent  thing  (understood  by the name oi Spirit or Angel) that
hath  not quantity . . . and, in sum, which is not (taking Body for that
which  is  somewhat  or  somewhere) Corporeal.** All the passages can be
interpreted,  Hobbes thinks, simply in the sense in which "angel** means
"messenger"  and  "most  often,  a  messenger  of  God," which signifies
"anything that makes known his extra-ordinary presence.'* If, instead of
existing only when they carry God's word to men, the angels are supposed
to  have  permanent  being,  then  they  must  be  corporeal. As "in the
resurrection men shall be permanent and not incorporeal," Hobbes writes,
"so  therefore  also  are  the  angels  ...  To  men that understand the
signification  of  these  words,  substance  and incorporeal—and mean by
"incorporeal"  having  no  body at all, not just a subtle body the words
taken  together  "imply  a  contradicHence Hobbes argues that to say "an
tion.  angel, or spirit, is (in that sense) an incorporeal substance, is
to  say  in  effect that there is no angel or spirit at all. Considering
therefore  the signification of the word angel in the Old Testament, and
the  nature of dreams and visions that happen to men by the ordinary way
of   nature,"   Hobbes  concludes  that  the  angels  are  "nothing  but
supernatural  apparitions  of  the  fancy,  raised  by  the  special and
extraordinary  operation  of  God,  thereby  to  make  his  presence and
commandments  known  to  mankind,  and chiefly to his own people." Locke
seems  to take the exactly opposite position. Asserting that we have "no
clear  or  distinct  idea  of  substance  in general," he does not think
spirits  any  less  intelligible  than  bodies.  "The  idea oi corporeal
substance,''   he  writes,  "is  as  remote  from  our  conceptions  and
apprehensions,  as that of spiritual substance or spirit; and therefore,
from  our  not  having  any notion of the substance of spirit, we can no
more  conclude its non-existence, than we can, for the same reason, deny
the  existence  of  body." Just as we form the complex idea of bodies by
supposing  their  qualities,  such  as  figure  and motion, or color and
weight,  to  co-exist in some substratum; so by supposing the activities
we find in ourselves—such as "thinking, understanding.

[61a]
Chapter  1  : ANGEL willing, knowing, and the power of beginning motion,
etc."— to co-exist in some substance, *'we are able to frame the complex
idea  of an immaterial spirit.'' Not only does Locke think that "we have
as  clear a perception and notion of immaterial substances as we have of
material,"  but he also finds the traditional doctrine of a hierarchy of
angels  quite  acceptable  to reason. "It is not impossible to conceive,
nor  repugnant  to reason, that there may be many species of spirits, as
much  separated  and diversified one from another by distinct properties
whereof  we  have  no  ideas,  as  the  species  of  sensible things are
distinguished one from another by qualities which we know and observe in
them."  Locke goes even further—beyond the mere possibility of angels to
the  likelihood  of  their  real  existence. His reasoning resembles the
traditional  argument  of the theologians on this difficult point. "When
we  consider the infinite power and wisdom of the Maker," he writes, "we
have  reason  to think that it is suitable to the magnificent harmony of
the  Universe,  and  the  great  design  and  infinite  goodness  of the
Architect, that the species of creatures should also, by gentle degrees,
ascend  upward  from  us  toward his infinite perfection, as we see they
gradually  descend  from us downwards." Such speculations concerning the
existence and the order of angels are usually thought to be the province
of  the  theologian  rather than the philosopher. But Bacon, like Locke,
does  not  think  it  unfitting for the philosopher to inquire into such
matters.  In  natural theology for him a part of philosophy—Bacon thinks
it  is improper "from the contemplation of nature, and the principles of
human  reason,  to  dispute  or  urge  anything with vehemence as to the
mysteries  of  faith."  But  "it  is otherwise," he declares, "as to the
nature  of  spirits  and  angels;  this  being  neither unsearchable nor
forbid,  but in a great part level to the human mind on account of their
affinity."  He  does  not  further  instruct us concerning angels in the
Advancement  of  Learning,  but  in the Novum Organum he throws light on
their  nature  as  well  as  ours  by  touching  on  one  characteristic
difference  between the human and the angelic mind. Discussing there the
theory of induction, he holds that "it is only for God

[61b]
(the  bcstowcr  and  creator  of  forms),  and  perhaps  for  angels  or
intelligences  at  once  to  recognize  forms affirmatively at the first
glance  of  contemplation." Unlike most of the great ideas with which we
are  concerned,  the idea of angel seems to be limited in its historical
scope.  It  is not merely that since the i8th century the discussion has
dwindled,  but also that the idea makes no appearance in the great books
of  pagan  antiquity  —certainly  not  in  the strict sense of the term,
whereby  "angel" signifies a creature of God, spiritual in substance and
nature,  and  playing  a  role in the divine government of the universe.
There  are,  nevertheless,  analogous  conceptions  in  the religion and
philosophy  of  the  ancients; and in philosophy at least, the points of
resemblance  between  the  analogous concepts are sufficiently strong to
establish  a  continuity  of  discussion.  Furthermore,  elements in the
thought  of Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus exercise a critical influence
on  Judaeo-Christian  Gibbon  relates  how the early Christians made the
connection  between  the  gods  of  polytheism  and their doctrine about
angels.  "It  was  the  universal  sentiment  both  of the church and of
heretics,"  he  writes, "that the daemons were the authors, the patrons,
and  the  objects  of  idolatry.  Those  rebellious spirits who had been
degraded  from  the rank of angels, and cast down into the infernal pit,
were  still  permitted to roam upon the earth, to torment the bodies and
to  seduce  the  minds  of  sinful  men. The daemons soon discovered and
abused  the natural propensity of the human heart towards devotion, and,
artfully  withdrawing  the adoration of mankind from their Creator, they
usurped  the  place  and  honors  of  the  Supreme  In  the polytheistic
religions  of  antiquity,  the  demi-gods or inferior deities are beings
superior   in   nature  and  power  to  man.  "The  polytheist  and  the
philosopher,  the  Greek  and the barbarian," writes Gibbon, "were alike
accustomed  to  conceive a long succession, an infinite chain of angels,
or daemons, or deities, or aeons, or emanations, issuing from the throne
of  light."  In  Plato's  Symposium, for example, Diotima tells Socrates
that Love "is intermediate be-

[62a]
twcen the divine and the mortd j . .and interprets between gods and men;
conveying  and  taking  across to the gods the prayers and sacrifices of
men,  and to men the commands and repHes of the gods; he is the mediator
who spans the chasm which divides them." Love, Diotima explains, is only
one  of  "these  spirits  and  intermediate  powers" which "are many and
diverse." Such demi-gods are intermediate by their very nature. Although
superhuman  in  knowledge  and  action,  they  still  are not completely
divine.  Occupying  a place between men and gods, they are, according to
Plato,  "by  nature  neither  mortal  nor  immortal." Their existence is
necessary  to  fill out the hierarchy of natures. They are links in what
has  come  to be called "the great chain of being." The analogy with the
angels  arises  primarily  from  this  fact of hierarchy. Both pagan and
Christian  religions  believe  in  an  order of supernatural or at least
superhuman  beings graded in perfection and power. In both, these beings
serve  as  messengers  from  the  gods  to  men;  they  act sometimes as
guardians  or protectors, sometimes as traducers, deceivers, and enemies
of  man.  But  the analogy cannot be carried much further than this. The
angels,  according to Christian teaching, are not inferior gods, or even
demi-gods.   As  compared  with  the  "intermediate  spirits"  of  pagan
religion,  they  are  less  human  in character, as well as less divine.
Nevertheless,  the  reader  of  the great poems of antiquity will find a
striking  parallelism  between the heavenly insurrection which underlies
the action of Prometheus Bound and the angelic warfare in Paradise Lost.
In the writings of Plato, Aristotle, and Piotinus, philosophical inquiry
turns  from  the  sensible  world  of  material  things  to consider the
existence and nature of an order of purely intelligible beings. As there
is  an  inherent  connection between being perceptible to the senses and
being  material, so that which is purely intelligible must be completely
immaterial.  If  ideas  exist independently—in their own right and apart
from  knowing  or  thinking minds— then they constitute such an order of
purely  intelligible  entities.  At  this  point  a  number of difficult
questions arise. Are the intelligiblcs also intelligences, /.<?.,

[62b]
THE)GREAT  IDEAS  are  they  an  order  of knowcrs as well as a realm of
knowables  ?  Can  they  be regarded, as substances ? And if so, do they
have a mode of action appropriate to their mode of being—action which is
other  than  knowing, action which in some way impinges on the course of
events  or  the  motions  of the physical world? yjm.]? Plotinus answers
affirmatively   that  the  purely  intelligible  beings  are  also  pure
intelligences,  but  he  does  not  conceive them as having any power or
action except that of knowledge. Another answer to these questions given
in  antiquity  and  the  Middle  Ages  is  that the inteUigences are the
celestial  motors,  the  movers  of the heavenly bodies. "Since we see,"
Aristotle  writes,  "that  besides  the  simple  spatial movement of the
universe,  which we say that the first and unmovable substance produces,
there  are  other  spatial  movements—  those  of  the planets—which are
eternal  (for  a  body which moves in a circle moves eternally), each oi
these  movements  also  must be caused by a substance, both unmovable in
itself  and  eternal." These secondary movers, Aristotle thinks, are "of
the  same  number as the movements ot the stars," and not only must they
be  eternal  and  unmovable,  as  is  the prime mover, but also "without
magnitude"  or  immaterial. Plato offers an alternative hypothesis— that
the  celestial  bodies  are  alive and have souls. This hypothesis, like
Aristotle's,  tends  in  the  Middle Ages to be restated in terms of the
theory  of  angels.  Aquinas  reports Augustine as thinking that "if the
heavenly  bodies  are  really living beings, their souls must be akin to
the  angelic  nature."  He  himself holds that "spiritual substances are
united  to them as movers to things moved," the proof of which, he says,
"lies  in  the fact that whereas nature moves to one fixed end, in which
having  attained  it,  it rests; this does not appear in the movement of
the  heavenly  bodies.  Hence  it  follows  that  they are moved by some
intellectual  substances." The question whether intelligences govern the
planets  also  occupies  the  attention  of  an  astronomer like Kepler.
Although  he  denies any need for such intelligences—among other reasons
because  planetary  motion is not circular but elliptical—he argues that
the celestial movements are the work either "of the natural power of the
bodies, or else a work of the soul

[63a]
Chapter  1  :  ANGEL  acting  uniformly  in accordance with those bodily
powers."  But  whether or not they are to be regarded as movers^ as well
as  ^powers  and knoiuables, the intelligences represent for ancient and
mediaeval  thought  a  mode  of  being  exempt  from the vicissitudes of
physical  change  even  as  it  is  separate  from  matter.  When modern
philosophers  consider spirits or spiritual being, they seldom deal with
the   ancient   speculations   about   pure  intelligibles  or  separate
intelligences  without  being  influenced by the theological doctrine of
angels which developed in mediaeval thought. The extent of this doctrine
may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  the Sutnma Theologica of Aquinas
contains a whole treatise on the angels, as well as additional questions
on  the  speech  of  angels,  their hierarchies and orders, the division
between  the  good  and  the  bad  angels,  and their action on men— the
guardianship  of  the  good  angels and the assaults of the demons. That
these  additional  questions  are  contained  in  the treatise on divine
government  throws  some  light  on  their theological significance. The
primary  fact  about  the  angelic  nature  is immateriahty. An angel is
immaterial  both  in  its  substantial  being  and in its characteristic
activity  which,  says  Aquinas,  is  "an  altogether immaterial mode of
operation."  Being  immaterial, they are also incorruptible. "Nothing is
corrupted  except  by  its  form  being  separated from the matter . . .
Consequently,"  Aquinas  writes,  "a subject composed of matter and form
ceases to be actually when the form is separated from the matter. But if
the  form subsists in its own being, as happens in the angels, it cannot
lose  its  being." To signify that they are intelligences existing apart
from  matter,  the  angels  are  sometimes called "subsisting forms" and
sometimes "separate substances." Although they are imperishable in being
and  have  immortal  life,  the angels are not, like God, truly eternal.
"That  heaven  of  heavens which Thou createdst in the beginning is some
intellectual  creature,"  Augustine  writes,  but  it  is  in  "no  ways
coeternal  unto  Thee."  As  created,  the angels have a beginning. Yet,
while  not  eternal,  neither  are  they temporal creatures in continual
flux,  but,  according to Augustine, they "partake of Thy eternity . . .
through the

[63b]
sweetness  of  that  most  happy  contemplation of Thyself. . . cleaving
close  unto  Thee, placed beyond all the rolling vicissitudes of times."
It is for this reason that the angels are spoken of as "aeviternal." The
familiar  question  concerning  the  number of angels able to stand on a
needle's  point  if  it  was  ever asked by mediaeval theologians merely
poses  the  problem  of how an incorporeal substance occupies space. The
way  in  which Aquinas discusses "angels in relation to place" discloses
how the question serves to raise generally significant issues concerning
the  nature  of  space and quantity, and their relation to causality. He
points  out that a body occupies place in a circumscribed fashion, i.e.,
its  dimensive quantity is contained within the space; whereas "an angel
is  said  to be in a corporeal place by application of the angelic power
in  any  manner  whatever  to  the place. . . . An incorporeal substance
virtually  contains  the  thing with which it comes into contact, and is
not  contained  by  it."  To  an  objector who thinks that since, unlike
bodies,  angels do not fill a place, several can be in the same place at
the  same  time,  Aquinas  replies that two angels cannot be in the same
place   because  "it  is  impossible  for  two  complete  causes  to  be
immediately  the  cause  of  one  and the same thing." Since an angel is
where  he  acts,  and  since  by the power of his action he contains the
place  at  which  he acts, "there cannot be but one angel at one place."
Angels  are also said to go from one place to another without traversing
the  intervening  space and without the lapse of time. Considering their
immateriality, such action is less remarkable for angels to perform than
is   the  action  of  electrons,  which,  according  to  modern  quantum
mechanics,  jump  from  outer to inner orbits of the atom without taking
time or passing through inter-orbital space. The immateriality of angels
has  other  consequences which throw comparative light on the conditions
of  corporeal  existence.  In the world of physical things we ordinarily
think  of  a species as including a number of individuals. While all men
have  the same specific nature, they differ numerically or individually.
But because angels are immaterial substances, it is held that each angel
is a distinct species. "Things which agree in species but differ in

[64a]
number,"   Aquinas  explains,  "agree  in  form  but  are  distinguished
materially.  If,  therefore,  the  angels are not composed of matter and
form  . . . it follows that it is impossible for two angels to be of one
species."  Furthermore,  as  Aquinas  states  in  another  place,  among
"incorporeal  substances  there  cannot  be  diversity of number without
diversity  of  species  and  inequality  of  nature."  Each  species  is
necessarily  higher or lower than another, so that the society of angels
is a perfect hierarchy in which each member occupies a distinct rank. No
two  angels are equal as, on the supposition that they share in the same
specific  humanity,  all  men  are.  Yet  such  names  as "seraphim" and
"cherubim" and the distinction between archangels and angels indicate an
organization  of  spiritual  substances into various groups—according to
the  tradition,  into  nine  orders or subordinate hierarchies. The nine
orders  or ranks of angelic being are described by Dante in the Paradiso
as  distinct  circles  of  love and light. Using these metaphors he thus
reports  his  vision of the heavenly hierarchy. "I saw a Point which was
raying  out  light  so keen that the sight on which it blazes must needs
close because of its intense brightness. . . . Perhaps as near as a halo
seems  to girdle the light which paints it, when the vapor that bears it
is  most  dense,  at such distance around the Point a circle of fire was
whirling  so rapidly that it would have surpassed that motion which most
swiftly  girds  the world; and this was girt around by another, and that
by the third, and the third then by the fourth, by the fifth the fourth,
and  then  by  the  sixth  the  fifth.  Thereon the seventh followed, so
widespread  now  in  compass  that the messenger of Juno entire would be
narrow to contain it. So the eighth and ninth." Beatrice explains to him
how the relation of the circles to one another and to the Point which is
God  depends  upon their measure of love and truth, whereby there is "in
each  heaven a marvellous agreement with its Intelligence, of greater to
more and of smaller to less." She then amplifies her meaning: "The first
circles  have  shown to thee the Seraphim and the Cherubim. Thus swiftly
they  follow  their own bonds, in order to liken themselves to the Point
as most they can, and they can in proportion

[64b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS as they are exalted to see. Those other loves, which go
around  them,  are  called  Thrones  of  the divine aspect, because they
terminated  the  first  triad. . . . The next triad, that in like manner
bourgeons  in  this  sempiternal spring which the nightly Aries despoils
not,  perpetually  sing Hosannah with three melodies, which sound in the
three  orders  of joy ... first Dominations, and then Virtues; the third
order   is   of   Powers.  Then  in  the  two  penultimate  dances,  the
Principalities  and  Archangels  circle;  the  last is wholly of Angelic
sports.  These  orders  all  gaze  upward, and downward so prevail, that
towards  God  all  are drawn, and all draw." The theory of angels raises
many  questions regarding the similarity and difference between them and
disembodied  souls.  But  for  comparison  with  men,  perhaps  the most
striking  consequences of the theory of angels as bodiless intelligences
concern the manner of their knowledge and government. The comparison can
be  made  on quite different views of the nature of man and the soul. In
fact,  diverse conceptions of man or the soul can themselves be compared
by  reference  to the angelic properties which one conception attributes
to  human  nature  and  another  denies.  Lacking bodies, the angels are
without  senseperception and imagination. Not being immersed in time and
motion,  they do not reason or think discursively as men do by reasoning
from  premises  to  conclusion. Whereas "human intellects," according to
Aquinas, "obtain their perfection in the knowledge of truth by a kind of
movement  and discursive intellectual operation ... as they advance from
one  known thing to another," the angels, "from the knowledge of a known
principle  .  .  .  straightway  perceive  as  known  all its consequent
conclusions . . . with no discursive process at all." Their knowledge is
intuitive  and  immediate,  not  by  means  of  concepts abstracted from
experience or otherwise formed, but through the archetypal ideas infused
in  them  at their creation by God. That is why, Aquinas goes on to say,
angels "are called intellectual beings" as contrasted with such rational
natures  as "human souls which acquire knowledge of truth discursively."
If  men  "possessed  the fulness of intellectual light, like the angels,
then in the first grasping of princi-

[65a]
Chapter  1 : ANGEL pics they would at once comprehend their whole range,
by perceiving whatever could be reasoned out from them." It would appear
from  this  that  conceptions  of the human intellect which minimize its
dependence  on  sense and imagination, and which emphasize the intuitive
rather  than the discursive character of human thought, attribute angehc
power  to man. The same may be said of theories of human knowledge which
account for its origin in terms of innate ideas or implanted principles.
Still another example of the attribution of angelic properties to man is
to  be  found  in the supposition that human beings can communicate with
one  another  by  telepathy. The angels are telepathic; one angel, it is
said,  can  make its ideas known to another simply by an act of will and
without  any exterior means of communication. Lacking bodies, the angels
are without bodily emotions, free from the human conflict between reason
and  passion,  and  completely  directed  in their love—or the motion of
their  will  —by what they know. In the Divine Comedy Beatrice speaks of
the  angelic society as one in which "the Eternal Love disclosed himself
in  new  loves."  Adverting to the division between the good and the bad
angels,  she  tells  Dante, *' those whom thou seest here were modest in
grateful  recognition  of  the  Goodness  which  had  made  them apt for
intelligence   so   great,  wherefore  their  vision  was  exalted  with
illuminant  grace  and  by  their  merit,  so  that  they  have full and
steadfast  will."  Yet  their  vision  and  love of God is not equal. In
heaven  "the Primal Light that irradiates it all is received in it by as
many  modes  as  are  the  splendors  with which the Light pairs Itself.
Wherefore,  since  the affection follows upon the act that conceives, in
this  nature  the  sweetness  of love diversely glows and warms." Such a
society, governed by knowledge and love, has no need for the application
of  coercive  force, for angels are ordered to one another in such a way
that  no  misunderstandings  or  disagreements can occur among them. The
philosophical  anarchist  who  proposes  the  ideal  of  a human society
without  restraint or coercion seems, therefore, to be angelicizing men,
or  at least to be wishing for heaven on earth. Conceiving government on
earth in other terms,

[65b]
the  writers  of  The  Federalist  remark  that  "if men were angels, no
government  would be necessary." If they had considered that the angelic
society  is  governed  by  love alone and without force, they might have
said,  "if  men  were  angels,  no  coercion would be necessary in their
government."  One of the great theological dogmas asserts that, from the
beginning,  the  angels  are  divided  into two hosts— the good and evil
spirits.  The  sin  of  Lucifer,  or Satan, and his followers is that of
disobedience,  or  rebeUion  against  God,  motivated  by  a pride which
refuses to be satisfied with being less than God. As Satan himself says,
in  Paradise  Lost, . . . pride and worse Ambition threw me down Warring
in Heav'n against Heav'ns matchless King. ... Ail his good prov'd ill in
me,  And wrought but malice; lifted up so high I 'sdeind subjection, and
thought  one  step higher Would set me highest, and in a moment quit The
debt  immense  of  endless gratitude . . . And that word Disdain forbids
me, and my dread of shame Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd Then
to  submit,  boasting I could subdue Th' Omnipotent. The theologians try
to  define  precisely  the nature of Satan's pride in wishing to be God.
"To  be  as  God,''  Aquinas  explains,  "can be understood in two ways:
first, by equality; secondly, by likeness. An angel could not seek to be
as  God in the first way, because by natural knowledge he knew that this
was  impossible  .  . . And even supposing it were possible, it would be
against  natural  desire, because there exists in everything the natural
desire  to  preserve its own nature which would not be preserved were it
to  be changed into another nature. Consequently, no creature of a lower
nature  can ever covet the grade of a higher nature, just as an ass does
not  desire  to  be a horse." It must be in the other way, then, Aquinas
thinks,  that  Satan sinned by wishing to be like God. But this requires
further  explanation.  "To desire to be as God according to likeness can
happen  in  two ways. In one way, as to that likeness whereby everything
is likened unto God. And so, if anyone desire in this way to be Godlike,
he  commits  no  sin;  provided  that he desires such likeness in proper
order, that is to

[66a]
B  THE GREAT IDEAS say, that he may obtain It from God. But he would sin
were  he  to desire to be like God even in the right way, but of his own
power, and not of God's. In another way, he may desire to be like God in
some respect which is not natural to one; e.g., if one were to desire to
create  heaven  and earth, which is proper to God, in which desire there
would  be sin." In this last way, Aquinas asserts, "the devil desired to
be  as  God,  Not that he desired to resemble God by being subject to no
one  else  absolutely,  for thus he would be desiring his own non-being,
since  no  creature can exist except by participating under God." But he
"desired  as  the  last  end  of  his beatitude something which he could
attain  by  virtue of his own nature, turning his appetite away from the
supernatural  beatitude  which  is  attained  by  God's  grace."  In the
original  sin  of Lucifer and the other fallen angels, as well as in all
subsequent  intervention  by  Satan or his demons in the affairs of men,
lie  the  theological mysteries of the origin of evil in a world created
by  God's  love and goodness, and of the liberty of those creatures who,
while  free, can only do God's will. As indicated in the chapter on Sin,
the  fall  of Adam from grace and innocence involves the same mysteries.
Man's  destiny  is  connected  with the career of Lucifer in traditional
Christian teaching, not only on the side of sin, but also with regard to
man's  redemption—salvation  replacing the fallen angels by the souls of
the elect in the heavenly choir. Among the most extraordinary moments in
our  literature are those in which Lucifer talks with God about mankind,
as  in  Paradise Lost', or about a particular man, as in the Book of Job
or  in  the  Prologue  in  Heaven  in Faust. Their pagan parallel is the
speech  of Prometheus to a silent Zeus, but Prometheus, unlike Satan, is
man's benefactor and he can defy Zeus because the Fates, whose secret he
knows, rule over the gods. Lucifer, on the contrarv', seems always to be
in  the  service  of  God.  When  he  appears  to  Ivan  in the Brothers
Karamazov,  he  protests,  "I  love  men genuinely . . . and against the
grain  I  serve to produce events and do what is irrational because I am
(%-r

[66b]
commanded  to."  If it were otherwise, the warfare between the powers of
light  and  darkness  would  have  to  be  construed as a battle between
equals, which, according to Christian orthodoxy, is the Manichean heresy
that  regards  the  world as the battle ground of the forces of good and
evil. -a^i;-? t>vij!ujtii 3fU'ei!?r • The word "angelic" usually has the
connotation  of  perfect  moral  goodness,  but that must not lead us to
forget  that  the  demons  are  an^  gehc  in their nature although of a
diabohcal  or  evil will. Nor should the fact of Satan's subservience to
God   cause   us   to  forget  that  Christian  theology  tries  not  to
underestimate the power of the devil in his goings and comings on earth.
Satan  tried  to tempt even Christ, and throughout the New Testament the
destruction  of  the  diabolical influence over men occupies a prominent
place.  The intervention of the devil in man's life provides, if not the
theme,  the  background  of  Goethe's  Faust.  As  the theory of demonic
influences  and  diabolical  possession  is  an  integral  part  of  the
traditional doctrine of angels, so, in modern times, demonology has been
a  major  focus  of attack upon theological teaching concerning spirits.
Moralists  have  thought  it possible to explain human depravity without
recourse  to the seductions of the devil, and psychiatrists have thought
it  possible  for men to go mad or to behave as if bewitched without the
help  of  evil  spirits. The idea of the devil, according to Freud, is a
religious  fiction— "the best way out in acquittal of God" for those who
try  "to  reconcile  the  undeniable  existence  ...  of  evil  with His
omnipotence  and supreme goodness." The characteristic skepticism of our
age  has  been directed against the belief in angels generally. It casts
doubt by satire or denies by argument the existence of spirits both good
and  evil. Yet, all arguments considered, it may be wondered whether the
existence  of  angels—or,  in  philosophical terms, the existence ofpure
intelligences—  is  or  is  not  still a genuine issue. Or are there two
issues  here,  one  philosophical  and  the other theological, one to be
resolved  or  left  unresolved on the level of argument, the other to be
answered dogmatically by the declarations of a religious faith ?

[67a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  Inferior  deities  or dcmi-gods in polytheistic
religion  lo  2.  The philosophical consideration of pure intelligences,
spiritual  substances,  suprahuman persons 1 2a, The celestial motors or
secondary  prime  movers:  the  intelligences  attached to the celestial
bodies  2b.  Our  knowledge of immaterial beings 12 3. The conception of
angels  in  Judaeo-Christian  doctrine  3 J. The first creatures of God:
their  place  in  the  order  of creation 3^. The angelic nature 3r. The
aeviternity  and incorruptibility of angels i^ 3^, The angelic intellect
and  angelic knowledge 3^. The angelic will and angelic love 3/. Angelic
action:  its  characteristics  in general 3f. The angelic hierarchy: the
inequality,  order,  and  number of the angels and their relation to one
another  4.  Comparison  of  angels with men and with disembodied souls:
their  relation to the 5. The distinction and comparison of the good and
the  bad  angels  5  J.  The  origin  of the division between angels and
demons:  the  sin  of Lucifer or Satan ^5 53. The society of the demons:
the  rule of Satan over the powers of darkness 6. The role of the angels
in the government of the universe 6a. The ministry of the good angels in
the  affairs  of men: guardianship 6b. The intervention of the demons in
the  affairs  of  men: temptation, possession 16 7. God and Satan 17 ya.
Warfare  between  the  powers  of light and darkness: their struggle for
dominion  over  man  yb.  Lucifer in the service of God 8. Criticism and
satire with respect to the belief in angels and demons

[67b]
1 Chapter 1 : ANGEL (H PAGE

[68a]
10  THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or passage cited. 1. Inferior
deities  or  demi-gods  in polytheistic religion 4 Homer: Iliad, bk viii
51a-56d esp
[1-40]
51a-b; bk xiv
[135-360]
99c-101d; bk xv
[1-235] 104a-106c; bk xviii
[368-467] 133d134d; BK XX
142a-147d; bk xxi
[383-513]
152a-153c  / Odyssey, bk v [1-147] 208a-209c; BK IX [231-280] 231c-232a;
bk  xiii  [125-164]  256b-d  5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d /
Eumenides  81a-91d  5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c / Philoctetes
[1409-1471]  194d-195a,c  5  Euripides  :  Rhesus  [890-982] 210d-211d /
Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[1-55]
225a-c,
[12681440] 235b-236d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Trojan Women [1-97] 270a-271a / Ion 282a-297d
/  Helen  298a-314a,c  /  Andromache  [1226-1288]  325c-326a,c / Electra
[1233-1359] 338b-339a,c / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Heracles Mad 365a377d
esp
[1-59] 365a-c /
Orestes [1625-1693] 410b-d 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[595-626]
496a-b / Peace 526a-541d / Birds 542a-563d esp [571638] 549d-550d,
[1199-1261]
557c-558b,
[1494-1693] 560c-562d / Frogs 564a-582a,c /
Plutus 629a-642d

[68b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53]ames: Psychology, 116a- 119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of page 1 19. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  cerBible References: The references are to book, chapter, and
verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in title of books
or  in  the  numbering  of chapters or verses, the King James version is
cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a (D), follows; e.g., Old
Testament:   Nehemiah,   7:45—   (D)   //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols:  The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 6
Herodotus:  History, bk i, 21d-22a; 31a-b; 48c; bk II, 58a-60d; 79d-80c;
82d-83b;  bk iv, 155c-156a; bk viii, 266c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a
/  Euthydemus, 81d'82b / Cratylus, 92h-97d / Phaedrus, 116b-d; 122c-125b
passim,  esp  124d-125a;  130d-131a;  141c  /  Symposium,  152b; 153b-d;
159d-161a;   163a-164c  /  Euthyphro,  193a-c  /  Apology,  204c-205c  /
Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320d-328a / Timaeus, 452b / Critias, 481c-482a /
Statesman,  588a-589c  /  Laws,  bk ii, 653a-c; 662c-d; BK IV, 680c-684a
passim;  bk vii, 730a-d; bk x 757d-771b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk hi,
ch  4  [iooo»818]  518d-519a;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [i074''i-i4]  604d605a 9
Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  hi, ch 18 [1419*8-13] 673d-674a 12 Lucretius:
Nature  ofThings,  bk  i  [1-41]  la-c;  BK  II  [581-660] 22b-23b; bk v
[396-404]  66b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3 108b-c; CH 12
118d-120b;  ch  14  120d-121c;  bk  ii,  CH  16,  158b-d;  bk  iv, ch 4,
226d-228a;  ch  ii,  240d-241a  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii
258a-b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid 103a-379a esp bk i [223-233] 109a, [297-304]
Ilia, [657-694] 121a-122a, bk iv
[218-258]
173a-174a, bk x
[1-117] 302a-305a

[69a]
a  tola Chapter 1: ANGEL 11 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 50d-51c; 57b58a
/  Coriolanus,  189a-c / Aemilius Puulus, 220d-221b / Pelopidas, 238a-b;
239d-240c  /  Aristides, 268a-d / Dion, 781d-782a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii,  35d-36a;  bk  hi,  59d-60c  /  Histories,  bk ii, 214d-215a; bk iv,
293b-294a;  bk  v,  294d-296a  17  Plotinus : Second Ermead, tr ix, ch 9
70d-72a  passim  / Third Ennead, tr v 100c -106b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi,
ch  14  149d-150a / Fifth Ennead, tr vih, ch 3, 241a; ch 10 244c-245a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk i-x 129a-322a,c passim; bk xviii, ch 8-19
475d-482c;  ch  21  482d-483b;  ch  24  485a-b;  bk  xix,  ch 9 516a-c /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 17 645d-646a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  22, A 3, ANS 130d-131c; q 67,, a 7, ans 331c-332b 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxi  46a-47c;  paradise,  VIII  [1-15]  116d 22
Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1902-2482]
191a200b  23 Hob BBS : Leviathan, part i, 79d-82c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and   Pantagruel,   bk  hi,  132b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  246d-248c;
256d-257d; 269a-b 26 Shakespeare: As You Like It, act v, sc iv
[i 14-152] 625a-b
27  Shakespeare: Tempest, act iv, sc i 541c544d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  20b-c  32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / UAllegro 17b-21a /
//  Penseroso 21a-25a / Arcades 25a27b / Lycidas 27b-32a / Comus 33a-56b
/  Paradise Lost, bk I [331-621] 100b-107a / Samson Agofiistes [896-902]
359a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch hi, sect 15 116c-d 37
Fielding:  To7n  Jones,  152b-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 12b-d;
184c-185d; 345b-347d esp 346c-347a; 461b-c; 583d-584a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  135b;  226a-227c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro,
196d197c;  part  i,  224a-b;  228a'C;  238d-239b;  252d-253c;  part  ii,
263d-265c; 268b-271c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[5300-5392]
131a133a; [7005-8487] 171b-206b esp [7005-7039] 171b-172a,
[7080-7248]
173b-177b,
[72637270] 178a, [7495-7820] 183b-190b
2.  The  philosophical  consideration  of  pure intelligences, spiritual
substances, suprahuman persons 17 Plotinus: Second Erinead, tr ix, ch 17
76b77a  /  Third  Ennead, tr ii, ch ii 88b-c; tr v 100c-106b; tr vih, ch
8-10  132d-136a / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4 209d-210c; tr vih, ch 3, 241a
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vih, ch 3 344a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xh
99b-110d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, A 3, ans 130d-131c;
q 45, a 5, ans 245c-247a; q 47, A I, ans 256a-257b; q 50, a 3, ans 272a-

[69b]
273b;  q  65,  a  4,  ans 342b-343c; o 79, a 4 417a-418c; a 10, ans 423d
424d;  q  84,  a  4, ans and rep 1,3 444d-446b; q 87, a i, ans and rep 3
465a-466c; q 88, a i, ans 469a471c; Q no, a i, rep 3 564c-565d; q 115, a
i, ans 585d-587c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 92, A I,
ans and rep 9-10 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Cojnedy, paradise, ii
[112123] 109a; xxviii [1-78] 148d-149c; xxix [1345] 150b-c
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  174b-176d;  part  IV,  258b-260c  24
Rabelais:   Gargantua   and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  172d-173c  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 41d-42a / Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 15 149a 31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 225d 226a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk ii [142-154] 114b; BK HI
[694-735] 150b-151b; bk v
[388-450]
183b-185a; [469-505] 185b-186a; bk vi [316353] 203a-204a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, sect II 165a-b; ch xxi, sect 2 178c; ch
xxih,  sect  5  205a-b;  sect 15-37 208c-214b passim; BK HI, ch VI, sect
11-12  271b-272b;  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 6, 315a-b; sect 27 321d-322a; ch
XVI,  sect  12  370b-371a;  ch  xvh,  sect  14 378c-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  25-27  417d-418b;  sect  135-145  440a-442a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 136b; 136d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 237c-d / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254a;  259c-d;  263a;  263d-264d;  266a-c;
271a-277b;  278a; 280b-281a; 282c; 286a-287h / Practical Reason, 296a-c;
300a-c;  303b-304a;  305c-d;  308c309b; 321b-c; 325d-327a; 328b; 340c-d;
347d348h / JudgefJient, 508b; 572d-574b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part i, 238d239a 2a. The celestial motors or secondary prime movers: the
intelligences  attached to the celestial bodies 7 Plato: Timaeus, 452c-d
/  Laws, bk x, 765b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch i [284'»27-^6] 376a;
ch  12 383b-384c / Metaphysics, bk xh, CH 8 603b-605a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[4o6''27407^13] 636b-637b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [110-145]
62c-63a  13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-732] 230b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,   890a-895b   esp  890b893b;  896a-897a;  914a-b;  930b;  932a-933a;
959a-960a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b1085b  esp 1083b-1085b 17
Plotinus:  Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a-41a; CH 3 41c-42a; tr hi, ch 2
42c-d  /  Third  Ennead,  tr ii, ch 3, 84b; tr iv, ch 6, 99d; TR V, ch 6
103b-104a  /  Fourth Ennead, tr iv, CH 8, 162b-d; ch 22-27 168d-172a; ch
30

[70a]
12   THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (2.  The  philosophical  consideration  of  pure
intelligences,   spiritual   substances,  suprahuman  persons.  2a.  The
celestial  motors  or secondary prime movers: the intelligences attached
to  the celestial bodies^ 174b-c; CH 35, 177c; ch 42 180d-181b; tr VIII,
CH  2,  202a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 47, A I, ANS
256a-257b;  q  50,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  272a-273b; q 51, a 3, rep 3
277a-278c;  q  52,  A  2  279b-280a; q 66, a 2, ans 345d-347b; q 70, a 3
365b-367a;  q 76, a 6, rep 3 396a-d; q iio, a i, rep 2-3 564c-565d; a 3,
ans  566d-567b;  Q  115, A 4, rep I 589d-590c; q 117, a 4, rep i 599b-d;
part 1--11, q 6, a 5, rep 2 648b-649a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi  suppl,  Q 91, a 2, rep 10 1017c-1020c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
vii
[67-96]
lOb-c; PARADISE, I [103-126] 107b-c; 11 [112138] 109a; VIII
[16-39]
116d-117a;
[97-114]
118a; XIII
[52-72]
126a;  xxvni  148d-150b;  XXIX [37-45] 150c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v,
104b-105d  2b.  Our  knowledge  of  immaterial beings 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead, tr vin, ch 8-10 132d-136a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par
2-9  99c101c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 50, A 2, ans
270a-272a;  q 84, a 7, rep 3 449b450b; Q 88, aa 1-2 469a-472c; q 94, a 2
503a504a;  q  hi,  a  i,  rep  3  568c-569b;  part  i-ii,  Q 3, A 6, ans
627b-628a;  a  7  628a-d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q
92,  A  I,  ANS  and rep 9 1025c-1032b 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
41d-42a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  122c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, sect II 165a-b; ch xxiii, sect 5 205a-b
sect  13  207d-208b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b  bk  III, ch VI, sect 11-12
271b-272b;  ch  xi  sect  23  305a-b; bk iv, ch hi, sect 17 317c sect 27
321d-322a; ch vi, sect 14, 336a-b CH XI, sect 12 357c-d; ch xvi, sect 12
370b371a  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 27 418a-b; sect 81 428c-d;
sect  89  430b-c;  sect  135-145  440a-442a  3.  The conception ofangels
inJudaeo-Christian  doctrine  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk viii-xii
264b,d-  ~^'  360a,c  19  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i, qq 50-64
269a-338d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, xxviiixxix 148d-151d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  174b-176d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
93a-110b esp
[84-191] 95b-97b, [423-431] 102b; bk v [769904] 192a-195a; bk vi [320-353] 203a-204a

[70b]
1  2b  to 3h 3a. The first creatures of God: their place in the order of
creation  Old  Testament:  /  Kings,  8:27—  (D)  ^^^  Kings,  8:27 / //
Chronicles,  2:6; 6:18— (D) // Paralipomenon, 2:6; 6:18 / Psalms, 8:4-5;
ii5'i6;  148:4—  (D)  Psalms,  8:5-6; 113:16; 148:4 / Isaiah, 6:1-3— (D)
Isaias,  6:1-3  /  Eze\iel,  i—  {D)  Ezechiel,  1  /  Daniel,  7:10 New
Testament:  Matthew,  18:10  /John, 1:51 / Acts, 23:8 / Hebrews, 1-2 esp
1:1-8,  2:1-9  /  I Peter, 3:22 / Revelation, 5:1 1-14— (/)) Apocalypse,
5:11-14  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii 99b-110d; bk XIII, par 4 111c
/  City  of  God,  bk  xi  322b,d342a,  c;  bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 45, A 5, ans and rep i 245c-247a; q
47, a i, ans 256a-257b; a 2, ans 257b-258c; q 50, aa 1-3 269b-273b; q 61
314d-317c;  q 62, a i 317d318c; A 3 319c-320b; q 65, aa 3-4 341c-343c; q
66,  A 3, ans and rep 3 347b-348d; a 4, ans and REP I 348d-349d; q 67, a
4,  ans  and  rep  4  352a-354a;  q  85,  a  i, ans 451c-453c; q 90, a 3
482c-483a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xii [2527] 70c; paradise,
vii [121-148] 116b-c; xix
[40-51] 135c; xxix [1-48] 150b-d
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  174d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  132b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17c-d 32
MiLTOi^:  Paradise Lost, bk hi [86-102] 137a-b; BK V [800-868] 192b-194a
/ Samson Agonistes
[66y-6jT,] 354a
33  Pascal: Pensees, 140 199a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch
vi,  SECT  II-I2  271b-272b;  bk  iv,  ch xvi, sect 12 370b-371a 3^. The
angelic  nature  Old  Testament: Pi-^Z/w/, 103:20-22; 104:4— (D) Psalms,
102:20-22; 103:4 / Isaiah, 6:1-3— (D) Isaias, 6:1-3 / Ezel^el, i; 10 {D)
Ezechiel,  i;  10  New  Testament:  Hebrews,  1-2  esp 1:1-8 / // Peter,
2:10-11   /   Revelation,  18:1—  (D)  Apocalypse,  18:1  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk xii, par 7 lOOd101a; par 9 lOlb-c; par 12 101d-102a; par
18-22,  103b-104a  /  City of God, bk xxi, ch 1 560a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, qq 5053 269a-284d; q 79, a i, rep 3 414a-d; q 87, A
I, ans and rep 2-3 465a-466c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxix
[i48] 150b-d; [127-145] 151c-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part hi, 174b-176d 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  218d;  225d-226a  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i [84-191]
95b-97b;
[423-431]
102b; BK V
[800-868]
192b-194a; BK VI [320-353] 203a-204a

[71a]
3c  to  Sg  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  87a-88a  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  x, SECT 9, 143a-b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12
271b-272b   3c.  The  aeviternity  and  incorruptibility  of  angels  18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  g lOlb-c; par 12 101d-102a; par
15-16  102b-103a;  par  18-22, 103b-104a; par 28, 105c / City of God, bk
XII,  CH 15 351b-352d; bk xih, ch i 360a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  10,  A 3, ANS and RKP I 42c-43b; a a 5-6 44b-46d; Q 50, A 5
274b-275a;  q  61,  a 2 315c-316a; q 97, A I, ANS 513c-514c; q 104, a i,
ans and rep i,3 534c-536c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii [64-69]
115d;  [121-148]  116b-c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part hi, 175d-176d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagriiel, bk hi, 173a-c 32 Milton : Paradise
Lost, bk i [i 16-159] 96a-97a; bk n
[81-105] 113a-b; bk v [846-860] 193b194a; [889-892] 194b; bk vi [296-353] 202b204a esp [320-353] 203a-204a; [430-436] 205b
3^.  The angelic intellect and angelic knowledge Old Testament: Genesis,
16:7-12;  18:9-15;  22:15-18  /  judges,  6:11-16;  13:2-14 / // Samuel,
14:20—  (D)  //  Kings,  14:20  / Daniel, 10-12 New Testa-ment: Matthew,
24:35-36  /  Mar\,  13:28-32  /  /  Timothy,  3:16  /  /  Peter,  1:12 /
Revelation,  17;  18:21-24;  21:9-22:7—  (Z))  Apocalypse, 17; 18:21-24;
21:9-22:7  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xii, par 12 lOld102a; par 16
102d-103a;  par 20 103c-d / City ofGod, BK IX, cH 20-22 296a-297a; bk x,
ch  2  299d-300a;  bk  xi,  ch  ii  328d-329b; ch 13-15 329c-331a; ch 29
339a-b;  bk xvi, ch 6 426c427a; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b; ch 29, 614b-d
19  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, a 2, ANS and REP 2 31d-32c;
q  12, a 4, rep 2 53b-54c; qq 54-58 284d-306b; q 64, a i 334a335c; q 75,
A  7, REP 3 384d'385c; q 79, a i, rep 3 414a-d; a 2, ans 414d-416a; a 8,
ans  and REP 3 421c-422b; a 10, ans 423d-424d; Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c;
a  3, rep i 443d444d; A 7, ANS 449b-450b; q 85, a i, ans 451c-453c; a 5,
ans  457d-458d; q 87, a i, ans and rep 2 465a-466c; a 3, ans 467b468a; q
89,  a  3, ans 475d-476c; a 4, ans 476c-477a; q 117, a 2 597c-598c; part
i-ii,  Q  3,  A  8,  rep 2 628d-629c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 50, A 6 lla-12a; q 51, a i, ans and rep 2 12b-13c; part ii-ii, q
5, aa 1-2 410a-412a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xix
[4057]
135c; XXI
[73-102]
139a-b; xxviii
[98114] 149d-150a; xxix [67-84] 15ia; [127-145]
151c-d

[71b]
Chapter  1  :  ANGEL  M  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ir, aph 15 149a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[242-255) 98b99a;
bk ii
[142-151)
114b; bk iii
[654-735]
149b-151b  csp  [681-69^]  150a-b;  bk v [388505] 183b-186aesp [^88-413]
183b-184a,  [469505J  185b-186a;  bk  viii  [66 79] 233b-234a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  285  224a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 9
143a-c;  ch xxiii, sect 13 207d-208b; sect 36 213c-d; bk hi, ch vi, sect
3  268d;  CH  XI,  SECT 23 305a-b; bk iv, ch hi, sect 6, 315a-b; sect 23
320a-c;  ch  xvii,  sect 14 378c-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 81
428c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 318b 3e. The angelic will and angelic
love  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  9  lOlb-c;  par 12-13
101d-102b;  par 15 102b-c; par 18, 103b-c; par 21-22, 103d-104a; par 28,
105c  /  City ofGod, bk ix, ch 20-22 296a-297a; bk x, ch 7"302d-303a; bk
xii,  ch  3  343d-344b;  CH  6-9  345b-348b; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d587b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  5960  306b-314c;  q  62, a 2
318d-319c;  q  64,  aa  2-3 335d-337c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 50, A 6 lla-12a; part ii-ii, q 5, a 2 411b-412a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, viii
[3139] 117a; xxiii [70-139] 142a-c; xxviii 148d150b esp [106-114] 150a; xxix [55-66] 150d151a; [127-145] 151c-d
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [535-543]  187a;  BK VIII [612-643]
245b-246a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi, sect 50-51
191b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[11,676-824]
2S4a287b;    [11,854-12,111]   288b-294b   3/.   Angelic   action:   its
characteristics in general 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 45, A
5,  ans  and  rep  i  245c-247a;  qq  51-53  275a284d;  Q 91, A 2, rep i
485b-486b;  a  4,  rep  2  487d-488c;  qq  106-107 545c-552b; qq iio-iii
564c-571d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  174c;  175c-d  32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk viii
[107-114]
234b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 13 207d-208b
3g.  The  angelic  hierarchy:  the  inequality, order, and number of the
angels  and  their  relation to one another Old Testament: Psalms, 80:1—
(D)  Psalms,  79:2  /  Isaiah, 6:1-7; 37'-^^~{^) ^-^^i^^y 6:1-8; 37:16 /
Ezekjel,  10;  11:22—  (D) Ezechiel, 10; 11:22 / Daniel, 7:10 Apocrypha:
Tobit, 12:15-21 — (D) OT, Tobias, 12:15-21

[72a]
(3.  The  conception  of  angels  in  Judaeo-Christian doctrine. 3g. The
angelic  hierarchy:  the inequality, order, and number of the angels and
their  relation  to  one  another^  New  Testament: Colossians, i:i6 / /
Thessalontans,  4:16  (D)  I  Thessalonians,  4:15 / Hebrews, 12:22-23 /
Jude,   9  /  Revelation,  5:11—  (D)  Apocalypse,  5:11  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  12,  102a; par 31, 106C'd / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  24,  283b; BK XXII, ch 30, 617c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  47,  A  2, ANS 257b-258c; q 50, aa 3-4 272a-274b; Q 63, A 7
331c-332b; a 9, rep 3 333b-d; qq 106-109 545c-564b; part i-ii, q 4, a 5,
rep  6  632c-634b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 8, A 4 759b-d
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[112138] 109a; XXVIII 148d-150b; xxix [127-145]
151c-d  30  Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 17d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk v [600-904] 188b195a esp [769-799] 192a-b, [809-845] 193a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch hi, sect 27 321d-322a; ch xvi, sect 12,
370c371a  35  Berkei^ey  :  Human  Knowledge,  sect 81 428c-d 47 Goethe:
Faust, prologue
[243-270]
7a-b; PART II [11,844-12,111] 288a-294b 4. Comparison of angels with men
and  with  disembodied  souls:  their  relation  to  the  blessed in the
heavenly  choir Old Testament: /o^, 4:18-19 / Psalms, 8:4-5— (D) Psalms,
8:5-6  New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:23-33  /  Marl{,  12:18-27  / Lu}^,
20:27-38  /  /  Corinthians,  6:2-3  / Hebrews, 1:13-14; 2:7; 12:22-23 /
Revelation,  22:8-9—  (Z)) Apocalypse, 22:8-9 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  xii,  par  23 104b-c / City of God, bk vii, ch 30, 261d; bk viii, CH
14-18  273d-277a;  ch  25  283b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  5-13  288b-292d;  ch 22
296d-297a;  bk  xi,  ch  29  339a-b;  bk xiii, ch i 360a-b; bk xvi, ch 6
426c-427a;  bk  xxi, ch 10 569d-570b; bk xxii, CH 29, 614b-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  23  630a-c;  ch  30 632c-633b; ch 33 633d-634b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, A 2, REP 2 31d-32c; q 23, a i,
rep  3  132c-133b;  Q 47, a 2, ANS 257b-258c; q 51, a i, ans and rep 2-3
275b-276b;  qq 54-60 284d-314c passim; Q 62 317c-325b passim; q 66, a 3,
ans  and  rep  3  347b-348d;  q  75,  a  7  384d-385c;  Q 76, A 2, rep I
388c-391a;  a  5,  ans  394c396a;  q  79,  a  i,  rep 3 414a-d; a 2, ans
414d416a; a 8, ans and rep 3 421c-422b; q 84, a 3, rep I 443d-444d; a 7,
ans  449b-450b; Q 85, A I, ANS 451c-453c; a 5, ans 457d-458d; Q 87, A I,
ANS and rep 2-3 465a-466c; a 3, ans 467b-468a; q 89, a 3, ans 475d-476c;

[72b]
14 THE GREAT IDEAS 4/0 5 A 4, ans 476c-477a; a 7, rep 2 478d-479c; Q 93,
A  3 493d-494c; q 97, a i, ans 513c-514c; q 108, A I, ANS 552c-553c; a 8
561a-562a; Q 117, A 2 597c-598c; part i-ii, q 2, a 3, rep i 617b-618a; q
4,  a  5,  rep 6 632c-634b; q 5, A I, rep i 636d-637c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50,  A  6 lla-12a; q 51, a i, ans and rep 2
12b-13c;  part  ii-ii,  q  5,  a  2  411b-412a; part hi, q 6, A 3, REP 2
742a-743a;  q 8, a 4 759b-d; part III suppL, q 69, A 3, REP 5 887d-889c;
q  70, A 3, CONTRARY 897d-900d; q 89, a 3 1007dlObsb; A 8 1011b-1012a; q
95,  a  4  1046d1047d;  Q  96, A 9 1062d-1063b; q 99, a 3 1081d-1083a 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, iv [28-48] Ilia; VII [121-148] 116b-c;
viii  [22-39]  116d117a;  XIX  [40-66] 135c-d; xxi [73-102] 139a-b; XXIX
[13-36] 150b-c; xxxi 153b-154c; xxxii
[85-114] 155c-d
27   Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [314-322]  43d  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 80d-81a / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 15 149a 32
Milton: At a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Paradise Lost, BK II
[345-353] 118b-119a; bk hi
[654-735] 149b-151b esp [681-693] ISOa-b; bk
IV
[358-365]
160a-b; bk v
[388-450]
183b185a;
[469-505]
185b-186a; bk vi
[316-353]
203a-204a; bk viii [66-178] 233b-236a; bk x
[888-908] 293b-294a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  140  199a-b;  418 243a; 793, 326b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch x, SECT 9 143a-c; ch xxiii, sect 13 207d-208b;
BK  IV, CH hi, sect 17 317c; CH xvii, SECT 14 378c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  318b-319a;  394a 43 Federalist: number 51, 163b-c 44 B0SWEI.1.:
Johnson,  363a-b  47  Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,894-12,111] 289b294b 51
Tolstoy:   War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  295b-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  11, 22c23a 5. The distinction and comparison of the good
and the bad angels Old Testament: Job, 4:18 New Testament: II Peter, 2:4
/  Jude,  6 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 67 88b-c / City of God,
bk  ix  285b,d-298a,c  passim;  bk XI 322b,d-342a,c passim, esp ch 11-13
328d330b,  CH 19-20 332b-333a; bk xii, ch 1-9 342b,d-348b; bk xxii, ch i
586b,d-587b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 33, 633d-634a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 47, A 2, ANS 257b-258c; qq 63-64 325b-338d
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxix [4981] 150d-151a 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, part hi, 174d-175a; part IV, 258d-259b

[73a]
\5a to 6a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i 93a-110b esp
[27-282]
94a-99b,
[587-615]
106a-b; hk ii
[229-283]
116a-117a;
[477-485]
121b; bk hi
[613-742] 148b-151b; bk iv [1-130] 152b-155a;
[788-1015] 169b-174b; bk v [577]-bk vi [912]
187b-216a passim 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue [243-292] 7a-8a 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic{,  219b  5a.  The  origin  of  the division between angels and
demons: the sin of Lucifer or Satan Old Testament: Isaiah, 14:4-27— (Z))
IsaiaSy  14:4-27  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  ofSolomon,  2:24— (D) OT, BooJ{ of
Wisdom,  2:24-25  New  Testament:  // Peter, 2:4 / Jude, 6 / Revelation,
12:7-10— (D) Apocalypse, 12:7-10 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 67
88b-c/  City  of God, bk xi, ch 9-20 326d-333a; bk xii', CH 3 343d-344b;
ch   6-9  345b-348b;  bk  XXII,  CH  I  586b,d-587b  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 47, A 2, ans 257b-258c; q 63 325b-333d 21 Dante:
D/rm<f Comedy, hell, hi [22-51] 4b-c; XXXIV
[28-36]
51c; PURGATORY, XII
[25-27]
70c; paradise, xix
[40-51] 135c; xxix
[4966] 150d-151a
22  Chaucer:  Monies  Tale  [14,005-012]  434a 30 Bacon: Advaricement of
Learning, 81a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i 93a-110b esp
[27-83] 94a-95a; bk
iv
[32-104]
153a-154b; bk V [600-904] 188b-195a 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,075-121]
246a247a  i  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk xi, 344c-d 5b. The
society  of  the  demons:  the rule of Satan over the powers of darkness
Apocrypha:  Ecdesiasticus,  39:28—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 39:33-34 New
Testament:  Matthew,  9:34;  10:25;  12:22-30  /  Mar}{,  3:22  / Lul{e,
11:14-23  /John, 8:31-59 / Ephesians, 2:1-3; ^-^^ / Hebrews, 2:13-15 / 1
John, 3:8-12 / Revelation, 2:9,13; 9:1-11; 18:2— (D) Apocalypse, 2:9,13;
9:1-11;  18:2 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xx, ch ii 541a-c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk hi, ch 37, 673d-674a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  63,  AA 8-9 332c-333d; q 109 562a- 564b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell
la-52d esp viii
[65]-ix
[103]
llc-13b, xviii
[19-39]
25c-d, xxi-xxiii 30a-34c, xxviii [1-42] 41b-c, xxxiv
[16-31] 51c
22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [6957-7220] 279a-283b / Summoner's Prologue
284b-285a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part hi, 195a; part iv, 247a-248a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [242-263] 98b99a; bjk ii
[1-520]
llla-122b esp
[11-42]
lllb-112a; bk iv [89-92] 154b; bk v [600-904] 188b-195a

[73b]
Chapter  1:  ANGEL  15  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 116a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part i [233H-2604] 56b 63b esp
[2465-25:^1]
60a-61b;
[:5835-4222]
93b103a;  part h [11,636-675] 283a-284a 6. The role of the angels in the
government of the universe Old Testament: Genesis, 3:24; 28:12 / Psalms,
103:20-22—  (D)  Psalms,  102:20-22  / Daniel, 7:10 / Zechariah, 1:7-21;
4:1-6:8—  (D) Zacharias, 1:7-21; 4:1-6:8 New Testament: Matthew, 24:31 /
MarJ^,  iy.:ij  I  John, 1:51 / Revelation, 5:2,11-14; 8-20 passim— (£>)
Apocalypse,  5:2,11-14; 8-20 passim 18 Augustine: City of God, bk vh, ch
30,  261d;  BK VIII, CH 24, 283a-b; bk x, ch 15 308a-b; CH 21 311c-312a;
bk  xh, ch 27 359c-360a,c; BK XVI, CH 5-6, 426a-c; bk xxii, ch i, 586b,d
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  45,  a  5,  ans and rep i
245c-247a;  q  63, a 7, ans 331c-332b; q 64, a 4, ans 337d-338d; q 66, A
3,  rep  2  347b-348d;  q  89,  a  8, rep 2 479c480c; q 91, A 2, rep 1,3
485b-486b;  a  4, rep 2 487d-488c; qq 106-114 545c-585c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, vii
[67-96]
lOb-c; PURGATORY, II
[10-51]
54c-55a; viii
[22-36]
64c; XV
[1-36] 75b-d;
xvii
[40-63]
78d-79a; xxiv [133-154] 91a-b; paradise, ii
[112-138] 109a;
viii
[91-148] 117d-118c;
xiii
[52-72]
126a; xxviii
[120-129]
150a; xxix
[13-45] 150b-c
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Paniagruel, bk ii, 117d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk ii
[i 19-134] 113b114a; [237-249] 116b; [402-416] 120a; bk vii
[550-601] 229a-230a / Areopagitica, 410a
6a.  The ministry of the good angels in the affairs of men: guardianship
Old  Testament: Genesis, 16:7-12; 18:1-19:22; 21:9-21; 22:1-19; 24:7,40;
32:1-2,24-30;  48:1516  /  Exodus,  14:19-20;  23:20-23;  32:34;  33:2 /
Numbers,  20:16;  22:22-35 /Joshua, 5:13-15— {D) Josue, 5:13-16 /Judges,
2:1-4;  6:ii-24;i3  /  II  Samuel,  24:15-17—  (D) // Kings, 24:1517 / /
Kings,  19:5-8—  (D)  ///  Kings,  19:5-8  / // Kings, 19:32-35— (£>) IV
Kings, 19:32-35 / / Chronicles, 21:11-30— (D) I Paralip07nenon, 21:11-30
/  //  Chronicles,  7,2:21—  {D) II Paralipomenon, 32:21 / Psalms, 34:7;
35o-6;  91:1013—  (D)  Psalms,  33:8;  34:5-6; 90:10-13 ; Isaiah, 6:6-7;
?>T'2>^~{^)  i^^i^^y 6:6-7; 37:36 / Daniel, 3:28; 6:22; 8-12— (D) Daniel
3:956:22',  ?)-i2 / Hosea, 12:2-4— (D) Osee, 12:2-4 / Zechariah, 1:7-21;
3—  (D) Zacharias, 1:72i;3 Apocrypha: Tobit, 3:17; 5-12— (D) OT, Tobias,
3:25;  5-12  / Baruch, 6:y—{D) OT, Baruchy 6:6 / Song of Three Children,
2^-26-{D)  OT,  Daniel, 3:49-50 / Bel and Dragon, 31-42— {D) OT, Daniel,
14:30-41

[74a]
(6.  The  role  of the angels in the government of the universe. 6a. The
ministry  of  the  good angels in the affairs of men: guardianship.) New
Testament:  Matthew,  1:18-25;  2:13,19-20; 13:24-30,36-43,47-51; 18:10;
24:31;  28:1-7 / Mar}{, 1:13; 13:27 / LuJ^, 1*1-38; 2:8-15; 16:22 /John,
5:4;  12:28-29 / Acts, 5:17-20; 7:52-53; 8:26; 10:1-7,22,30-32; 12:5-11;
23:9;  27:21-24  / Galatians, 3:19 / Hebrews, 1:13-14 / Revelation, 1:1;
7-11;  14:6-20;  15-18;  19:17-18;  22:16  — (D) Apocalypse, 1:1; 7-1 1;
14:6-20;  15-18;  19:17-18; 22:16 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par
37,  108d  /  City  of God, bk viii, ch 25 283b-c; bk x, ch 8 303a-d; ch
12-13  306d'307c;  bk xix, ch 9 516a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 30
632c633b;  CH 33 633d-634b 19 Aquinas : Surmva Theologica, part i, q 64,
A  4,  ANS  337d-338d;  q  66,  a  3,  rep  2 347b348d; Q 86, a 4, rep 2
463d-464d;  q 89, a 8, rep 2 479c-480c; q 91, a 2, rep 1,3 485b-486b; QQ
111-113 568b-581d; part i-ii, q 3, a 7, rep 2 628a-d; Q 5, a 6 641a-642a
20  Aquinas  : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, a 3 241c-242b; part hi
suppl,  q 76, a 3 942b-d; Q 89, a 3 1007d-1008b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, viii
[65]-ix
[103]
llc-13b; purgatory, v
[85-129]
59d60c; VIII [1-108] 64a-65b; ix [70-145] 66c-67b; XII
[73-136]
71a-d; xvii
[40-63]
78d-79a; PARADISE, XXXII [85-II4] 155c-d 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,588-825]
463b-467b  23HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part hi, 174d-175a; 175c-d 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 132b-c; 158c-159b; 168c 27 Shakespeare:
King  Lear, act iv, sc ii [3850] 270d-271a 32 Milton: Comtis 33a-56b esp
[170-229] 37a38b / Paradise Lost, bk ii
[i 024-1 033] 133b;
BK IV
[549-588] 164b-165a;
[776-843] 169b170b; BK V [224-247] 180a-b; bk vi [893-912]
215b-216a; bk viii
[630-643] 246a / Areopagitica, 410a-b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  124a  /  Pensees, 722, 309b-312a; 846
339a-b  47  Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,676-12,111] 284a294b 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic\,  409b-410a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vii, 185a-c
6b.  The  intervention  of the demons in the affairs of men: temptation,
possession  Old Testament: Genesis, 3 / / Samuel, 16:14-23 —(D) / Kings,
16:14-23  /  / Kiiigs, 22:20-23— (D) /// Kings, 22:20-23 / / Chronicles,
21:1—  {D)  I  Paralipomenon,  21:1  /  II  Chronicles,  18:2022— (D) //
Paralipomenon, 18:20-22 / Job, 1-2

[74b]
16  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6b  Apocrypha:  Tobit, 3:8— (D) OT, Tobias, 3:8 /
Wisdom  of  Solomon, 2:24— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 2:24-25 New Testament:
Matthew,  4:1-11;  8:28-34;  9:32-34; 12:22-30,43-45; 13:19,24-30,36-43;
17:14-18  /  Mar\,  1:13;  4:15; 5:1-20 / Lul{e, 4:1-13; 8:2-3,12,26-36;
11:14-26;  22:3-6  / John, 8:31-59; 10:19-21; 13:2,21-27 / Acts, 5:1-11;
8:5-8;  10:37-38;  16:16-18 / Romans, 8:38-39 / // Corinthians, 2:10-11;
11:13-15  /  Galatians, 1:8 / Ephesians, 2:2 / / Thessalonians, 2:18 / /
Peter,  5:8-9  /  Revelation,  2:10;  9; 12-13— (D) Apocalypse, 2:10; 9;
12-13  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 67 88b-c / City of God, bk
ii,  ch  24-26,  164c-i66d;  bk  VIII,  CH 15-24 274d-283b; bk ix, ch 18
295cd;  bk  x,  ch  9-1  1 303d-306d; ch 21-12 311c312b; bk XVIII, ch 18
480d-482a;  bk  xix,  ch  9 516a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 23-24
648a-649a; bk hi, ch 37, 673d-674a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  63,  A  9,  REP  3 333b-d; q 64, a 4, ans 337d-338d; q 86, A 4, REP 2
463d-464d; q 89, a 8, rep 2 479c-480c; q 114 581d-585c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 80 159d-162d; part hi, q 8, aa 7-8 761d-763b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy^ hell, viii
[65]-ix
[103] llc-13b; XXVII [55-136] 40a-41b; xxxiii
[91-157] 50c-51b; purgatory, v [85-129] 59d60c; VIII [1-108] 64a-65b
22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of Law [4778-4805] 240b-241a / Friar's Tale
278a-284a  /  Physician's  Tale  [12,055-072]  368a-b  / Pardoner's Tale
[12,778-828]  380b-381b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par 20 508b-509a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 69c-71a; part hi, 174d-175a; 195a; part iv, 258c-261a
24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 93d-94a; bk hi, 169d-173d;
bk  iv, 261a-265a; 285c-288d; 300b-d 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act ii, sc
hi
[356379] 220c-d
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[27-36]
94a;
[331-621]
100b-107a; bk ii
[310-389]
118a119b; [496-505] 122a; [1024-1033] 133b; bk iv
[32-113] 153a-155a; [358-392] 160a-161a; [502535] 163b-164a; [776-1015] 169b-174b; bk vi
[893-912] 215b-216a; bk ix
[404-794]
256a264b  33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 140a / Pensees, 784 325b; 843,
337b-338a;  850  340a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 184c-d 47 Goethe:
Faust, prologue 7a-9b; part i
[482-517]
14a-b;
[i 178-2336]
29b-56a esp
[1322-1384]
32b-34a,
[1530-1867]
37a-44b;
[3776-3834] 92a-93b; [4176-4205] 102a-103a;
part II
[4941-4970]
122b-123a;
[5357-5392]
132b-133a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk ii, 21d-22b; bk iv,
86b-c;  bk  v,  130b-132c;  BK  VI,  169c-170b; bk vii, 175b-176b; bk x,
295a-c

[75a]
7/0 8 Chapter 1: ANGEL 17 7. God and Satan 18 Augustine: Cily of God, bk
xx  530a-560a,c  passim  •  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theohgica, part i, q 63
325b'333d  esp  a 3 327b-328b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theological part i-ii, q
80, A I, RF.p 2-3 159d-160c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxiv 51b-52d
22  Chaucer:  Friar's Tale 278a-284a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 195a
32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk i-ii 93a-134a, bk hi
[56-134]
136b-138a, bk iv
[1006-1015] 174b, BK V [224-245] 180a-b, bk
V
[563]-BK
VI
[892] 187b-215b, bk x
[1-62]
274b-275b,  [460-584]  284b-287a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 784 325b; 820 331b;
826  332b-333a;  846  339a-b  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi,
337a-346a  la.  Warfare  between the powers of light and darkness: their
struggle  for dominion over man Old Testament: / Samuel, 16:14-23— (D) /
Kings,  16:14-23  /  Job,  1-2  /  Zechariah, 3:17— (D) Zacharias, y.i-y
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  8:3—  (Z>)  OT, Tobias, 8:3 New Testament: Matthetv,
4:1-11; 12:22-30; 13:19,24-30,36-43; 25:41 / Mar\, 1:13; 5:1-20 / Lu}{e,
4:1-13;  8:26-36;  10:17-20; 11:14-23; 22:31-34 I John, 12:31-32 / Acts,
8:5-8;  19:1120;  26:9-29 / Romans, 16:17-20 / / Corinthians, 10:20-21 /
//  Corinthians,  2:10-11;  I 4-3-4; 10:2-5; 11*13-15 / Ephesians, 4:27;
6:1018///  Thessalonians, 2:8-9// Timothy, 4:1-5 / // Timothy, 2:24-26 /
Hebretvs, 2:13-15 / James, 4:7 / / Peter, 5:8-9 / I John, 3:8-12 / Jude,
9   /   Revelation,   2:9-13;  3:9-13;  12-14;  16:13-14;  20:1-10—  (D)
Apocalypse,  2:9-13;  3:9-13;  12-14;  16:13-14;  20:1-10  18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  iv, par 24-27 25b-26a; bk v, par 20 32d-33a; bk x, par
67  88b-c / City of God, bk ii, ch 25 165c-166b; BK XII, CH 6 345b-346c;
bk  xx, ch 11-13 541a-542d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 23 648a-c; bk
hi, ch 37, 673d-674a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a i, rep
4  34d-35c;  a  3,  ans  36b-37c;  q 49, a 3 266d-268a,c; q 63, a 2, ans
326c-327b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 74, A I, rep I
925c-926c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, viii
[65]-ix
[103] llc-13b; XXVII [55-136] 40a-41b; purgatory, v
[85-129] 59d-60c;
viii
[1-108] 64a65b; XI [1-30] 68d-69a; xiv [130-15 1] 75a-b
22 Chaucer: Friar's Tale [7227-7246] 284a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv,
247a-248a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [890-1009] 130b133a; bk hi
[1-415] 135b-144b; bk ix [679779] 262a-264a

[75b]
33 Pascal: Provincial letters, 116a-b 40 Cibbon: Decline and Fall, 81b-c
41  CjIbbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 330b 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue 7a-9b;
part i
[1335-1378]
33a-34a; part ii
[11,612-843]
282b-288a  48  Melville:  Moby  DicJ{Csp  4b  5a,  117a-122b, 131a-138a,
144a-b,  370b  372a, 418a-419b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk mi,
50c54b  esp  54a-b;  bk  iv,  86b-c;  bk  v,  130b-136b;  BK VI, 151b-d;
169c-170b;  bk  vii,  175b-176c; 185a-c; bk xi, 342d-343b 7b. Lucifer in
the  service of God Old Testament: /o^, 1-2 / Psalms, 78:49— (D) Psalms,
77:49   Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  39:28  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,
39:33-34  18  Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 24, 283ab; BK x, CH 21
311c-312a;  bk  xii,  ch  27  359c  360a,c; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b 19
Aquinas:  Smmna Theologica, part i, q 64, a 4, ans 337d-338d; q 114, a i
581d-582c  20  Aquinas:  Sum,ma  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl, q 89, a 4
1008b-1009b . . 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xviii
[19-39]
25c-d; xxi-xxiii 30a-34c; xxvii [55]-xxviii
[42] 40a-41c; xxxiv 51b-52d
22 Chaucer: Friar's Tale [7055-7085] 281a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
i
[157-168] 97a;
[209-220] 98a; bk x [616-640] 288a-b
47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
[271-353] 7b-9b;
PART  II [7127-7137] 174b-175a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
151b-d;  BK  XI,  341a-344d 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Disconte?its,
790d  8.  Criticism  and satire with respect to the belief in angels and
demons  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  51d-52b;  69c-71a;  PART III,
174b-176d;  195a;  part  iv,  258b261a;  276c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  171a-173d;  bk iv, 285c-288d; 300b-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  500a-501a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 41d-42a / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  62, 113d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latus, bk xii,
86d87b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  184c-d;  189c; 347a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  229d; 231b; 244c; 334c 42 Y^k^t: Judgement, 592a-c;
599d-600a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv-, 354c355b 50 Marx:
Capital,  31  d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 21d22b; BK XI,
337a-346a  53  James  :  Psychology,  148b  54  Freud:  New Introductory
Lectures, 876d-877a; 877c

[76a]
18  THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES I. Augustine. De Genesi ad Litteram
Aquinas. On Being and Essence, ch 4 . Sum?na Contra Getitiles, bk ii, ch
46-55,  91loi; BK III, CH 104-110 . Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate,
qq  8-9;  De Malo, Q 16; De Anima, a 7 . On Spiritual Creatures, aa 1-3,
5-8  .  De  Substantiis  Separatis Dante. Convivio {The Banquet^, second
treatise, CH5-7 Machiavelli. Belfagor II. Philo Judaeus. On the Cherubim
Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology, (m) "DioNYsius". On the Celestial
Hierarchy  Erigena.  De Divisione Naturae, bk i (4, 7-9), 11 (6, 22), IV
(7-9),  V  (13)  Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed, part i, CH 49;
PART  II,  CH 2-7 BoNAVENTURA. BrcvUoquium, part ii (6-8) R. Bacon. Opus
Majus, part vii Albo. The BooJ^of Principles {Sefer ha-If^arim) , bk II,
CH  12  Calvin.  Institutes  of  the Christian Religion, bk i, CH 14 (3)
Luther.  Table  Tall^  Donne.  Aire  and  Angells  SuAREZ. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xii  (14), XXXIV (3, 5), XXXV, xli (2), li (3-4) Marlowe.
The Tragical History ofDoctor Faustus

[76b]
For:  Other  discussions  relevant to the theory of angels, see Eternity
4a;   Idea   le;  Knowledge  7b;  Mind  ioc;  SouL4d('2);  and  for  the
metaphysical  consideration  of  immaterial substances, see Being ybfa).
The  theological  doctrine  of the fallen angels, see Sin 3, 3b; and for
the related doctrines of Heaven and Hell, see Eternity 4d; Good and Evil
id, 2b; Immortality 5e-5f; Punishment 5e(i). The theory of the celestial
motors,  see  Astronomy  8b; Change 14. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below
are  works not included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant
to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited,  consult the BibUography of Additional Readings which follows the
last  chapter of The Great Ideas. Heywood. The Hierarchic of the Blessed
Angells H. Lawrence. Of Our Communion and IVarre with Angels Camfield. a
Theological Discourse of Angels and Their Ministries Leibnitz. Discourse
on  Metaphysics,  xxiii,  xxxivxxxvi John Reynolds. Inquiries Concerning
the State and Economy of the Angelical Worlds Swedenborg. Angelic Wisdom
Concerning  the Divine Providence Voltaire. "Angels," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  ScHLEiERMACHER.  The  Christian  Faith,  par 42-45 W. Scott.
Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft  J.  H.  Newman. "The Powers of
Nature,"  in  vol  ii.  Parochial and Plain Sermons Heine. Gods in Exile
Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ix,  ch  2  Michelet.  Satanism and Witchcraft
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough, part iv, bk i, ch 4; PART VI ; PART VII, CH
4-7 Wendell. "Were the Witches of Salem Guiltless.?'* in Stelligeri Lea.
Materials  Toward  a  History  of  Witchcraft  France. The Revolt of the
Angels Earn ell. Greeks Hero Cults and Ideas ofImmortality Williams. The
Place  of  the  Lion  Glover.  "The Daemon Environment," in Gree\ Byways
Zilboorg.  The  Medical Man and the Witch During the Renaissance VoNiER.
The Angels C. S. Lewis. Out of the Silent Planet . The Screwtape Letters

[77a]
Chapter  i:  ANIMAL  INTRODUCTION ALPHABETICAL ordering places Animal /x
after  Angel  in this list of ideas. There is a third term which belongs
with  these two and, but for the alphabet, might have come between them.
That  term is Man. These three terms—and a fourth, God, which rounds out
the  comparison—are  conjoined  in  Shakespeare's  statement  of what is
perhaps the most universal reflection of man upon himself. "What a piece
of  work  is  man!"  says  Hamlet, "How noble in reason! how infinite in
faculty!  in  form and moving, how express and admirable! in action, how
like  an  angel!  in  apprehension,  how  like a god ! the beauty of the
world! the paragon of animals!" Animal, angel, god— in each of these man
has  seen his image. And at different moments in the history of thought,
he  has  tended  to  identify  himself  with one to the exclusion of the
others.  Yet  predominantly  man has regarded himself as an animal, even
when  he  has  understood  himself  to be created in God's image, and to
share  with the angels, through the possession of intellect, the dignity
of being a person. As his understanding of himself has varied, so has he
altered  his  conception  of  what  it is to be an animal. In terms of a
conception  of  personality  which involves the attributes of reason and
free will, man has legally, as well as morally and metaphysically, drawn
a sharp line between persons and things, and placed brute animals in the
class  of  things. According to the principle of this distinction, being
alive  or  even  being  sensitive  does  not give animals, any more than
plants  and  stones,  the  dignity  or  status  of  persons.  When man's
animality—either   in   terms   of  his  biological  affinities  or  his
evolutionary  origins—has  seemed  an adequate definition of his nature,
man has attributed to animals many of 19

[77b]
his  own  traits, his intelligence and freedom, even his moral qualities
and political propensities. Nevertheless, he has seldom ceased to regard
himself  as  the  paragon of animals, possessing in a higher degree than
other animals the characteristic properties of all. There are exceptions
to  this,  however.  Animals have been glorified by man for skeptical or
satiric  purposes. Montaigne, for example, doubts that man can lay claim
to  any special attributes or excellences, and further suggests that, in
some  particulars  at  least,  men are less able and less noble than the
beasts.  Relying  on  legends found in Pliny and Plutarch which describe
the  marvelous  exploits  of animals, he argues that "it is not upon any
true  ground of reason, but by a foolish pride and vain opinion, that we
prefer ourselves before other animals, and separate ourselves from their
conditions  and society." Why, Montaigne asks, "should wc attribute to I
know not what natural and servile inclination the works that surpass all
we  can  do  by  nature and art" ? We have no grounds for believing that
"beasts,  by natural and compulsory tendency, do the same things that we
do  by  our choice and industry." Rather "we ought," he continues, "from
like  effects, to conclude like faculties, and consequently confess that
the  same  reason, the same method, by which we operate, are common with
them,  or  that they have others that are better." Nor can we excuse our
presumption  of superiority by the fact that we are compelled to look at
animals  from  our  human  point  of  view.  "When  I play with my cat,"
Montaigne  writes,  "who knows whether I do not make her more sport than
she makes me ? We mutually divert one another with our monkey tricks; if
I  have  my  hour  to  begin  or  to refuse, she also has hers." Suppose
animals were to tell us what they

[78a]
20 THE GREAT IDEAS thought of us. "The defect that hinders communication
betwixt  them  and us, why may it not be on our part as well as theirs ?
'Tis yet to determine," Montaigne thinks, "where the fault' lies that we
understand  not one another; for we understand them no more than they do
us; by the same reason they may think us to be beasts as we think them."
If  Montaigne's  view  were to prevail, no special significance could be
given  to  "brute" as opposed to "rational" animal. For that matter, the
same  holds true whenever man is conceived asjtist an animal, paragon or
not.  Animals are brute only when man is not—only when to be human is to
be somehow more than an animal, different in kind, not merely in degree.
Satirists  like  Swift idealize an animal nature to berate the folly and
depravity  of man. In his last voyage, Gulliver finds in the land of the
Houyhnhnms  a  race  of  human-looking  creatures,  the  Yahoos,  who by
contrast with their noble masters, the horses, are a miserable and sorry
lot.  Here  it  is  the Yahoos who are brutes, bereft as they are of the
intelligence  and  virtue  which  grace  the  splendid  Houyhnhnms.  The
comparison  of  men  and  animals  takes  still another direction in the
allegories  of fable and poetry. From Aesop to the mediaeval Bestiaries,
there  is  the  tradition of stories in which animals are personified in
order  to teach a moral lesson. In the Divine Comedy Dante uses specific
animals  to  symbolize  the  epitome  of  certain  passions,  vices, and
virtues. The intent of his allegory is, however, never derogatory to man
as  man.  But  when  Machiavelli  allegorizes the qualities required for
political  power,  he  advises the prince "knowingly to adopt the beast"
and "to choose the fox and the lion." This tends to reduce human society
to  the  j  ungle  where  strength  and guile compete for supremacy. The
comparison of men and animals fails to touch the distinction, or lack of
distinction, between animals and plants. This is basic to the definition
or  conception of animal nature. As in the case of men and animals, this
problem  can  be  approached  in two ways: either from the side of plant
life, and with respect to those functions which seem to be common to all
living  things;  or  from  the  side of animal life, and with respect to
those functions which seem to belong only to

[78b]
animals,  never  to plants. On either approach the issue remains whether
plants  and  animals are different in kind, not merely in degree. On the
one  hand,  it  may  be  argued that sensitivity, desire, and locomotion
(even  perhaps  sleeping  and waking) are, in some form or degree, to be
found  in  all  living  things. On the other hand, it may be argued that
such  functions as nutrition, growth, and reproduction, though obviously
common  to plants and animals, are performed by animals in a distinctive
manner. If plants manifest all the vital powers or activities present in
animals;  or  if  in  functions  common  to both, animals differ only in
degree,  then  the scale of life would seem to be a continuous gradation
rather  than  a  hierarchy.  The  opposite  position,  which  affirms  a
difference  in kind and consequently a hierarchy, is taken by Aristotle.
In  his  biological writings, as well as in his treatise On the Soul, he
draws  a  sharp  line  between  plant  and  animal  life by reference to
faculties  or  functions  absent  in  the  one  and  found in the other.
Aristotle  first points out that "living may mean thinking or perception
or  local  movement  and  rest,  or  movement in the sense of nutrition,
decay,  and  growth.  Hence,"  he  goes  on, "we think of plants also as
living,  for  they  are observed to possess in themselves an originative
power through which they increase or decrease in all spatial directions;
they  grow  up  and  down,  and everything that grows increases its bulk
alike in both directions or indeed in all, and continues to live so long
as  it can absorb nutriment." This leads him to assign to plants what he
calls  a nutritive or vegetative soul, whereby they have the three basic
faculties   common   to   all   living   things—nutrition,  growth,  and
reproduction.  But Aristotle does not find in plants any evidence of the
functions  performed  by animals, such as sensation, appetite, and local
motion.  These  are the characteristic powers of the animal soul, called
by  him  the  "sensitive  soul"  because sensation is the source both of
animal  desire  and  animal  movement.  Galen  follows Aristotle in this
distinction.  In  his  Natural Faculties he limits his investigations to
the  functions  common  to all living things. He uses the word "natural"
for  those effects, such as "growth and nutrition . . . common to plants
as well as animals," which, in his view,

[79a]
opposed  to such activities as "feeling and iarc i ^voluntary motion . .
.  peculiar  to  animals,"  that  jie  calls  "effects  of the soul," or
"psychic."  It  may  seem  surprising  at  first  that  Galen's study of
nutrition,   growth,   and  reproduction—  not  only  of  the  functions
themselves  but  of  the  bodily  organs and processes involved in these
functions—should  be  restricted  to their manifestation in animals, and
not  in  plants  as  well. The reason may be that for the naturalists of
antiquity,  the  biological  functions of vegetable matter did not yield
their  secrets  readily enough to observation. A treatise on plants, not
written  by  Aristotle  but  attributed  to  his school, begins with the
remark that "life is found in animals and plants; but whereas in animals
it  is  clearly manifest, in plants it is hidden and less evident." This
view  of  the  world  of  living  things  as  divided into the two great
kingdoms  of  plant  and  animal  hfe  prevailed  through  centuries  of
speculation  and  research.  But  from the time that Aristotle began the
work  of  classification, it has been realized that there exist numerous
examples of what Bacon called "bordering instances . . . such as exhibit
those  species  of bodies which appear to be composed of two species, or
to  be  the  rudiments  between  the one and the other." Within the last
hundred years the difficulty of classifying such specimens, particularly
those  which  seem  to  fall  between  plant  and animal, has raised the
question  whether  the traditional distinction can be maintained. "If we
look even to the two main divisions, namely, to the animal and vegetable
kingdoms,"  writes Darwin, "certain low forms are so far intermediate in
character  that  naturalists  have disputed to which kingdom they should
belong."  Yet  Darwin  does  not  find  the  evidence  available  to him
sufficient  to  determine whether all living things have descended "from
one  primordial  form"  or  whether  the  evolution  of  life  is  to be
represented in two distinct lines of development. Since Darwin's day the
researches  of  scientists  like  Loeb  and  Jennings on the behavior of
micro-organisms,  and  the  phenomena of tropisms {e.g.^ the sunflower's
turning  toward  the  sun),  and  the  study of what appears to be local
motion  in  plants, have contributed additional evidence relevant to the
issue. It is, however, still considered open and arguable.

[79b]
Chapter  2: ANIMAL ;» The fact that organisms exist which do not readily
fall   into   cither   classification   may  signify  continuity  rather
thanseparation  between  plants and animals; but it may also be taken to
mean  that  more  acute  observations are required to classify these so-
called "intermediate forms." Plant tropisms may or may not require us to
deny  that  sensitivity  belongs  to  animals  alone. The apparent local
motion  of  plants  may  be a mode of growth or a random movement rather
than  a directed change from place to place; and the attachment to place
of  apparently stationary animals, such as barnacles and mussels, may be
different  from the immobility of rooted Against the background of these
major  issues  concerning  plants,  animals,  and  men  as continuous or
radically  distinct  forms of life, the study of animal organisms— their
anatomy  and  physiology—acquires  much of its critical sigAnatomy is an
ancient  science.  Several  surgical treatises of Hippocrates display an
extensive  knowledge of the human skeletal structure and the disposition
of  some  of the organs of the human body. The dissection of animals, as
well  as  gross  observation,  provides  Aristotle  with a basis for the
comparative anatomy of different species of animal. For Galen as well as
Aristotle, much of this anatomical study was motivated by an interest in
the structure and relation of the organs involved in the local motion of
the  body  as a whole, and in local motions within the body, such as the
motions  of  the  alimentary  or  reproductive systems. It remains for a
later  investigator,  schooled  in  the tradition of ancient biology, to
make the startling discovery of the circulation of the blood through the
motions  of  the  heart. Harvey not only does this, but he also suggests
the  functional interdependence of respiration and circulation, based on
his  observation  of  the intimate structural connections between heart,
arteries, veins, and lungs. His contribution is at once a departure from
and a product of the scientific tradition in which he worked, for though
his  conclusions  are  radically  new,  he  reaches  them by a method of
research and reasoning which follows the general principles of Aristotle
and Galen. His insistence, moreover.

[80a]
22  THE GREAT IDEAS on the necessity of finding a functional purpose for
an  organic structure stands as the classic rejoinder to Francis Bacon's
recommendation  that  formal and final causes be separated from material
and efficient causes in the study of nature. Bacon assigns the first two
types  of  cause  to  metaphysics,  and  limits physics to the last two.
Harvey's  work  on  the  generation of animals is another example of the
continuity  between  ancient  and  modern  biology.  In  some  respects,
Aristotle's  researches  on  the reproductive organs and their functions
are  more general than Harvey's. They represent for him only part of the
large  field of comparative anatomy, and have significance for the study
of  mating habits in different classes of animals. Yet on the problem of
the  act  of  generation itself, its causes and consequences, especially
the  phenomena  of embryonic development, Harvey's treatise reads partly
as  a  conversation with Aristotle, and partly as the record of original
observations  undertaken  experimentally.  "Respect for our predecessors
and  for  antiquity  at  large," he writes, "inclines us to defend their
conclusions  to the extent that love of truth will allow. Nor do I think
it  becoming  in  us  to  neglect  and  make  little of their labors and
conclusions,  who  bore  the  torch that has lighted us to the shrine of
philosophy." The ancients, in his opinion, "by their unwearied labor and
variety  of  experiments, searching into the nature of things, have left
us  no doubtful light to guide us in our studies." Yet, Harvey adds, "no
one of a surety will allow that all truth was engrossed by the ancients,
unless  he  be  utterly  ignorant ... of the many remarkable discoveries
that  have lately been made in anatomy." Referring to his ov/n method of
investigation,  he  proposes  as  a  "safer  way  to  the  attainment of
knowledge"  that  "in  studying  nature," we "question things themselves
rather  than  by turning over books." It is particularly with respect to
animal  generation  that  the  great  books  exhibit  continuity  in the
statement  of basic problems in biology, as well as indicate the logical
conditions  of  their  solution.  The issue of spontaneous generation as
opposed  to  procreation  runs  through  Aristotle,  Lucretius, Aquinas,
Harvey, and Darwin. The problem of sexual and asexual repro-

[80b]
duction,  with all the relevant considerations of sexual differentiation
and  sexual  characteristics,  is  to be found in Aristotle, Darwin, and
Freud.   Questions   of  heredity,  though  they  are  raised  with  new
significance  by  Darwin and William James, have a lineage as ancient as
Plato. Scientific learning has, of course, advanced in recent times with
regard  to  the  nature  and  behavior  of  animals.  On  such topics as
heredity,  the  work  of  Mendel, Bateson, and Morgan is crucial; or, to
take   another   example,  our  knowledge  of  the  functioning  of  the
respiratory  and  the  nervous  system  has been greatly enlarged by the
researches of Haldane, Sherrington, and Pavlov. Yet even in these areas,
the  background of recent scientific contributions is to be found in the
great books—in the writings, for example, of Harvey, Darwin, and William
James.  Another interest which runs through the whole tradition of man's
study  of animals lies in the problem of their classification— both with
respect to the principles of taxonomy itself, and also in the systematic
effort  to construct schemes whereby the extraordinary variety of animal
types  can  be  reduced to order. In this field Aristotle and Darwin are
the  two great masters. If the names of Buifon and Linnaeus also deserve
to  be mentioned, it must be with the double qualification that they are
followers  of Aristotle on the one hand, and precursors of Darwin on the
other.  The  Aristotelian  classification is most fully set forth in the
History  of  Animals.  There  one  kind  of animal is distinguished from
another  by  many "properties": by locale or habitat; by shape and color
and size; by manner of locomotion, nutrition, association, sensation; by
organic  parts  and members; by temperament, instinct, or characteristic
habits  of  action.  With respect to some of these properties, Aristotle
treats  one kind of animal as differing from another by a degree—by more
or  less—of  the  same trait. With respect to other properties, he finds
the  difference  to  consist in the possession by one species of a trait
totally  lacking  in  another.  He  speaks  of  the  lion  as being more
"ferocious"  than  the  wolf, the crow as more "cunning" than the raven;
but  he also observes that the cow has an "organ of digestion" which the
spi-

[81a]
der  lacks,  the lizard an "organ of locomotion" which the oyster lacks.
The  sponge lives in one manner so far as "locale" is concerned, and the
viper in another; reptiles have one manner of locomotion, birds another.
So  ample  were Aristotle's data and so expert were his classifications,
that  the  major divisions and sub-divisions of his scheme remain intact
in  the  taxonomy  constructed  by  Linnaeus.  The  radical character of
Darwin's  departure  from  the  Linnaean  classification  stems  from  a
difference in principle rather than a correction of observational errors
or  inadequacies.  Where  Aristotle  and  all  taxonomists before Darwin
classify  animals  by  reference  to their similarities and differences,
Darwin  makes  inferred  genealogy  or  descent the primary criterion in
terms  of  which  he groups animals into varieties, species, genera, and
larger  phyla.  Naturalists,  according  to  Darwin, "try to arrange the
species,  genera,  and  famiHes  in  each  class,  on what is called the
Natural  System. But what is meant by this system.? Some authors look at
it  merely as a scheme for arranging together those living objects which
are  most  alike,  and for separating those which are most unlike. . . .
The  ingenuity  and utility of this system are indisputable," but Darwin
thinks  that  its rules cannot be explained or its difficulties overcome
except  "on  the view that the Natural System is founded on descent with
modification—  that the characters which naturalists consider as showing
true affinity between any two or more species, are those which have been
inherited   from   a   common  parent,  all  true  classification  being
genealogical—  that  community  of  descent  is  the  hidden  bond which
naturalists  have been unconsciously seeking, and not some unknow^n plan
of  creation,  or  the enunciation of general propositions, and the mere
putting together and separating objects more or less alike." In Darwin's
opinion,  classification  "must  be strictly genealogical in order to be
natural."  Only  by  the  principle of descent— "the one certainly known
cause  of  similarity  in  organic  beings"—can  we arrange "all organic
beings  throughout  all time in groups under groups"; see "the nature of
the  relationships  by which all living and extinct organisms are united
by  complex,  radiating,  and  circuitous lines of affinities into a few
grand classes"; and understand "the

[81b]
Chapter  2:  ANIMAL  23  wide  opposition in value between analogical or
adaptive characters, and characters of true affinity." Furthermore, "the
importance  of  embryological  characters  and  of rudimentary organs in
classification"  becomes  "intelligible  on  the  view  that  a  natural
arrangement  must  be  genealogical."  By  reference to "this element of
descent,"  not only shall we be able to "understand what is meant by the
Natural  System,"  but also, Darwin adds, "our classifications will come
to  be,  as far as they can be so made, genealogies; and will then truly
give  what may be called the plan of creation." Whereas the Aristotelian
classification  is  static in principle, having no reference to temporal
connections   or   the  succession  of  generations,  the  Darwinian  is
dynamic—almost  a  moving  picture  of  the ever-shifting arrangement of
animals  according  to their affinities through common ancestry or their
diversities  through  genetic  variation. Connected with this opposition
between  static  and  dynamic  principles  of classification is a deeper
conflict  between  two  ways  of  understanding the nature of scientific
classification  itself.  The point at issue is whether the classes which
the  taxonomist  constructs  represent  distinct  natural forms. Do they
exist  independently  as  objects demanding scientific definition or are
the  scientist's  groupings  somewhat arbitrary and artificial.? Do they
divide   and   separate  what  in  nature  is  more  like  a  continuous
distribution  with  accidental  gaps  and  unevennesses ? This issue, in
turn,  tends  to  raise the metaphysical question concerning the reality
and  fixity  of  species, which relates to the problem of the difference
between real and nominal definitions, and the difference between natural
and  arbitrary  systems  of classification. On these matters Aquinas and
Locke  have  much  to  say,  as  well  as  Aristotle  and Darwin. Fuller
discussion  of  such  questions  is  to  be  found  in  the  chapters on
Definition  and Evolution. Insofar as problems of classification and the
nature  of species have a bearing on evolution, they are treated in that
chapter,  as  are  the  related issues of continuity or hierarchy in the
world  of living things, and of difference in degree or }{ind as between
plants and animals, animals and men. The last two problems also occur in
the chapters on Life and Man.

[82a]
24  THE GREAT IDEAS On the theme of comparisons between animals and men,
two  further  points  should  be  noted.  The first concerns the soul of
animals.  When  soul  is conceived as the principle or source of life in
whatever  is  alive,  plants and animals can be said to have souls. Like
Aristotle,  Augustine  distinguishes  "three grades of soul in universal
nature": one which has "only the power of life . . . the second grade in
which  there is sensation . . . the third grade . . . where intelligence
has  its  throne."  Though  he  also follows Aristotle in defining three
kinds  of  soul,  Aquinas  distinguishes  four grades of life, and in so
doing differentiates between /7^r/^<r/ and imperfect animals. "There are
some  living  things," he writes^ "in which there exists only vegetative
power,  as  the  plants.  There  are others in which with the vegetative
there  exists also the sensitive, but not the locomotive power; such are
immovable  animals,  as  shellfish.  There are others which besides this
have locomotive power, as perfect animals, which require many things for
their  life,  and  consequently movement to seek the necessaries of life
from  a distance. And there are some living things which with these have
intellectual  power—namely,  men." On this theory, man, viev/ed in terms
of his animal nature, is a perfect animal. Viewed in terms of his reason
or  intellect, he stands above the highest animals. Yet having a soul is
not  peculiar  to  man, just as being alive, or sensitive, or mobile, is
not.  But  when, as with Descartes, soul is identified with intellect—as
"a thing which thinks, that is to say a mind ... or an understanding, or
a  reason"—and,  in  addition,  soul  is  conceived  as  a spiritual and
immortal  substance, then the conclusion seems to follow that animals do
not  have souls. For Descartes, the theory of the animal as a machine or
automaton  follows  as  a  further  corollary.  "If  there had been such
machines,  possessing  the  organs  and outward form of a monkey or some
other  animal without reason," Descartes claims that "we should not have
had  any  means of ascertaining that they were not of the same nature as
those  animals."  Hobbes  hkewise  would  account for all the actions of
animal  life  on  mechanical  principles.  "For what is the heart, but a
spring," he asks, "and the

[82b]
nerves,  but so many strings; and the joints, but so many wheels, giving
motion  to the whole body.?" The animal is thus pictured as an elaborate
system  of moving parts, inflexibly determined to behave in certain ways
under  the impact of stimulation by external forces. The doctrine of the
animal  automaton is sometimes generalized, as by La Mettrie, a follower
of  Descartes,  to  include the conception of man as a machine. The same
conclusions which are reached from the denial of soul in animals seem to
follow  also  from the theory that the soul, even in the case of man, is
material  or  a  function  of  matter.  According  to  those  who,  like
Lucretius, hold this view, the phenomena of life, sensation, and thought
can  be  explained  by  the  movement  of  atomic  particles  and  their
interaction. The second point concerns the relation between instinct and
intelligence  in  animals.  The  nature  of  animal instincts (or innate
habits)  is  considered  in the chapters on Emotion and Habit, as is the
nature  of animal intelligence in the chapters on Man and Reasoning. But
here  we face the issue whether instinct functions in animals, as reason
does  in man, to meet the exigencies of life; or whether in both, though
varying  in  degree,  intelligence cooperates with instinct to solve the
problems  of  adjustment to environment. Those who, like Aquinas, regard
instinct  and  reason  as  the alternative and exclusive means which God
provides  for  the  ends  of  animal and human life, necessarily tend to
interpret  animal  behavior  in  all  its  detail  as  pre-determined by
elaborate  instinctive  endowments.  Accordingly,  animal behavior, even
when  voluntary rather than purely the action of physiological reflexes,
is  said  not to be free, or an expression of free choice on the part of
the animal; for, as is pointed out in the chapter on Will, Aquinas calls
behavior  "voluntary"  if it involves some knowledge or consciousness of
the  objects  to  which it is directed. Instinctive behavior, such as an
animal's  flight  from danger or its pursuit of food or a mate, involves
sense-perception of the objects of these actions, as well as feelings or
emotions  about them. But though it is "voluntary" in the sense in which
Aquinas uses that word, instinctive behavior is, according to him, the

[83a]
exact  opposite  of  action  based  upon  free  will.  It  is completely
determined  by  the  inborn  pattern  of  the  instinct.  It may vary in
operation  with the circumstances of the occasion, but it does not leave
the  animal  the freedom to act or not to act, or to act this way rather
than  that.  Such  freedom of choice, Aquinas holds, depends on reason's
ability  to contemplate alternatives, to none of which is the human will
bound by natural necessity. Aquinas does not limit human reason and will
to  a  role  analogous to the one he ascribes to instinct and emotion in
animal  life.  Their  power enables man to engage in speculative thought
and  to  seek  remote ends. Nevertheless, on the level of his biological
needs,  man  must  resort  to the use of his reason and will where other
animals  are  guided  by  instinct. "Man has by nature," Aquinas writes,
"his  reason  and  his  hands,  which are the organs of organs, since by
their means man can make for himself instruments of an infinite variety,
and for any number of purposes." Just as the products of reason take the
place  of  hair, hoofs, claws, teeth, and horns— "fixed means of defense
or  of  clothing,  as  is  the case with other animals" so reason serves
man's  needs, in the viev/ of Aquinas, as instinct serves other animals.
Others,  like  Darwin,  James, and Freud, seem to take a different view.
They  attribute  instinct to men as well as to animals. In their opinion
instinctively  determined  behavior  is  influenced by intelligence, and
affected  by  memory and imagination, in animals as well as in men. They
recognize,  however,  that  instinct  predominates  in some of the lower
forms   of  animal  life,  and  acknowledge  that  the  contribution  of
intelligence  is  great  only among the more highly developed organisms.
"Man  has  a  far  greater  variety  of impulses than any lower animal,"
writes  James;  "and  any  one  of these impulses taken in itself, is as
'blind' as the lowest instinct can be; but, owing to man's memory, power
of  reflection, and power of inference, they come each one to be felt by
him,  after he has once yielded to them and experienced their results in
connection  with  a  foresight  o{  xhost results." On the same grounds,
James  argues  that  ''every  instinctive act, in an animal with memory,
must  cease  to  be  'blincT  after  being  once  repeated,  and must be
accompanied

[83b]
Chapter 2: ANIMAL 25 with foresight of its 'end' just so far as ihal end
may  have fallen under the animal's cognizance." If instinct, in animals
or  men,  were  sufficient  for  solving the problems of survival, there
would be no need for what James calls "sagacity" on the part of animals,
or   of  learning  from  experience.  Like  Montaigne,  James  assembles
anecdotes  to  show  that  animals  exercise  their  wits and learn from
experience.  "No  matter how well endowed an animal may originally be in
the  way  of  instincts," James declares, "his resultant actions will be
much  modified  if the instincts combine with experience, if in addition
to   impulses   he   have   memories,   associations,   inferences,  and
expectations,  on  any considerIn his consideration of "the intellectual
contrast  between  brute  and  man,"  James  places "the most elementary
single  difierence  between  the  human  mind and that of brutes" in the
"deficiency  on  the  brute's part to associate ideas by similarity," so
that  "characters,  the  abstraction  of  which  depends on this sort of
association,  must in the brute always remain drowned." Darwin similarly
makes  the  difference in degree between human and animal intelligence a
matter  of  greater  or  less  power to associate ideas. In consequence,
human  instincts are much more modifi.ed by learning and experience than
the  instincts of other animals, as in turn the higher animals show much
greater   variability  in  their  instinctive  behavior  than  do  lower
organisms.  It  is  not  necessary to deny that men alone have reason in
order to affirm that, in addition to instinct, animals have intelligence
in  some  proportion  to  the  development  of  their  sensitive powers,
especially  their  memory and imagination. The position of Aristotle and
Aquinas   seems  to  involve  both  points.  But  if  we  attribute  the
extraordinary  performances  of  animals  to  their  intelligence alone,
rather  than  primarily  to  instinct,  then we are led to conclude wath
Montaigne  that  they possess not merely a sensitive intelligence, but a
reasoning  "Why  does  the  spider make her web tighter in one place and
slacker  in another?" Montaigne asks. "Why now one sort of knot and then
another, if she has not deliberation, thought, and conclusion.'^" And in
another

[84a]
26 THE GREAT IDEAS place he asks, "What is there in our intelHgence that
we  do  not  see  in the operations of animals? Is there a polity better
ordered,  the  offices  better distributed, and more inviolably observed
and  maintained  than  that  of  bees?  Can  we imagine that such and so
regular  a  distribution of employments can be carried on without reason
and  prudence?"  Gregariousness  in  animals  and  the  nature of animal
communities  are  considered in the chapter on State, in connection with
the  formation  of  human society. But so far as human society itself is
concerned,  the  domestication  of  animals  signifies  an  advance from
primitive  to  civilized life and an increase in the wealth and power of
the  tribe  or  city. Aeschylus includes the taming of animals among the
gifts of Prometheus, who "first brought under the yoke beasts of burden,
who  by  draft  and  carrying relieved men of their hardest labors . . .
yoked  the  proud  horse  to  the chariot, teaching him obedience to the
reins,  to  be  the  adornment  of  wealth  and  luxury." The Iliad pays
eloquent  testimony  to  the  change  in the quality of human life which
accompanied the training of animals to respond to human command. Homer's
reference  to  Castor  as  "breaker  of  horses"  indicates the sense of
conquest  or  mastery  which men felt when they subdued wild beasts; and
the  oftrepeated Homeric epithet "horse- taming," which is intended as a
term of praise for both the Argives and the Trojans, implies the rise of
a people from barbarous or primitive conditions— their emancipation from
the  discomforts  and  limitations  of animal life. Aristotle points out
that  one  mark of wealthy men is "the number of horses which they keep,
for  they cannot afford to keep them unless they are rich." For the same
reason,  he  explains,  "in  old  times the cities whose strength lay in
their  cavalry were oligarchies." Legend and history are full of stories
of  the  loyalty  and devotion of animals to their human masters, and of
the  reciprocal  care  and  affection  which  men  have given them. But,
motivated  as  it  is by their utihty for economic or military purposes,
the breaking of animals to human will also frequently involves a violent
or wanton misuse.

[84b]
1  The  use,  or  even  the  exploitation, of animals by man seems to be
justified  by  the  inferiority  of the brute to the rational nature. As
plants  exist  for  the  sake  of  animals,  so  animals,  according  to
Aristotle,  "exist  for  the sake of man, the tame for use and food, the
wild,  if  not all, at least the greater part of them, for food, and for
the   provision   of  clothing  and  various  instruments."  Aristotle's
conception  of  the  natural slave, discussed in the chapter on Slavery,
uses  the  domesticated  animal  as a kind of model for the treatment of
human  beings  as  tools  or  instruments.  Though  he  does  not  share
Aristotle's  view  that  some  men are by nature slaves, Spinoza takes a
comparable  position with regard to man's domination and use of animals.
"The  law  against  killing animals," he writes, "is based upon an empty
superstition  and  womanish tenderness, rather than upon sound reason. A
proper  regard,  indeed,  to  one's  own  profit  teaches us to unite in
friendship  with  men, and not with brutes, nor with things whose nature
is  different  from human nature ... I by no means deny," he continues »
"that brutes feel, but I do deny that on this account it is unlawful for
us to consult our own profit by using them for our pleasure and treating
them  as  is  most  convenient  to  us, inasmuch as they do not agree in
nature  with  us."  But  other  moralists  declare that men can befriend
animals,  and  insist that charity, if not justice, should control man's
treatment   of  beasts.  Nor  is  such  contrary  teaching  confined  to
Christianity, or to the maxims of St. Francis, who would persuade men to
love not only their neighbors as themselves, but all of God's creatures.
Plutarch, for instance, argues that although "law and justice we cannot,
in  the  nature of things, employ on others than men," nevertheless, "we
may  extend  our  goodness and charity even to irrational creatures." In
kindness  to  dumb animals he finds the mark of the "gentle nature"— the
sign  of  a man's humaneness. "Towards human beings as they have reason,
behave  in  a  social spirit," says Marcus Aurelius; but he also writes:
"As  to  animals  which  have  no  reason,  and generally all things and
objects, do thou, since thou hast reason and they have none, make use of
them with a generous and liberal spirit."

[85a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  General  theories  about  the animal nature la.
Characteristics  of animal life: the animal soul (i) Animal sensitivity:
its  degrees  and  differentiations  (2) Animal memory, imagination, and
intelligence  (3)  Animal  appetite:  desire  and emotion in animals (4)
Locomotion:  degrees  of  animal  motility  (5)  Sleeping  and waking in
animals  lb.  The  distinction between plants and animals in faculty and
function  :  cases  difficult  to  classify  ic. The distinction between
animal  and human nature (i) Comparison of brutes and men as animals (2)
Comparison of animal with human intelligence id. The habits or instincts
of  animals:  types of animal habit or instinct; the habits or instincts
of  different  classes  of animals le. The conception of the animal as a
machine  or  automaton  2.  The  classification  of  animals 2a. General
schemes  of  classification:  their  principles  and major divisions 2b.
Analogies  of  structure and function among different classes of animals
2c.  Continuity and discontinuity in the scale of animal life: gradation
from  lower  to  higher  forms  3.  The  anatomy of animals 3^. Physical
elements  of the animal body: kinds of tissue 3^. The skeletal structure
3^.  The  visceral  organs  3^.  The  utility  or  adaptation  of bodily
structures  4.  Animal  movement  4«. Comparison of animal movement with
other  kinds of local motion 4^. The cause of animal movement: voluntary
and    involuntary   movements   4^.   The   organs,   mechanisms,   and
characteristics of locomotion 5. Local motion within the animal body 5^.
The  ducts,  channels,  and conduits involved in interior bodily motions
^b.  The  circulatory system: the motions of the heart, blood, and lymph
5^.  The glandular system: the glands of internal and external secretion
^d.  The  respiratory system: breathing, lungs, gills 5^. The alimentary
system: the motions of the digestive organs in the nutritive process

[85b]
Chapter 2: ANIMAL 27 PAGE 30 31 32 33 '34 35 36 37 38 39

[86a]
28  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6. Animal nutrition 6a. The nature of the nutriment
6b.  The process of nutrition: ingestion, digestion, assimilation 8. The
generation of animals 8^. The origin of animals: creation or evolution •
characteristics  (4)  The  mating of animals: pairing and copulation (5)
Factors  affecting  fertility  and  sterility  9. The development of the
embryo:  birth and infancy 9^. Oviparous and viviparous development ()b.
The  nourishment of the embryo or foetus pr. The process of embryogeny :
the  stages  of foetal growth 9^. Multiple pregnancy: superfoetation ^f.
The  care and feeding of infant offspring: lactation 9^. Characteristics
of   the   offspring   at   birth  similarities  iia.  The  geographical
distribution  of  animals:  their  natural  habitats  11^.  The relation
between  animals  and their environments 12. The treatment of animals by
men  12a.  The taming of animals i2c. Friendship or love between animals
and men

[86b]
PAGE  f^f.  The  excretory system: the motions of elimination 39 5^. The
brain  and  nervous  system:  the  excitation  and conduction of nervous
impulses  40  7.  Animal growth or augmentation: its nature, causes, and
limits  41  %b.  Diverse  theories of animal generation: procreation and
spontaneous  generation  8r.  Modes  of  animal reproduction: sexual and
asexual  42  (i) Sexual differentiation: its origins and determinations;
primary  and secondary (2) The reproductive organs: their differences in
different  classes of animals (3) The reproductive cells and secretions:
semen  and  catamenia,  sperm  and  tgg  43 ^d. Comparison of human with
animal  reproduction  44  ge.  The  period  of  gestation:  parturition,
delivery,  birth 45 11. The habitat of animals 46 123. The use and abuse
of animals 47 and satire 48

[87a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer: Iliad, bk ii [265-28:5] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation *'esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 1. General theories about the
animal  nature  la.  Characteristics  of  animal life: the animal soul 7
Plato:  Cratylus,  93c-d  /  Phaedo,  233b-c  / Republic, bk x, 440b-c /
Timaeus,  476d-477a,c  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 8 [1017^1017]
538b / Soul 631a-668d esp ek ii, ch 2
[413*20-^4] 643 b-c
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*10-488^29] 7d-9d; bk vni, ch
i 114b,d115b / Parts ofAnimals, bk i, ch i [641*33-^10] 164b-c; ch 5
[645^14-646*5]
169c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  5  [667^21-32]  196a / Motion of Animals, ch 6-1 1
235d-239d  esp  ch  10  238c-239a  /  Generation  ofAnimals, bk i, ch 23
[731*24-^8]  271c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [736*24-737*19]  276d-278a;  CH  5
[741*6-31]  282a-b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch i 167a-b; CH 12
172d-173c  \  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [94-416] 31b-35c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect 16, 262d; BK IX, sect 9 292b-d 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 855a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch ir
5b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr iii, ch 23 153d- 154b

[87b]
Chapter  2:  ANIMAL  2^  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 11 74a-b /
City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  18,  A I 104c-105c; Q 72, a i, rep i 368b-369d Q 75, A 3 380c-381b; a
6,  rep i 383c-384c Q 78, A I 407b-409a; q 118, a i 600a-601c PART I-II,
Q 17, A 2, REP 2 687d-688b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl^
Q 79, a I, ANS 951b-953b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-78] 91d-92a
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 138a-b; 192d 28 Marvey:
Motion  ofthe  Heart, 302d-303a / On Animal Generation, 369d-370b; 372b;
384d390b  passim;  403d-404b;  418b-419d; 431b434a esp 433c-d; 456b-458a
esp  457a-d;  488d496d  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 186a 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20a  / Discourse, PART V, 56a-b; 59a-60c /
Objections   and   Replies,   156a-d;   208c;  226a-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch ix, SECT 12 140c; CH xxvii, SECT 3-5 219d-220c
passim; bk hi, ch vi, sect 33 278b-c 53 James: Psychology, 4a-6b; 8a-14b
passim, esp llb-12a; 47b-52a passim

[88a]
30  THE GREAT IDEAS ( 1 . General theories about the animal nature. 1 a.
Characteristics  of  animal life: the animal soul.) 54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 651d657d esp 651d-652c, 655b-656a / New Introductory
Lectures^   851a-c   Itf(1)   Animal   sensitivity:   its   degrees  and
diflferentiations  7 Plato: Timaeus, 453b-454a 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii,
ch 2
[413^1-13]
643c-d;
[414*1-3] 644a; bk
ii,  ch  5-BK iii, CH 3 647b-661b; bk iii, ch 8-13 664b-668d / Sense and
the Sensible 673a-689a,c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 3
[489*17-20]
10b; ch 4
[489^23-27]
10c; ch 9-11 13b-15a; ch 15
[494^11-18] 16d; bk
ii, CH 10 25b-c; ch 12 [504*19-29] 26c-d; ch 13
[505*33-39] 27d-28a; bk iv, ch 6 [531*27-^4]
58b;  CH  7  [532*5-10]  58d-59a;  ch 8 59d-62a; BK V, CH 16 [548^10-15]
75b-c; bk viii, ch i
[588*^17-31]
115a-b; bk ix, ch 34
[620*1-5]
145c / Parts ofAnimals, bk ii, ch i [647*1-^10] 171a-d; ch 8 [653^22-29]
179b; ch 10-17 181d188a,c esp ch 10 [656*i4]-ch 12 [657*25] 182b183d, ch
16-17 185d-188a,c; bk hi, ch 4
[666*34-^1] 194b; [667*10-15] 195b; bk iv, ch
5  [681^14-682*9]  212b-d;  ch  ii  [690^17-691*28]  222d-223c / Gait of
Animals, ch 4 [705^9-13] 244b / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 23
[731*24-^8]
271c-d; bk ii, ch i
[732*12-14]
272c; CH 3
[736*25-^14]
276d-277b; ch 5
[741*6-30] 282a-b; ch 6 [743^25-744^11] 285ad; bk V, CH I [778^2o]-CH 2 [781^30] 321a-324a
/  Ethics,  bk I, CH 7 [1097^33-1098*2] 343b; BK III, CH 10 [1118*17-^8]
364d-365a;  bk  vi,  CH  2  [1139*17-21]  387d;  bk ix, ch 9 [1170*1319]
423d-424a; bk x, ch 4
[1174^15-1175*2]
429a-b  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch i 167a-b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk ii [398-477] 20a-21a; bk hi
[231-287] 33a-d;
[323-416]
34b-35c; bk iv
[216-268]
47a-d;
[524-548]
51a-b;  [615-721] 52b-53d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect i6, 262d
16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 855a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 11
74a-b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A 3, ANS 106b-107c; q
75, a 3, ans and rep 2 380c-381b; q 78, aa 3-4 410a-413d; q 91, a 3, REP
1,3 486b-487d 23 Hobbes: Let'iathan, part i, 49a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
286a-287b;   290c-291b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  369d-370b;
433c-435a;  456b-458a esp 457a-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27,
157b-d;  aph 40, 173c-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59a-c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, sect 11-15 140b-141a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit ofLaws, bk xiv, 103a-c

[88b]
1^(1)  to  1^(3) 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337c-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic^,
244a-245b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 261c-262a; 301c302a; 397d-398a;
402b-c;  406c;  432c-434c  passim;  447b-d;  474a-b;  480a-482b  passim;
529a-b;  553d-554a;  568d-569b; 595b-596a esp 595d 53 James: Psychology,
8a; 9b-13a passim, esp 13a; 27a-42b passim 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle, 647a648a la{2) Animal memory, imagination, and intelligence 4
Homer:  Odyssey,  bk xvii [290-327] 280a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk iii,
112b-c  7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 319c-320b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk
i,  ch  i  [980*28-  ^27]  499a-b  /  Soul,  bk iii, ch 3 [427^14-429*9]
660a-661b; ch 10
[433*8-12]
665d; ch 10
[433^27]-cH
II
[434*9] 666c-d / Memory and
Reminiscence 690a-695d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^25-27]
9d; BK VIII, CH I
[588*18-31]
114b,d; [589*1-3] 115b; bk ix, ch i [608*1132] 133b,d; ch 7
[612^18-32] 138b-c; ch 46
[630^17-23]
156a / Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[1147^3-5] 397d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[9621036] 56d-57c
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  26,  78b  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i, q 78, A 4, ANS and REP 3,5-6 411d-413d; part i-ii, Q
13,  A  2,  rep  3 673c-674c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a-51b; 52b;
53d; 64b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 218c-219b; 229d-230b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  454a  31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 19d-20a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk viii
[369-451]
240a-242a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 10 143c-d 35
HuMi.:  Human  Understanding, sect ix, div 83 487c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv,  163b-164b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 337d-338a; 341d-342a 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  291d-294c;  296c297b;  400a-c; 412d; 447b-c;
480a-481b 53 James: Psychology, 3b-6b esp 5b; 13a-14a; 49a-50a; 51a-52a;
679a-683a;  704a-706b  1^(3)  Animal  appetite:  desire  and  emotion in
animals 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xvii
[426-455]
126c-d  / Odyssey, bk xvii [290-327] 280a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk iv,
146c-d  7  Plato:  Symposium,  165c-166b  / Republic, bk II, 319c-320b /
Laws,  bk  vi,  712b  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  iii, ch 9-11 664d-667a 9
Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch 18 97b-99c; bk viii, ch i
[588^24-589*10] 115b;

[89a]
1^(4)  to  \b  BK  IX, CH 4 [611*9-14] 136d; ch 37 [621^28622*10] 147c /
Farts of Animals^ bk 11, ch 4
[650^20-651*15]
175c-176a; bk hi, ch 4
[667*10-22]
195b; BK IV, CH 5
[679*5-32)
209a-c; ch ii [692*22-27] 224b-c / Motion of Animals, ch 6-1 i 235d-239d
/  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  8  [1116^23-1117*9] 363a-c; ch 10 [1118*17- ^8]
364d-365a;  bk vii, ch 6 [1149^30-36] 400c; ch 12 [1153^27-35] 404c-d 10
Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch  6  202d203a;  ch  8, 206b-c 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [1:56-160]  31d-32a;  [288-322]
33d-34b; [741-753] 39c-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi [745-760] 348b; bk xii
[5-1 1 ] 354a
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  23,  154b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  6,  a i, REP 2 28b-d; qq 80-81 427a-431d; part
i-ii,  Q  6,  A  2 646a-c; q 11, a 2 667b-d; q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2
673c-674c; q 15, a 2 682a-c; Q 16, A 2 684d-685b; q 17, a 2 687d-688b; Q
40,  A  3  794c-795a;  q  46,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 2 815b-d 22 Chaucer:
Manciple's  T^^/d-  [17,104-135]  490a-b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
61a-d;  64a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 224c-225b 27 Shakespeare: King Lear,
act  iv, sc vi [109125] 274c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 346a-347d;
349a-350a;  391a-c;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c477a  31  Spinoza: Ethics,
partiii,  prop  57,  scHOL415b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343d-345a 44
BoswEhL: Johnson, 215d-216a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 289b-291a 49 Darwin:
Descent   of   Man,   289a-291a;  303c;  305c-309d;  371c-372c;  447b-c;
480a-481b;  543d-545d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 575b; bk XIV,
605d-606a  53  James:  Psychology, 14a-b; 49b-51a; 700b-711a passim, esp
702a-703a;   717b;  723b-725a;  729b  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,
607d'609b  esp  609b  / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 721a; 737c-d
l</(4)  Locomotion: degrees of animal motility 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi,
ch  9-11  664d-667a;  ch  12  [434*30-^9] 667b-c 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[487^5-34] 8b-d; BK
II, CH I [497*^18-498^10] 20a-d; bk iv, ch i [523^20-524*24] 48d-49d; CH
4  [528*30-^11]  55b;  BK  VIII,  ch  i  [588^1124]  115a;  BK IX, ch 37
[621^2-13]  147a-b;  ch 48 [631*20-30] 156c-d / Parts of Animals, bk IV,
CH   6-9  213b-217b  passim;  ch  10  [686*25-  ^35]  217d'218c;  ch  12
[693*25]-ch  13 [696*34] 225b-228a / Motion of Animals, ch 1-2 233a234a;
ch  8  [702*22]-ch  10 [703^1] 237c-239a / Gait of Animals 243a-252a,c /
Generation  of  Animals,  bk ii, ch i [732*12-24] 272c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties, bk ii, ch 8, 193b-c

[89b]
Chapter  2:  ANIMAL  31  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v {837-859]
72a-b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A I, ans 104c-105c; a
2,  rep  i  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q 78, a r, ans and rep 4
407b409a   24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  192d  31
Descartes:  Rules, xii, 19d-20a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
ix,  sect  ii 140b-c; sect 13 140d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 279a-280c;
371d372c  53  James:  Psychology, 10a-12b esp 12a-b; 699a \a{5) Sleeping
and  waking in animals 8 Aristotle: Sleep 696a-701d 9 Aristotle: History
of Animals, bk hi, ch 19
[521*15-17] 46a; bk iv, ch 10 63c-64b; bk vi,
ch 12 [566''i3-i5] 92d; bk vih, ch 14 [599*20]- CH 17
[600^15] 125b-126d / Parts ofAnimals,
BK II, CH 7
[653*10-20]
178b-c / Motion of Animals, ch ii
[703^8-15] 239b / Generation
ofAnimals,  bk  v,  ch  i [778^20-779*28] 321a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  iv  [907-961]  56a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q  81,  A 4, ANS 966d-967d; q 82, a 3, ans 971a972d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  337c  \h.  The  distinction  between  plants and animals in
faculty  and  function:  cases  difficult  to classify 7 Plato: Timaeus,
469d-470a  8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  10  [148*23-38] 202b-c /
Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[199*20-^13]
276c-d / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292^1-11] 384a / Soul, BK I, CH 5
[410*^16-411*2] 640d-641a;
bk II, CH 2
[4i3*2o-*'io] 643b-c; ch 3 644c645b; BK III, CH 12 [434*22-*'9] 667a-c / Sleep,
CH I 696a-697c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch 6
[531*^8-9] 58b; BK V, ch
i  [539^15-25]  65b-d;  bk  VIII,  CH I [588V589^2] 114d-115b / Parts of
Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [650*1-37]  174c-175a;  CH  10 [655*^27-656*8]
181d-182a; bk iv, ch 4
[677*^36-678*15] 207d-208a; ch
5
[681*10-^9]
211c-212b; ch 6
[682*^26-28]
213d; ch 10
[686*^23-687*1] 218b-c / Gait ofAnimals, ch 4
[705*26-*'9] 244a-b
/ Generation of Animals, BK I, CH I
[715*^18-716*1] 255d-256a; ch 23
271b-d;   bk   ii,   ch  i  [732*12-14]  272c;  [735*1619]  275d;  ch  3
[736*25-**i4] 276d-277b; ch 4
[740*'25]-cH 5 [741*30] 281d-282b; bk hi, ch 7
[757*^15-30] 298c-d; ch
ii  302b-304d;  bk  v,  CH  I  [778*'30-779*4]  321a-b 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[700-710] 23d-24a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk viii, sect 7 286a; bk IX,
sect 9, 292c

[90a]
32  THE GREAT IDEAS ( 1 . General theories about the animal nature. 1 h.
The  distinction  bettveen  plants  and animals ht faculty and function:
cases  difficult  to  classify.^ 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk vii, CH23,
256b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A I, REP 2 104c-105c;
A  2, REP I 105c-106b; A 3, ANS 106b-107c; q 69, a 2, rep i 361c-362c; Q
72,  A  I,  REP  I 368b-369d; q 78, a i, ans 407b-409a 28 Harvey: Motion
ofthe  Heart,  278b  /  Circulation of the Blood, 327d-328a / On Anifval
Generation,  368a-b; 369d-370b; 372b; 397c398c; 457c-d; 461b-d 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 30 159c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  ix,  SECT  11-15  140b-141a; bk hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b 43
Federalist:  number  37,  119c  49  Darwin:  Origin ofSpecies, 241 b-c /
Descent  of  Man, 372b-c 53 James: Psychology, 8a 54 Freud: Unconscious,
429c-d   Ic.  The  distinction  between  animal  and  human  nature  Old
Testament:  Genesis,  1:20-30  /  Psalms, 8 esp 8:4-8— (D) Psalms, 8 esp
8:5-9   /  Ecclesiastes,  .  3:18-22  '"'^'Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound
[436-505]  44c-  '45a  5 Euripides: Trojan Women [669-672] 275d 7 Plato:
Laches,  35b-d  / Protagoras, 44a-45a / 1;;;. Cratylus, 93a-b / Timaeus,
452d-453a  / Laws, bk ii, 653b-c; bk vii, 723c-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
v, ch 3
[132^17-22]
183a  / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292*^1-11] 384a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*28-^27]  499a-b  /  Soul,  bk II, CH 3 [414^17-20] 644d; [415*7-12]
645b; BK III, CH 3
[427^7-14]
659d-660a;
[428*20-24]
660c; CH 10
[433^8-13] 665d
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453*5-14]
.695b :<>?) Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^20-27] 9d; BK IV, CK 9 [536*34-*'8] 63a-b;
BK VIII, CH I
[588*18-^4] 114b,d /
Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch i [641^5-10] 164b-c; bk ii, CH 10 [656*4-14]
182a-b; bk hi, ch 10 [673*4- ,'1'. 10] 201d-202a; bk iv, ch 10
[686*25-687^5]
;- '-: 217d-219a / Generation ofAnimals, bk v, ch 7 (786^15-22] 328c-d /
Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1097^33-1098*4] 343b; bk hi, ch 2 [1111^6-9]
357b; BK VI, ch 2 [1139*17-20] 387d; ch 13
[1144^1-10] 394b; BK
VII, ch i
[1145*15-26]
395a; ch 5 399a-d; ch 6
[1149^24-1150*8]
400b-c;  BK X, CH 8 [1178^23-32] 433c / Politics, BK I, CH 2 [1253*7-18]
446b-c; bk hi, ch 9
[1280*31-34]
477d-478a; bk vii, ch 13 {1332*39-^5} 537a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355^1-3] 594d / Poetics, ch 4 [1448^4-8] 682c

[90b]
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  1,  ch  3  108b-c;  ch  6, lilac; ch 9,
114c-115a;  ch  16 121d122d; ch 28, 134a-b; bk ii, ch 8, 146a-c; BK III,
CH  7,  183d;  BK  IV,  CH  5, 228c-d; ch 7, 233a-b; ch ii, 240d-241a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a,c; bk v, sect 16 271c-d;
bk  vi, sect 23 276b; BK IX, sect 9 292b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
x, par 11 74a-b; BK XIII, par 35-37 120b-121a esp par 37, 121a / City of
God,  bk  vii, ch 23, 256b-c; bk xi, CH 27-28 337b-338d; bk xxix, ch 24,
610c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 8 626c-627a; CH 22, 629b-c 19
Aquinas:  Swnma  Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, rep 2 14b-15b; a 4, rep i
16d-17c; q 18, a 2, rep I 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, A 10, ANS
117d-118b;  q 30, a 2, rep 3 168a169b; Q 59, A 3, ANS 308b-309a; q 72, a
i,  rep  1,3  368b-369d; q 75, aa 2-3 379c-381b; A 6, rep I 383c-384c; q
76, a 5, rep 4 394c396a; q 78, a i, ans 407b-409a; a 4, ans 411d-413d; q
79, a 8, rep 3 421c-422b; q 81, a 3, ans and rep 2 430c-431d; q 83, a i,
ans 436d-438a; q 91, a 3, rep 1-3 486b-487d; q 92, A I, ans 488d-489d; q
96,  a  i 510b-511b; q 115, A 4, ANS 589d-590c; q 118, aa 1-2 600a-603b;
part i-ii, q i, a i, ans 609b-610b; A 2, ANS and REP 1,3 610b-611b; q 2,
a  5,  contrary  618d-619c; q 6, a 2 646a-c; q 10, A 3, ANS 664d-665c; q
11, a 2 667b-d; q 12, A 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q 15, a 2 682a-c;
q  16,  a  2 684d-685b; q 17, a 2 687d688b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 50, A 3, REP 2 8b-9a; q no, a 4, rep 3 350d-35id; part hi,
q 2, a 2, REP 2 711d-712d; q 7, a 9, ANS 751d-752c; part hi suppl, q 79,
a i, ANS 951b-953b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi
[i 12-120]
39b;  purgatory,  xxv  [34-78]  91d-92a;  paradise,  V [19-24] 112b; VII
[121-148] 116b-c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1303-1333]
181b182a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 52b; 53a-b; 54a; 59b-c; 63a;
79b-c;  part  ii,  lOOa-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  207a-c; 215a-232c 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act iv, sc iv [32-39] 59a 31 Descartes: Rules, xii,
19d-20a  /  Discourse,  PART I, 41d; part V, 56a-b; 59a-60b / Objections
and  Replies, 156a-d; 226a-d; 276c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 57,
schol  415b; PART IV, prop 37, schol i, 435a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk vii [449-549] 227a229a; bk vhi
[369-451]
240a-242a; bk ix
[549-566] 259b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  140  199a-b;  339-344  233a-b; 418 243a / Vacuum,
357a-358a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect i 93a-b; bk ii, ch
xi,  sect  4-1  i  144d-146a passim, esp sect io-ii 145d-146a; ch xxvii,
sect

[91a]
W)  Chapter  2: ANIMAL tJ3 8 221a 222a; sect 12 223a-b; bk hi, ch i SECT
1-3 251b,d-252a; ch vi, sect 12 271d 272b; SECT 22 273d-274a; sect 26-27
274d  276a; sect 29 276b-d; sect 33 278b-c; ch xi sect 20 304c-d; bk iv,
ch  xvi,  sect  12  370c-371a; ch xvii, sect i 371c-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge, intro, sect ii407b-408a 35 Hume: Human Understandings sect ix
487b488c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  ld-2a 38 RovssEw:
Inequality,  334d-335a; 337d-338d; 341d; 357c-d / Social Contract, bk i,
393b-c  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6d-8b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164a-c;  199c-  200c  /  Practical Reason, 316c-317a / Pref Metaphysical
Elanents  of  Ethics,  372a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386d /
Judgement,   479a-c;  584d-585c;  587a-588a;  602b,d  [fn  i]  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  448a-449c passim; 469b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  47  24a-b; part ii, par 132 46b-47a; par 139 48d49b; PART
III, par 190 66a-b; par 211, 70a-b; ADDITIONS, 4-5, 116a-d; 8 117c-d; 10
117d118a;  28  121b;  62  126a;  118  136a-b; 121 136c-d / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  156c;  168d; 178a-b; 186a; part i, 257d-258a; part hi,
304d-305a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 255a-b; 278a-c; 287a-c; 294c-305c
esp  294c-295a,  297a-298a,  304a; 311d-312c; 319b-d; 349d; 591d-593c 50
Marx:  Capital,  85b-c;  86b-c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
689c690a  52  DosroEvsi<iY  :  Brothers  Karamazov, bkvi, 167c 53 James:
Psychology,  85a-b; 677a; 678b-686b esp 678b, 683b-684a, 686a-b; 691a-b;
704a706b  esp  704a-b;  721a;  873a  54  Freud:  Sexual Enlightenment of
Children,   122c   /   Interpretation   of   Dreams,  385b-c  /  General
Introduction,  616b-c  lc(l)  Comparison  of brutes and men as animals 4
Homer: Iliad, bk hi [1-35] 19a-b; bk v [133143] 31c;
[159-165]
31d; bk vi
[503-516]
45b-c  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk ii, ch 9 [421^6-26] 652cd; [42 1^^8-33 1
653a-b  / Sense and the Sensible, . CH I [436^17-437*17] 673d-674a; ch 4
[440^25441*3] 678b-c; CH 5
[443^17-445^31]
681c683b  9 Aristotle: History of Animals 7a-158d passim, esp bk I, cH I
[488*5-10] 8d-9a, bk i, ch 6
[49i*i4]-bk hi, ch 22 [523*27] 12d-48a,c, bk
VII 106b,d-114a,c, bk ix, ch i
[608*10-^19]
133b,d-134a / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 7
[653*29-^5] 178d; CH 9 [655^^3-16] 181c; ch 10
[656*3-14]
182a-b; ch 14 184d-185c; ch 16
[659^28]-CH 17 [660^3] 186d-187c; bk hi, ch
i
[661^5-15]
188b,d;
[662^17-23]
190a; ch 6

[91b]
b
[669^4-8], 197d-198a; bk
iv, ch io
[68(^*2569o''io]
217d 222c / Gait of Animals 243a252a,c esp cu 4
[705^30-706*25] 244c 245a,
ch  5  [706^7-16]  245b,  CH  11-12  248d  249d  / Generation of Animals
255a-331a,c esp bk ii, CH 4 278b-282a, ch 6
[744*15-^1] 285b c
/ Ethics, BK III, CH 10
[11 18*18 -'*7| 364d-365a;
ch  n [1119*5-11] 365c; bk viii,ch i2[ii62'*i625] 414c / Politics, BK I,
CH 2 [1253*29-39] 446d 10 Hippocrates: Articulations, par 8 93c-94b; par
13  96b-c;  par  46,  106a  /  Instruments  of Reduction, par i, 122b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk ii [251-293] 18b-d; BK III [288-322]
33d-34b; bk iv [9621036] 56d-57c;
[1192-1208]
59d-60a;
[12511267] 60c-d; BK v [878-900] 72c-d; [1028-1090]
74c-75b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75,  A  6, REP I
383c-384c;  q  76,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  3-4  394c-396a; q 78, a 4, ans
411d-413d;  qq 80-81 427a-431d; q 91, a 3, rep i-:^ 486b487d; Q 98, A 2,
ANS  and rep 3 517d-519a; q 99, A I, ANS and rep 2 519b-520a; part i-ii,
Q  2, A 5, contrary 618d-619c; a 6, contrary 619d-620d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  pariin,  q  2,  A 2, REP 2 711d-712d 22 Chaucer: Manciple's
Tale
[17,104-144]
490a25   Montaigne:   Essays,  215a-232c  passim;  286a287b;  290c-291b;
424d-425c  27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  iv, sc vi [109i25]274c 28
Harvey:  Motion  ofthe  Heart,  268d-304a,c  esp  280c-283a  / On Animal
Generation,  338a-496d  esp  449a-454a,  463d-464a, 470c-472c 30 Baco:\:
Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 40, 173c-d 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 19d-20a /
Discourse,  part  V,  56a-b:  59a-60b  / Objections and Replies, 156a-d;
226a-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 57, schol 415b 35 Locke: Civil
Government, ch vii, sect 78-80 42b-43a / Human Understanding, bk ii, cii
ix,  sect  12-15  140c-141a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 58a-b; part iv,
147b148b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 334b,d-337d; 338c; 346b-d; 348d-349c
47  Goethe: Faust, prologue [281-292] 8a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 284a 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  255a-236d  esp 265c-d, 273d-275c, 285c-286d;
287d-290c;  310a-312d;  331a-336a;  590a-593a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue ii, 689c690a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 122d-123a
53  James:  Psychology, 49a-50a; 702a-b; 704a706b 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 782a-d
[fn
i]; 785a-b,d [fn i]

[92a]
34  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  {Ic.  The  distinction  between  animal and human
nature,)  lc(2)  Comparison  of  animal with human intelligence 7 Plato:
Republic, bk ii, 319c-320c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[199*20-23]
276c  /  Metaphysics,  -RYL i, ch i [980*28-981*12] 499a-c 9 Aristotle :
History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^20-27]
9d; BK VIII, ch i
[588*18-^4]
114b,d; BK IX, ch i [608*10-^19] 133b,d-134a; CH 7
[6i2**i8-32] 138b-c
/ Parts of Animals, BK I, CH I
[641^5-10]
164b-c; BK IV, CH 10
[686^22-687*23] 218b-d / Generation of Animals, BK
I, CH 23
[731*24-^8] 271C-d; BK
II, CH 6 [744*27-31] 285c / Ethics, bk vi, ch 7
[1141*20-35] 390a-b; bk vii, ch 3 [1147^3-5]
397d  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1254^20-25]  448b  10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 9
292b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, A 3, ans 308b-309a; q
76,  a  5,  rep  4  394c396a; q 79, a 8, rep 3 421c-422b; q 83, a i, ANs
436d-438a;  q  96,  a  i,  ans and rep 4 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 12, a 5
672a-c;  q  17,  A  2  687d-688b  20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q  79,  A  I,  ANS  951b-953b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b;
53a-b;  53d54a;  59b-c; 63a; 64b-c; 79b-c; part ii,100a-c; PART IV, 267b
25   Montaigne:  Essays,  215a-224a;  231d-232c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 428a-b; 454a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 73 117d118a;
BK  II, APH 35, 163d-164a 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 19d-20a / Discourse,
PART  v,  59d-60b  /  Objections  and Replies, 156a-d; 226a-d 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [369-451]  240a242a;  bk ix [549-566] 259b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  339-344  233a-b  /  Vacuum, 357a-358a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, sect 12-15 140c-141a; ch x, sect 10 143c-d;
CH  XI, SECT 4-1 1 144d-146a passim; ch xxvii, SECT 8 221a-222a; sect 12
223a-b;  bk  hi,  CH  VI,  sect  12  271d-272b;  bk iv, ch xvi, sect 12,
370c-371a;  ch xvii, sect i 371c-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knotvledge, intro,
sect  II  407b-408a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix 487b488c; sect
xii,  div  118, 504c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv 135a-184a esp 151b152a,
159b-160a   38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a;  341d-342a  /  Social
Contract,  bk  i,  393  b-c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6d-8b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  199c-200c;  235c-d / Prtf Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics, 372a-b / Judgement, 479a-c; 584d-585c; 602b,d [fn i]

[92b]
d  lc(2)  to  \d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 469c46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions, 25 121a; 121 136c-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 134b-135a
49  Darwin:  Descent ofMan, 287a-303d esp 291c297b; 319b-d; 591d-592a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 689c690a 53 James: Psychology,
5a-6b;  13a-15a  passim;  49a-50a;  85a-b;  665a-666b;  677a; 678b-686b;
704a-706b;  873a^  54  Freud:  Interpretation  ofDreams,  385b-c Id. The
habits  or  instincts of animals: types of animal habit or instinct; the
habits  or  instincts  of  diflferent  classes  of  animals 6 Herodotus:
History, bk ii, 62c-64c passim; 67b-c; BK III, llld-112c; bk vii, 236c 7
Plato: Republic, bk ii, 320b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[199*20-30]
276c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*10-488^29] 7d-9d; bk iv, ch 9 62a-63c;
bk  v-vi  65a-106d  esp  bk  v,  ch  8 [542*1 8-^*2] 68d-69a; bk viii-ix
114b,d-158d  esp  bk  viii,  CH I [588^23-589*9] 115b, CH 12 [596^20-28]
122d  /  Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 4 [650^19651*5] 175c-d; bk iv, ch 5
[679*5-32] 209a-c / Generation of Animals, bk hi, ch 2 [753^8-17] 294a-b
/  Politics,  bk  i, ch 5 [1254*^23-24] 448b; CH 8 [1256*18-30] 450a; bk
vii,  ch  13  [1332^34]  537b  10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12,
173a-c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [333-370] 19b-d; [661-668]
23b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, A 10, ANS 117d-118b; q
59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; Q 78, A 4, ANS 411d-413d; q 81, a 3, ans and REP
2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  i,  ans  436d-438a; Q 96, A I, ANS and REP 2,4
510b-511b;  q 115, A 4, ANS 589d-590c; part i-ii, q 12, a 5, ans and REP
3  672a-c;  q 13, a 2 esp rep 3 673c674c; Q 15, A 2, ans 682a-c; q 16, a
2,  rep  2 684d-685b; q 17, a 2, rep 3 687d-688b; q 40, A 3 794c-795a; q
41,  a  i,  rep  3  798b-d;  q  46,  A 4, REP 2 815b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 3, REP 2 8b-9a 22 Chaucer: Nun's Priest's
Tale
[15,282-287]
457b  /  Manciple's  Tale [17,104-144] 490a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  lOOa-c  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk iv, 247d-248b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 184a-b; 216b-219a 26 Shakespeare: Henry V, act i, sc
ii  [187-204]  535d-536a 27 Shakespeare: Timon of Athens, act iv, sc III
[320-348]  414b-c  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 339a-b; 346a-347d;
349a-350a; 361c-362a; 402a-d; 405c-406a; 428a-c; 476b-477b

[93a]
le  to  lb Chapter 2: ANIMAL 35 30 Bacon: Advancement of learning, 72c /
A^ovum Organum, bk i, ai>h 73 117d-118a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v,
60b  /  Objections and Replies, 156a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
57,  schol  415b  33  Pascal:  PensSes,  342-344  233b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect v, div 38, 466b; div 45 469c; sect ix, div 85 488c;
SECT XII, DIV 118, 504c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 162a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,   334d-335a;  337d-338a;  343d-344a  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 256d-257a / Practical Reason, 316c-317a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  469c-d  44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 221b-d 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  144a-b;  146b-147a;  283b-284a;  289b-292a  49  Darwin: Origin of
Species,  66a-69c  passim; 82d-85c; lOSd-lllb; 119a-135a,c esp 119a122d,
134d-135a,c / Descent of Man, 287d289a; 304b-310d esp 308a-310a; 312c-d;
369b-371b;  456b-457c;  463a-464b; 470d-475c passim, esp 475c; 504d-507a
passim,  esp  506c;  583a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 499c-500c 53
James: Psychology, 49b-50a; 68a-73b; 700a711a; 724a-b; 730a-b; 890b-891b
[fn  3]  54  Freud:  Narcissism, 401a-c / Insti?2Cts, 412b415d / General
Introduction,  615b-616c  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 650c-662b esp
65  Id654a  /  Group  Psychology,  684d-686c  esp 684d685b / Ego and Id,
711c-712a  /  New Introductory Lectures, 846a-851d esp 846b-d, 849c850a,
851a  \e.  The  conception  of  the  animal  as a machine or automaton 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640^5-18] 163a-b / Motion of Animals, ch 7
[701^1-13] 236d-237a / Generation of Animals,
BK  II,  CH I [734^3- 20] 275a-b; ch 5 [741^5-10] 282c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  3,  185a-b  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, intro, 47a 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v, 56a-b; 59a60c / Objections and Replies,
156a-d;   226a-d   33   Pascal:   Pensees,  340  233a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 10 143c-d; ch xi, sect ii 145d-146a; ch
xxvii,  sect  5  220b-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a  42 Kant:
judgement, 558b-559a; 575b-578a; 578d-582c 50 Marx: Capital, 190d [fn 2]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x, 449b-c; epilogue ii, 689c-690a 53
James: Psychology, 3b-6b passim, esp 5b-6b; lla-12a; 47b-52besp 51a-52a;
84a-94b; 700a706b esp 705a-706b

[93b]
2.  The classification of animals 2a. General schemes of classification:
their  principles  and  major divisions Old Testament: Genesis, 1:20-31;
2:19-20 / Leviticus, 11 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 13
[96^25-97'»6] 132a-b; ch 14 133c-134a / Topics,
BK VI, CH 6
[144*27-145*2)
197d-198c  passim  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  28 546b-c; BK VII, CH 12
[io37''28-io38*35l  561c-562a / Soul, BK II, CH 3 644c-645b 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals^ bk i, ch i
[486*i5]-CH 6 [491*5] 7b-12c esp ch
i  [486^*15487*1]  7b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [497*^4-18]  19b,d-20a;  CH 15
[505^25-32] 28b-c; bk iv, ch i [523*30- *'2o] 48b,d; bk v, ch i
[539*4-15] 65b;
bk  VIII,  CH I [588^4]-CH 2 [590*18] 114d-116c / Parts ofAnimals, bk i,
ch 2-4 165d-168c; ch 5
[645^20-28]
169c-d; BK III, CH 6
[669^7-14!
198a / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[715*18-^25]
255b-d; bk ii, ch i
[732*13733^17] 272c-274a; bk
hi, ch ir
[761^9-24]
302c-ci / Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1290^25-36]
489d-490a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, A 4, rep 1 16d-17c;
q  50,  a  4,  rep  i 273b-274b; QQ 71-72 367a-369d 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 468b469b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27, 158b-c; APH
30  159c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi 268b-283a passim,
esp  sect  7  270b,  sect 3637 279a-b; ch xi, sect 19-20 304b-d 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  193a-200c  /  Judgement,  579b-c  48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
95b-105b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  24a-b; 25d-29a esp 28c-29a;
30d-31d;   63d-64d;   207a-212c;   215b-217b;   224d-225b;  228c-229a,c;
238b239a;   241d-242a   /  Descent  of  Man,  331a-341d  esp  331b-333a,
337a-338c;  342a-350b  passim,  esp342a-b 2b. Analogies of structure and
function  among  diflferent  classes  of  animals 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 14
[98*20-23] 134a /
Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing  714a-726d  passim 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals  7a-158d  esp bk I, CH 1-6 7a-13a, bk ii, ch i 19b,d-23d, BK IV,
CH  8-BK  V,  CH  I  59d-66a, bk vth, ch i 114b,d-115b / Parts ofAnimals
161a-229d passim, esp bk I, ch 4 167d-168c, ch 5
[645**!-
646*5]  169b-d  /  Gait  ofAnimals  243a-252a,c  / Generation of Animals
255a-331a,c  esp  bk  ii, CH I 272a-276a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
hi,  ch  2  199d200a  28  Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 274b-d; 277b278d;
280c-283a; 299b-302c / On Animal

[94a]
7  N;fTjf  ns;  "h»  (2. The classification of animals. 2b. Analogies of
structure  and functimi among different classes of animals.^ Generation,
336b-d;  338a-496d  esp  449a-454a, 463d-464a, 468b-472c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii, aph 27, 157b158c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi,
ch  vi,  SECT 12 271d-272b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix, div 82
487  b-c 42 Kant: Judgement, 579b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 273a-b; 279b
49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 75b-78c; 82d-94c; 112b'113c; 212d-215a;
217b-219d;  225c-228c;  238c-239a  / Descent ofMan, 255a-265d; 271c275c;
279a-284b;  331a-335a;  338d-340c  passim  ;348b-c  2c.  Continuity  and
discontinuity  in  the  scale  of  animal  life: gradation from lower to
higher  forms  Old Testament: Genesis, 1:20-25 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii,
ch 2 [4i3''4-io] 643c;
[414^1-3] 644a; bk hi, ch
ii
[433^32-434*9]
666d;   CH  12  [434^9-30]  667c-d  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  i
[436^12-437*17] 673c-674a; ch 5
[443^^17-445*3] 681c-682d
9  Aristotle:  History  of Animals, bk viii, ch i 114b,d-115b / Parts of
Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[686^23-687*1] 218b-c / Generation ofAnimals,
bk  II,  CH  I  [732*i3-733''i7] 272c-274a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 18, A 2, rep I 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; Q 50, A 4, REP I
273b-274b;  q  71, a i, rep 4-5 367a-368b; q 72, a i, rep i 368b-369d; q
76,  A 5, rep 3 394c-396a; q 78, a i, ans and rep 4 407b-409a 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  336b-d;  400d'401a;  412c-413a  30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii, aph 30 159c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
ix,  SECT  11-15 140b-141a passim, esp sect 12 140c; bk III, CH VI, SECT
12  271d-272b;  bk  IV, CH XVI, SECT 12, 370c-371a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
199c-200c  /  Judgement,  578d-580a  esp  579b-c  49  Darwin:  Origin of
Species,  3a-b; 55b-62a esp 60b-61a; 64a-d; 80a-82d; 117a-118d; 167a180d
esp  180a-d;  207a-208a;  224d-225b;  228c-229a,c; 238b-243d esp 241a-d,
243b-c  / Descent ofMan, 337a-338c; 340d-341c 53 James: Psychology, 41b;
51a-52b;  95b-98a; 705b-706b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
768d769a  3. The anatomy of animals 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 63b-64c
passim 7 Plato: Timaeus, 466a-469c

[94b]
36  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2c to 3>b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i-iv
7a65a,c  esp  bk i, ch 1-6 7a-13a / Parts of Animals, bk ii-iv 170a-229d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 91, A 3 486b-487d 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  271a-272d  - 28 Harvey: On Anim.al
Generation, 343b-345d; 377c-380c passim; 485a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  52b-c  /  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 7 139c-140a 31 Descartes:
Discourse, part v, 56b-57a 42 Kant. Judgemetit, 579b-c 48 Melvillf: Moby
Dic{,  243b-252a  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 14c-15b passim; 85d-87b;
89b-90c;   217b-219d   /  Descent  of  Man,  255c-265a  passim;  266a-c;
271c-274d;  278c-284b  54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 647a648a
3^.  Physical  elements  of  the  animal  body: kinds of tissue 7 Plato:
Timaeus,  468a-469d  8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk iv,ch 10 [389*1923I
493b; CH 11
[389^7-18]
493c-d; ch 12 493d-494d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[486*5-15]
7a;
[487*1-10]
7d; bk hi, ch 2
[511^1-10] 35a; ch
5  [5I5*27]-ch  20  [521^17]  39c-46c  /  Parts  ofAnimals,  bk  i, ch i
[640^1124]  163a-b;  bk  ii,  ch i [646*7]-ch 2 [648*20] 170a-172c; ch 3
[649^22]-CH 9 [655^26] 174b181d; bk III, CH 2
[663^22-36]
191b-c / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[715*8-11]
255a; ch 18
[722*18-^1] 262a-b; bk
ii, ch 6
[743*1-^18] 284b-d
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 6 169c170c; bk II, CH 6 188c-191a;
bk  hi,  ch  ii  207d-208b; ch 15, 215a-b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl, Q 79, A 3, ans and rep i 955c-956b 28 Harvey: Motion of
the  Heart,  274d-275c;  302c-d  /  Circulation  of the Blood, 316d / On
Animal  Generation,  414c-415b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part
i,  39a-41a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  226b-228b;  276b277b  53 James:
Psychology,  53a-b; 118a 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 647a-d
3^.  The skeletal structure 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 91b-c; 112a; BK
IX,  306b  '"*  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  468a-469d  9  Aristotle: History of
Animals,  bk i, ch 7 13a-b; ch 13 [493*21-24] 15b; ch 15 [493^^12494*18]
15d-16b; bk ii, ch i
[499*18-500*14]
21c-22b; [500^20-25] 23a; ch i
[5oi*2]-ch 5
[502*3] 23b-24b; ch 15 [506*7-10] 28c; bk hi,
CH 7-9 40b-41d: CH ?.o [521^4-17] 46c; bk iv,

[95a]
3c  to  \b  CH  I [52^^1-18] 48b,d; [524^21-30] 50c-d; cii 2 [525^11-14]
51d;  CH  4  [528»i-3o]  54d-55b;  CH7  f532'*3i-^5] 59b; bk vii, cii 10
[587**ii-i81 113d-114a / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 6 176d-177c; ch 7
[653-^34-^2)
178d; ch 8
[653^3o]-cH 9
[655*'io] 179b-181c; bk hi, ch
1-2  188b,d-191d;  cii  4  [666^17-22]  194c-d; bk IV, CH 5 [679'^i3-35]
209d-210a; ch 10 [690^529] 221d-222b; ch 12 i695«i-26J 226c-227a; ch 13
[696^1-7] 228a-b / Motion of Animals,
ch I
[698''i5-^9] 233b-c
/  Gait of Animals, CH II 248d-249a / Generation of Animals, bk II, ch 6
[744^28-745^9]  286a-d  10  Hippocrates:  Injuries  of the Head, par 1-2
63b,d-64c;  par 18 69a-b / Fractures 74b,d-91d esp par 2-4 75a- 76c, par
9-12  78c-80a,  par  18  82b-c, par 20 83a, par 37 89a-b / Articulations
91b,d-121d passim / Instruments of Reduction 121b,d-130d passim, esp par
i  121b,d-122c  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk hi, ch 15, 215a-b 28
Galileo:  Two  Neiv  Sciences,  first  day, 132c; SECOND DAY, 187b-188c;
195c-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 443d-444c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  333b-338a  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 15a-b; 94a; 107a113c
passim;  217b-219d  / Descent of Man, 263c-264d; 273a; 280c-282c 3c. The
visceral organs 7 Plato: Timaeus, 466a-468a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk
vii, ch 10
[1035^26-28] 559b / Soul, bk II, CH 8 [420^2327] 652a-b /
Sleep, ch 3
[458-14-19] 701c
/  I Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 3 [468^28]-cH 4 [469*^20] 715b-716b;
ch  14 720d-721a 9 Aristotle: History ofAnimals, bk i, ch 16-17 16d-19d;
bk ii, ch 15-BK iii, ch i 28b-35a; bk III, ch 3
[513^22-39] 36d-37a; ch
13-15 44a-c; bk iv, ch i
[524^1-22]
50a-c; ch 2
[526^22-527*20] 53b-d; ch 3-7 54b-59d
passim  /  Parts ofAnimals, bk hi, ch 4 193a-195d; CH 6-14 197b-205c; bk
iv,  ch  1-5 205b,d-213b / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 3-16 256c261b
passim 10 Hippocrates : Ancient Medicine, par 22 8a- d / Sacred Disease,
156a  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 13 173d177a; bk hi, ch 8
205a-207b;  ch ii 207d-208b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl,
Q  80,  a  2, ans 957c-958b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
14a-b  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the Heart, 271b-273a; 274d-275c; 278b-c;
299b-302d  /  On  Atiimal  Generation,  339c-343a; 344d-345a; 350a-352d;
375d-376c;   450d-451b;   452c-453b;   473b476b;  485a-b  31  Descartes:
Discourse, part v, 56a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 266c; 281a-c 53 James:
Psychology,  19a-42b;  118a  54  Freud:  Beyond  the Pleasure Principle,
647a-b

[95b]
Chaptlr2: AN1NL\L 37 "id. The utility or adaptation of bodily structures
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch 4
[528^29-529'*il
55d; ch 5
[53o^'i9-24l
57c; bk IX, CH 37 [620^10-33] 146b-c;
[622^^;
15)  148a / Parts of Animals, bk ii-iv 170a 229d passim / Gait ofAnimals
243a-252a,c esp ch i 243a-b / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 2
[7i6^i8-»^2] 256b-c; ch 4-13 257a-260b; bk iv,
CH I
[765^33-766''io]
307a-b;  bk v, ch 8 330b-331a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 6,
170b-c;  CH  10 171b-172b; ch 13, 173d-174d; bk ii, CH 4, 187c-d; bk hi,
ch  3 200a-201a; ch 8 205a-207b; ch ii 207d-208b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  iv [823-857] 55a-b; bk v [837-877] 72a-c 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610c-611b  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart,
269a-b;  299b304a,c / 07i Animal GeneratioUy 390b-c; 401b; 402c; 418b-c;
453c-454c  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  529a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{,
227b-228a;  277b279b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, Ic; lOd-llb; 38c;
41c-44c esp 43a-b, 43d-44a; 66a-68b; 82 d98a,c esp 97b-98a,c; 103c-113c;
115c-116b;  225c-228c  /  Descent  ofMa?i, 258b-259a; 320b; 532d-543d 53
James:  Psychology,  701a  4.  Animal  movement  4a. Comparison ofanimal
movement with other kinds of local motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii,
ch  4  [254*^12-33] 339a-b / Heavens, bk ii, ch 2 376b-377c 9 Aristotle:
Motion  of Animals, ch i 233a-c; ch 4 [700^5-27] 235b-c; ch 6 235d-236b;
ch 7
[70i'^i]-CH 8
[702^12] 236d-238a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 18, A I, REP 1-3 104c-105c; q
70, a 3 365b-367a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59a-d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  XXVII, sect 4-5 220a-c 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  115b  53  James  :  Psychology,  4a-6b 4b. The cause of animal
movement: voluntary and involuntary movements 7 Plato: Phuedo, 241d-242a
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 2
[252^1628] 336c-d;
[253*6-21]
337a-b; ch 4
[254**
12-33]  339a-b  /  Soul,  bk  hi, ch 9-11 664d667a 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640^30-641^10]
163c-164c / Motion of Afiimals, CH 6-1 1 235d-239d / Ethics, bk hi, ch 2
[1111^6-9] 357b
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch i 167a-b

[96a]
(4.  Animal  movement.  Ah.  The  cause of animal movement: voluntaryand
involuntary  movements^ 12 Lucretius: 'Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293]
18b-d;  BK  III [161-167] 32b; bk iv [877-906] 55d-56a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 18, A 3, ANS 106b-107c; q 78, a i, ans and rep 4
407b-409a;  q  80,  a  2,  rep 3 428a-d; q 115, A 4, ans 589d-590c; part
i-ii,  q 6, a 2 646a-c; Q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q 15, A 2
682a-c;  q  16, a 2 684d'685b; q 17, a 2 687d-688b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  61a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pa?itagruel, bk hi, 192d-193a
28   Harvey:   Motion  of  the  Heart,  267a-b;  285d286a;  302d-303a  /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  316d;  325d-326d  /  On Animal Generation,
369d-370b;  415b-429c  esp  417a-419b,  423b424a,  427c-428c; 456b-458a;
488d'496d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20a  /  Discourse,  part V,
58d-59a;   60b   /  Objections  and  Replies,  156a-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understandi?2g,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT 5 179c-d; sect 7-1 i 180a-d; ch
xxxiii,  sect  6  249a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  x, sect 19 354a-c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  51-52  472b-473c  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-d  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  115b  53 James: Psychology, 3b; 5a; 8a-15a esp 12a-b, 15a; 71b
[fn  i];  694a-702a; 705a-706b; 761a765b; 767b-768a; 827a-835a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351d-352a;  363b-d  /  Instincts, 412b-414b
passim  4c.  The organs, mechanisms, and characteristics of locomotion 7
Plato: Timaeus, 454b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433^^13-27]
666b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[487^14-34] 8c-d; ch 4 [489^27-29] 10c; ch 5
[489^20-490^6] lla-12a; ch 15 [493^26-494^18]
16a-b; bk ii, ch i
[497^18-498^10]
20a-d; CH 12 26b-27a passim; bk hi, ch 5 39c-40a; bk iv, ch I
[523^21-524*32] 48d-50a; ch 2
[525»'i5-526^i8] 51d-53b; ch
4
[528*29-^11]
55b;  ch 7 [532*19-29] 59a-b / Parts ofAnimals, BK II, CH 9 [654*31-^35]
180a-d; bk iv, ch 6-9 213b-217b passim; ch 10
[690*4-^11]
221d222c; ch 12 [693*24]—ch 13
[696*34] 225b228a / Motion ofAnimals, ch 1-2 233a-234a;
CH 7
[701^1-13]
236d-237a; ch 8
[702*22]-
CH 10
[703^1] 237c-239a
/  Gait  of  Animals  243a-252a,c  10 Hippocrates: Articulations, par 60
113b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things^ bk iv [877-897] 55d-56a

[96b]
58 THE GREAT IDEAS 4(7 to 5a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 855b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 71, A I, rep 2 367a-368b; q 99, a i, ans
519b520a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 84, A I, REP 4
983c-984c 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 301d-302a / Circulation of the
Blood,  319b  /  On  Animal Generation, 450a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, xii,
19d-20a  /  Discourse^ PART v, 58d-59a / Objections afid Replies, 156a-d
34  Newton: Principles, corol ii 15a-16b esp 16b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
276b-278a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 23a- b; 66a-67a; 83b-84b; 93b-c;
94d-95a;  105c-106a  /  Descent  of  Man,  278c-280c;  365b-c  53 James:
Psychology,  9a-12b; 19b-26b; 714a715b passim 5. Local motion within the
animal  body  5a. The ducts, channels, and conduits involved in interior
bodily  motions  7  Plato: Timaeus, 470a-471b 8 Aristotle : Youth, Life,
and Breathing, ch 14
[474^2-9]
720d; CH 17
[476*26-^8]
722b-c; CH 22 724b-d passim 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 2
[488^29]-CH 3 [489*14] 9d-10b; ch 4 [489*2023] lOb-c; ch
12 15a; ch 16 [495*i8]-ch 17
[497*29] 17b-19d; bk
ii, ch 15-BK iii, ch 4 28b-39c; bk hi, ch 20 [521^4-8] 46c; bk v, CH 5
[540^29-541*12]
67b-c; BK VI, ch ii
[566*2-14] 92a-b; bk
vii, ch 8
[586*^12-24]
112d-113a / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 9
[654*31-^12] 180a-b; bk hi, ch 3 191d-193a;
CH 4 [665bio]-CH 5 [668^31] 193b-197b; ch 7
[670*7-18] 198c-d; CH 8 [67ob34]-cH 9 [671^28]
199c-200c; ch 14 203b-205c; bk iv, ch 2
[676^16-677*24]
206b-207a; ch 4
[677^36678*20] 207d-208a
/  Generation  of  Animals, bk I, ch 2 [7i6*33]-cH 16 [721*26] 256b-261a
passim; bk ii, ch 4 [738*9-739*2] 278d-279d;
[740*21-35] 281a-b; ch 6 [743*1-11] 284b; ch 7
[745^22-746*19] 287a-c; bk iv, ch 4 [773*1329] 315a-b
10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 22 8a-d/ Sacred Disease, 156a-b 10
Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 10 171b172b; ch 13 173d-177a; bk i,
ch  15-BK 11, ch 3, 179d-185b; bk n, ch 5-6 188b-191a; ch 9 195c-199a,c;
bk iii 199a-215d passim 28 Harvey : Mo//o;2 ofthe Heart, 268d-304a,c esp
295d-296a  / Circulation of the Blood 305a328a,c / On Animal Generation,
339c-340c;  342d-345a;  347d;  350a-353b;  368b-371c; 373b-374d; 378b-d;
379b-c;   388d-389a;   401c402c;  430b-d;  438c-441a;449c-d;  473d-476b;
485a-487b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 56b-59a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man, 257c

[97a]
5b to 5/ Chapter 2: ANIMAL 39 5b. The circulatory system: the motions of
the  heart,  blood,  and  lymph  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  466c-d;  471c-d  8
Aristotle:  Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing,  ch 26 725d-726b 9 Aristotle:
History ofAnimals, bk hi, ch 19
[52i''6-3i] 45d-46b; bk vi, ch 3 [561V15] 87c
/  Parts  of Animals, bk hi, ch 4-5 193a-197b / Generation ofAnimals, bk
ii, ch i [735'*io-26] 275d-276a; ch 5
[741^15-24]
282d; ch 6
[742^33-743*1] 284a; bk iv, ch
i  [766*30-^2]  307c-d  10  Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 160a 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch 15-BK 11, ch 2 179d-185a; bk ii, ch 4-6,
188a-d; bk hi, ch 13-15, 213a-215d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch
23,  154b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 17, A 9, rep 2
692d-693d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 138a-d 28
Harvey:  Motion ofthe Heart, 268d-304a,c esp 285b- 296a / Circulation of
the  Blood  305aj  328a,c  esp 309b-d, 324a-326d / On Animal Generation,
368a-371b;  374a-d;  429c-441a;  449c-d;  456b-d;  488d-496d I 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 48, I 186d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v,
56b-59a  / Objections and Replies, 156c-d 53 James: Psychology, 64a-65a;
695a-696a  5c.  The  glandular  system:  the  glands  of  inI ternal and
external  secretion  7 Plato: Timaeus, 472a-474b 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk i, ch 12
[493^10-16] 15a; bk ii, ch 13 [504^22-27] 27ab; bk hi, ch 2 [5ii''i-io] 35a; ch 20 [521^21]-
ch 21
[323*13] 46d-48c; bk vi, ch 20 [574^713] 100b; ch 21 [575^9-12] 101b; ch 26 103d;
ch  33  [580*2-4]  105c-d;  bk  vh,  ch  3 [583*2(>- 34] 108d-109a; ch 5
[585*29-32] 111b; ch ii 114a,c / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 7 [653^819]
179a; bk hi, ch 5 [668^1-10] 196d; ch 15 205d; BK IV, CH 10 [688*19-^34]
219d-220d  / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 20 [727^34728*9] 268a-b; bk
hi, ch 2 [752^23-24] 293d; bk IV, CH 8 318b-319c 10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine,  par  19  6d-7b  /  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  8,  12a-b  /
Prognostics,  par  6  20c  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 13,
175d177a;  bk ii, ch 2 184b-185a; ch 4-5, 188a-c; CH 8-9 191b-199a,c; bk
hi,  ch  5  202c-d;  ch 12, 209a-b 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 288d /
Circulation  ofthe Blood, 320a-b / On Animal Generation, 396c-d; 435a-c;
451b; 461b; 464c-d; 487c-488a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, pref 451a-452c
34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 538a

[97b]
49  Darwin:  Origin  ofSpecies,  110c  Ilia / Descent of Man, 339d-340c;
547c-548c  53 James: Psychology, 66b-67a; 696b-697b 5ci. The respiratory
system: breathing, lungs, gills 7 Plato: Timaeus, 470b-471b 8 Aristotle:
Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing,  en 727 717a-726d 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*i4-''3] 8a-b; ch 5 [489*34-*'6] lOd; ch ii
[492^5-12]
14b-c; CH 16
[495*2o-''i9] 17b-d;
CH 17 [496*27-34] 18c; BK II, CH 13 [504^27505*19] 27b-c; CH 15
[505*^32-506*4] 28c; bk
IV,  CH 2 [526*^18-22] 53b; BK VI, ch 12 [566*^214] 92c-d; BK VIII, ch 2
[589*10-^29] 115c-116b / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 16
[658*^26659*^19] 185d-186c; bk
hi, ch i
[662*16-28]
189b-c;  CH  3  191d-193a;  ch  6  197b-198a; bk IV, ch 13 [696*37-*'24]
228a-c;  [697*1  6-*'i]  229a-b  /  Motion  of Animals, ch ii [703^3-15]
239a-b  10 Hippocrates: Prognostics, par 5 20b-c / Articulations, par 41
103c-104b  10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk hi, ch 13, 211b-d 28 Harvey:
Motion   ofthe   Heart,   268d-273a  passim;  282b-285b;  303d-304a,c  /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  309c;  317c-d;  324a;  325d  /  On  Animal
Generation,  339c-340c;  458a  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 12,
141d-142a  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part v, 58b-c 33 Pascal: Weight of
Air,  415a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  272b-276b 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  87d-88c;  90c-91a;  238d  /  Descent  of  Man,  339a 53 James:
Psychology,  696a-b;  740b [£n i] 5e. The alimentary system: the motions
of  the  digestive  organs  in  the  nutritive process 7 Plato: Timaeus,
467d-468a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 3
[650*1-37] 174c-175a; bk hi, ch
i [661*34-^12] 188b; CH 3 191d-193a; ch 14 203b-205c; bk IV, CH II
[690*^18-691*1] 222d-223a; [691*28-
^^27]  223c-d  10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 11 4b 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 9-10 171b172b; CH 16, 180c-181b; bk hi, ch
4-5  201b202d;  ch  7-8 203b-207b; ch 13, 211d-212d 28 Harvey: Motion of
the Heart, 279a-b / On Animal Generation, 350a-c; 451b; 452d-453a; 456d;
460a-461a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  58c-d 5/. The excretory
system:  the  motions of elimination 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk
hi, ch 15 44b-c; BK IV, CH i
[524*9-14] 49d; bk
vi, ch 20 [574*^19-25] lOOb-c; BK VII, CH 10 [587* 27-33] ll^C' ^^ ^'"^'
^^ 5
[594^21-26] 120d;

[98a]
40 (5. Local motion within the animal body. 5/ The excretory system: the
motions  of  elimination.)  BK IX, CH 45 [630^7-17] 155d-156a / Parts of
AnifTjals,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [67o^23]-ch  9  [672*26]  199b-201a;  ch  14
[67^^^1-^^S] 204d-205c; bk IV, CH I
[676*29-35] 206a; ch 2 206b-207b;
CH  5  [679*5-32]  209a-c;  ch  10  [689*3-34]  220d221b / Generation of
Animals, bk i, ch 13
[719^29-720*11] 259d-260a
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters, Places, par 9 12d13b / Prognostics, par
11-12  21c-22b  10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13, 173d175d; ch
15-17  179d-183d;  bk  ii,  ch  2 184b185a; bk hi, ch 5 202c-d; ch 12-13
208b-213b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 119, A I, REP I
604c-607b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 80, A 2, REP I
957c-958b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 958b-959c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  16C'18b;  bk hi, 138b-c; bk iv, 293a-b; 310d311d 28
Harvey:  Motion  ofthe  Heart,  273b-c;  283a-b  / On Animal Generation,
344b'345a;  351a-b;  356c-d;  380c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 26a-b 45
Lavoisier:  Ele7nents  of  Chemistry, part i, 45c-d 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species, lllb-c; 120b-c 5^. The brain and nervous system: the excitation
and conduction of nervous impulses 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii,
ch  7  177c-179a;  ch  10  [656*14-^28] 182b-183a 10 Hippocrates: Sacred
Disease,  156a-160b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 6 188c191a 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 855a-b 17 Plotinus : Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch
23,  153d154a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 99, A I, ANS
519b-520a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 49b-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk hi, 190a-c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 456b-458a 31
Descartes:   Rules,   xii,  15d-20a  /  Discourse,  part  V,  58d-59a  /
Meditations,  vi,  102a-d  /  Objections and Replies, 156a-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  v,  pref  451a-452c  34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 518b-519b;
522a-b  45  Faraday  :  Researches in Electricity, 540a-541a,c 53 James:
Psychology,  2b-3a;  8a-67b  esp  9b-17a,  42a-b,  46b-47a;  70a-77b esp
70a'71a;   152a153a;  497a'501b  esp  500b-501b;  694a-695a;  698b-699a;
705a-b;  758b-759a;  827b-835a 54 Freud : Hysteria, 87a / Interpretation
ofDreams,   351c-352d;   363c-364b;   378a-b   /   Instincts,  413a-d  /
Unconscious,  431 d / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 646b-649d / Ego and
Id, 700a-b

[98b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5^  to  6b  6. Animal nutrition 6a. The nature of the
nutriment  Old Testament: Genesis, 1:29-30 5 Aristophanes: Peace [1-172]
526a-527d 7 Plato: Timaeus, 469d-470a; 471d-472a 8 Aristotle: Generation
and  Corruption, bk i, CH 5 [322*4-28] 419d-420b / Metaphysics, bk I, CH
3 [983^19-25] 501d-502a / Soul, bk h, CH 4
[416*18-^31] 646c-647b / Sense and the
Sensible,  ch  4 [441^24-442*12] 679b-d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk i, ch i
[488*15-20] 9a; bk hi, ch 20 [52i^2i]-ch 21
[523*13] 46d-48c; bk viii, ch 2 [59o*i8]-ch ii
[596^19] 116d-122d; ch 21
[603^25-34] 129d;
bk  IX,  CH  I  [6o8^i9]-cH 2 [610^19] 134a-136b; CH 9 140a-b / Parts of
Animals, bk ii, ch 4
[651*12-19] 176a / Generation of Animals, bk
IV, CH 8 [777*4-19] 319a-b / Politics, bk i, ch 8
[1256*18-30] 450a; [1256^11-20] 450b-c
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  3-8  Id3b;  par 13-15 4c-5d /
Regimen  in  Acute Diseases, par 4 27c-28a; par 14-17 32c-34c; APPENDIX,
par  18  41a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 168a-b; ch io-ii
171b'172d;  bk ii, ch 8, 191b-193d esp 192d-193b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk iv [633-672] 52c-53a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
97,  a 3, rep 2 515a-d; a 4 515d-516d; q 119, a i 604c-607b 24 Rabelais:
Gargaiitua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 138b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
378b-d;  398d-399c; 408c-d; 409c-d; 414a-b; 435a438b; 439a-440a; 448a-c;
461a-d;  463b-466b;  486c-d; 487c-488a; 494a-496d esp 494b, 495c-496a 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 50, 193b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d  6b. The process of nutrition: ingestion, digestion, assimilation 7
Plato: Timaeus, 467d-468a; 471c-472a 8 Aristotle: Meteorology, bk iv, ch
2  [379^1024]  483d-484a  /  Soul,  bk ii, ch 4 [416*18-^29] 646c-647b /
Sleep,  ch  3 699b-701d passim 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii,
ch 4
[594*11-21] 120a-b; ch 6 [595''6-i3] 121a; ch
17 [600^7-12] 126c / Parts of Animals, bk h, CH 3
[650^1-^13]
174c-175b; bk hi, ch i
[661*36-^12]
188b;  CH  3  191d-193a;  ch  14  203b-205c;  bk iv, ch 3 [677''3o]-ch 4
[678*20] 207d-208a; ch ii
[690^20-691*1] 222d-223a;
[691*28-^27] 223c-d
10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 11 4b / Regimen in Acute Diseases,
appendix, par 18 41a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2 167b168c;
CH 7-12 170c-173c esp ch io-ii 171b-

[99a]
7/0 8^ Chapter 2: ANIMAL 41 172d; CH i6, 180c-181b; bk ii, ch 4, 187a-b;
CH  6-7 188c-191b; bk hi, ch i 199a-c; ch 4 201b-202c; ch 6-9 202d 207b;
ch  13  209b213besp211d-213a  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bic h [871
882]  26a;  [1118-1147]  29b-c;  bk iv [858-876) 55b-c IQAquixNas: Summa
Theologjca,  part i, q 97, A 3, REP 2 515a-d; a 4 515d-516d; q 118, a i,
ANS  and  REP  3-4  600a-601c;  q  119,  a  i 604c607b 20 Aquinas: Swnma
Theologica,  part  hi  suppl, Q 80, A 3, ANS 958b-959c; a 4 959c-963a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrud,  bk  hi,  134d-135a;  138a-139b 27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [92-150] 352b-353a 28 Harvey:
Motion  of  the  Heart,  279a-b;  296a297a  esp  296d-297a;  297d-298b /
Circulation   of   the  Blood,  307c-308c;  319b;  320a-b  /  On  Animal
Generation,  350a-c; 408c-d; 413a-415a; 435a-438b; 441b-443b; 446c-447a;
455c-d;  460b-461d;  465b 30 Bacon: Novwn Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 184a-c
31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 58c-d 7. Animal growth or augmentation:
its nature, causes, and limits 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 63b 7 Plato:
Titnaeus, 471d-472a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[193^13-19]
269d-270a;  bk'vi,  ch  10 [241^27-^2] 325b-c; bk VIII, CH 7 [260*27-^1]
346b-c  / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 5 417b-420b / Metaphysics,
bk  V,  CH 4 [1014^20-26] 535a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch
19
[550^26-31] 77d; CH 33 [558*18-24] 84d-85a /
Motion of Animals, ch 5 235c-d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 18
[723*^9-23] 263a-b;
bk II, CH I
[735*13-23]
275d-276a; ch 3
[737'35-^7] 278b; ch 4 [739^34-741-2] 280d281d; CH 6 [744^32-745^9] 286a-d; bk iv, ch 4
[771^33-772^1] 313d
/ Politics, bk vii, ch 4
[1326*35-40] 530c
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  3  ld-2b  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties,  bk  i, ch 1-2, 167ad; ch 5 169b-c; ch 7 170c-171a; bk ii, ch
3,  186c-d  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [184-214] 3b-d; BK II
[1105-1147]  29a-c;  bk  v  [783-820] 71b-d; [878-900] 72c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 97, a 4 515d-516d; q 99, a i 519b-520a; q
119,  A I, ANS and REP 4 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q  80, A 4, ANS 959c-963a; a 5, rep i 963a-964b 28 Galileo: Ttvo
New  Sciences,  second  day,  187b-188c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
353b-354b;  374b-d;  388c-d;  408c-409b;  412b-415b esp 415a; 441a-443b;
450b-d; 494a-496d esp 495c-496a

[99b]
48  Melville:  Moby Dicl^, 338a-339a 49 Darwin: Origin ofSpecies, 71a-d;
227c-228b  /  Descent  of  Man,  402a-b;  405a-d;  540a  541c  54 Freud:
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 770b 8. The generation of animals 8a.
The  origin  of  animals:  creation  or  evoliiOld  Testament:  Genesis,
1:11-12,20-28;  2:49,19-23  7  Plato:  Timaeus, 452c-454a; 476b-477a.c 9
Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk hi, ch II [762''28-763*8] 303d-304a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk v [783-836] 71b-72a 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk xii, ch 21 357ab; CH 27 359c-360a,c; bk xvi, ch 7 427a-b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq 7172 367a-369d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk vii
[387-550]
225b-229a  34  Newton: Optics, bk hi, 542b 42 Kant: Judgement, 578d-580a
esp  579b-c;  581b-582c  47  Goethe:  Faust, part ii [8245-8264] 201a 49
Darwin: Origin of Species la-251a,c esp la7d, 63b-64d, 85b-c, 217d-219a,
230a-243d  /  Descent  ofMan,  265a-d  Sb.  Diverse  theories  of animal
generation:  procreation  and  spontaneous  generation 7 Plato: Timaeus,
476b-477a,c  8  Aristotle: Meteorology, bk iv, ch i [379*^68] 483c; ch 3
[381V13]  485d;  ch  ii  [389*28-  ^7]  493c / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 9
[1034*32- ^8] 557c-d; bk xii, ch 6
[1071*^29-31] 601c;
CH 7 [1072^30-1073*2] 603a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch i
[539*15-^13] 65b-66a; ch
ii
[543*'i8-i9] 70b;
ch 15 [546^17-547*1] 73c; CH 15 [547^i2]-ch 16
[548^7]
74b-75b; ch 19
[550*^31-551*13]
7 7 d- 78a;
[551 ''19-5 5 2*^27]
78c-79c; ch 21
[553*i6-*'2]
80a-b; ch 31
[556*^25]-ch
32
[557*^14] 83c-84b; bk vi, ch 15-16 95a-96a /
Gefieration of Ani?nals, bk i, ch i
[715*18716*2] 255b-256a; ch 16 [721*3-11] 260d-261a;
BK  II,  CH  I  [732*^8-14]  272d-273a; ch 3 [737*15] 277d; BK III, CH 9
299b-300a; ch ii
[76i''24-763*'i7] 302d-304d
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [865-943] 26a-27a; bk v [783-820]
71b-d 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xii.ch ii 349a-b; BK xvi, ch 7 427a-b
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 25, A 2, rep 2 144c-145b; q 45,
a  8,  rep  3  249b250a;  q  71,  a i, rep i 367a-368b; q 72, a i, rep 5
368b-369d;  q 92, a i, ans and rep i 488d-489d; q 118, aa 1-2 600a-603b;
Q 119, A 2 607b-608d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii. q 60, A I,
ANS 49d-50c

[100a]
42  THE  GREAT IDEAS (8. The generation of animals. 8b. Diverse theories
oj  animal  generation:  procreation  and  spontaneous  generation.^  24
Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 114b-c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
bk   v,  105a-b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Gefieration,  338b-d;  390b-c;
400d-401a;  406c-d;  412c-413a;  428cd;  449a-b; 454d-455a; 468b-472c 30
Bacox:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  50,  192a-b  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  Ic; 61a Sc. Modes of animal reproduction: sexual and asexual 7
Plato:  Symposium, 15 7 d- 158b / Timaeus, 476b-d / Statesman, 587a-588a
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch ii
[537^22-538*21] 64b-d;
bk  v-vii  65a-114a,c  esp  BK  V,  CH I 65a-66a, bk vi, ch 18 97b-99c /
Generation  ofAnimals  255a-331a,c  esp bk i, CH 1-2 255a-256c, bk i, ch
2i-bk ii, ch i 269c276a, BK II, ch 5 282a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk  ii,  ch 3 185a186d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 119, a 2,
ans  607b-608d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331a; 338a496d esp
390b-429c  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 47c-49c; 220a-b / Descent of
Man,  390c-391b; 395a-399c passim 54 Freud: Instincts, 415b / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  655b-657d; 659d-660c 8c(l) Sexual differentiation:
its  origins and determinations; primary and secondary characteristics 7
Plato:  Symposium,  157b-159b  / Timaeus, 476b-d 9 Aristotle: History of
Anijnals, bk ii, ch 3
[501^20-25] 24a; bk hi, ch 7 [516*15-20] 40c;
CH II [518*30-^4] 42d-43a; ch 19 [521*21-31] 46b; ch 20
[522*11-21] 47a-b; bk
iv, ch i
[524*'3i-525*i3] 50d-51a; ch 2 [525^34-526*6]
52b;  CH  3  [527^30-34]  54c-d; ch ii 64b-65a,c; bk v, ch 5 [540^14-28]
67b;  ch  7 [54i^3o]-ch 8 [542*1] 68c; CH 14 [544^32-545*22] 71c-72a; CH
18
[550^17-21]
77c-d; CH 28
[555^18-23]
82c; CH 30
[556^11-13]
83b; bk vi, ch 2
[559*27-29] 86a; ch 10 [565^13-15] 91d; ch 19
{573^32-574^1 ] 99d; bk VII, CH I [582*27-32] 107d-108a; ch 3
[583^14-29]
109b-c; ch 6
[585^21-27] llld; BK VIII, CH 2 [589^29-590*4]
116b-c;  BK  IX, CH I [608*21-^19] 133b,d-134a / Parts ofAnimals, bk hi,
ch i [661^33-662*5] 189a-b; bk iv, ch 10 [688*20-26] 219d-220a;
[688*^30-34] 220c-d
/ Generation of Animals, BK I, ch 2 256a-c; ch 18 [723*23-^3] 263b-c; CH
19-20 266c-269c; bk ii, ch i
[731^18732*12] 272a-b; bk hi, ch 10 [759^1-7] 300c;

[100b]
8r  to 8(r(2) BK IV, CH 1-2 304b,d-308d esp ch i [766*30- ^8] 307c-d; ch
3 [767^5-14] 309a; bk v, ch 7
[786bi6-788*i3]^328c-330a
10  Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 9 12d13b 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk iv
[12251232] 60b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92,  a  i,  ans and rep i
488d-489d; q 98, a 2, ans 517d-519a; q 99, a 2 520a-d; q 115, a 3, rep 4
588c-589c;  q  118,  a i, rep 4 600a-601c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  q  81,  A 3 966a-c; a 4, rep 2 966d-967d 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation, 346b; 400c401b; 402c-d; 454a-b; 462b; 481c 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organuni,  bk ii, aph 27, 158a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xvi,  116d117a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  339b-340c;  364a561d esp
364a-366b,  373b-374c, 384c-d; 586b-587d; 594a-595b 54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 659d661c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 785a
[fn
i]  /  Netv  Introductory  Lectures,  853d-855b  8c(2)  The reproductive
organs:  their  differences  in  different  classes  of animals 7 Plato:
Timaeus, 476b-d 9 Aristotle : History of Animals, bk i, ch 3
[489*8-14] 10b; CH 13 [493*24]-cH 14 [493^6]
15b-c; CH 17 [497*24-34] 19c-d; bk ii, ch i
[500*32-^25] 22c-23a; ch 10 [503*4-7] 25b-c;
ch 13
[504*^18-19] 27a; bk hi, ch
i 32a-35a; BK IV, CH I
[524*2-9] 49a-c;
[524^31-525*8]
50d; CH 2
[527*11-30]
53c-d; bk v, ch 2
[540*3 ]-CH 3 [540*33] 66c-67a; ch 5 [540^29541*12] 67b-c; CH 6 [541^7-12] 68a-b; bk vi,
CH 9 [564^io]-CH 10 [564^24] 90d-91a; ch 10
[565*12-22] 91b-c; CH II [566*2-14] 92a-b; ch
12 [567*1 i]-cH 13 [567*24] 93b; CH 32 105b-c; bk IX, CH 50
[631^22-25]
157a;
[632*22-27]
157c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk iv, ch 5 [680*12681*5] 210b-211c; CH 10
[689*3-34] 220d-221b; CH 12
[695*26-27]
227a; ch 13
[697*10-14]
228d-229a / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 1-16 255a-261b; bk hi, ch 5
[755^5-756*5]
756*^30-757*13]  297d-298a;  296c-297a;  ch  6  766*^26]  307a-308a;cH 4
[772^27-773*25]  314d315b  10  Gai.en '.Natural Faculties, bk hi, ch 2-3
199d201a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, lOc-lla; 15a-c; bk
ii,  70b-c;  95a-97b;  bk hi, 131b,d; 143a-144c; 178b-185d; 192b-193b 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  338d-352d; 401b-405c; 452c; 473b-476b;
477b-479c;  485a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 158a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic}{,  310a-b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 136b /
Descent  of  Man,  264d-265a;  272a-d;  339b-c; 364a-b 54 Freud: General
Introduction, 592a

[101a]
8r(3)  to  8r(5)  Chapter  2: ANIMAL 43 8c(3) The reproductive cells and
secretions:   semen   and   catamenia,   sperm  and  ^^^^  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,   bk   vii,  ch  9  (1034*  32-^8]  557c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  7
(io49''i2-i9]   574d;   BK   XII,   CH   6   [1071^29-31]   601c;  cH  7
[1072*^361073*2] 603a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[489^6-10] lOd; BK III, cH 22 48c; bk iv, ch
i
[525*2-8] 50d; CH 2 [527*31-3:5] 53d-54a; bk
VI,  CH  2  [559*15-560^2]  85d-87a;  ch  10  [564^  24-26]  91a;  CH 13
[567*16-^15]  93b-d;  bk  vii,  CH  I [582*i6]-CH 2 [583*13] 107d-108c /
Generation ofAnimals, bk i, ch 2 [716*2-17] 256a; CH 17-23 261b-271d; bk
ii,  ch  i  [733^23]-ch 4 (739^33] 274a-280d; ch 5 [741*6-32] 282a-b; bk
II, ch 7
[746^25]-BK
III, ch 2
[752''i5]
288a-293d; bk iii, ch 3-5 295b-297c; ch 7-9 298a-300a; bk iv, ch i
[764^4-21]
305c-d; ch I [765^io]-cH 2 [767*8] 306d-308b; ch 3
[767^16-769^10] 309a-311b
/  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  16  [1335*24-27]  540b 10 Hippocrates: Airs,
Waters,  Places,  par  14  15ab / Sacred Disease, 155d 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties, bk ii, ch 3 185a186d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371051] 57d; [1209-1277] 60a-d
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 71, A I, REP I 367a-368b; q 92,
a  3, rep 2 490c491b; A 4, ANS 491b-d; q 97, a 2, rep 3 514c515a; q 118,
aa  1-2  600a-603b; q 119, a i, ans 604c-607b; a 2 607b-608d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part iii suppl, Q 80, A 2, rep 2 957c-958b; a 3, ans
958b959c;  A  4,  ANS  and  rep 2,4-5 959c-963a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxv
[37-51] 91d
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 144b; 189b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   269b-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  338a-d;3^0c342d;
347d-348d;   353a-363d;   365a;   383d407a   esp  402d-405c;  417a-429c;
461d-472c;  473c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 192a-b 49 Darwin: Descent
ofMan,  257c;  372b-c  54  Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 653b-c;
655b-d  /  Netv  Introductory  Lectures,  853d-854c  8c(4) The mating of
animals:  pairing  and  copulation 6 Herodotus: H/.f/or3',BK 11, 67b; bk
iii,113a-b  7  Plato: Symposium, 158a-b / Republic, bk v, 361c-d / Laws,
bk viii, 737d-738b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[500^7-14] 22d; bk V, ch 2-14 66b-73b; ch 19
[55o''2i-26] 77d; ch 28 [555^18-23] 82c; ch 30
[556*25-28] 83a; bk vi, ch 2 [56o'*25-32] 87b;
CH 4 [562^*26-29] 89a; ch 13 [567*28-^12] 93c; CH 17 [570*27-29] 96b; ch
18-37 97b-106d; BK VII, CH 7
[586*15-20] 112b; bk
IX, ch i

[101b]
[6o9*'2i-26] 135b; ch 8 [61 3'»2 4-6 14*30] 139b140a; CH 37 [621^22-28] 147b; ch 41 [628*^1317] 153d; ch 47 156b / Generation ofAnimals,
BK  I,  ch  4-7  257a-258b;  cii  14  16  260b 261b; CH 18 [723^9-724*^]
263c-264a; en 19 [727^7] -CH 23 [731**14] 267c-271d passim; bk ii, ch 4
[737^25-739^20] 278c-280c; ch 7 [746*29l-cH
8
[749*5]
287c-290a,c; bk hi, ch i
[749^7750*7]
290d-291b; ch 5-6 296c-298a; ch 8 298d-299b; ch 10
[760^33-761*12] 302a; bk
IV,  ch 5 [773''23-774*i3] 315d-316a / Politics, bk I, CH 2 [1252*26-31]
445c  10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places, par 21 17b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv [10371057] 57d;
[1073-1120]
58a-d;
[i 192-1208]
59d-60a;  [1263-1279]  60d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, A
3,  REP  2  490c-491b; q 97, a 2, rep 3 514c515a; q 98, a 2 517d-519a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  224a-225b; 399a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal Geiieration,
343b-350a passim; 394b-398c; 401b-406a; 406d-407a; 417a-429c passim, esp
423b-c;  476b-477b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 162b; 166a-b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 555a-556a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,'2S7a'h; 289b-292a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  43d-44a;  47c-d;  49b-c / Descent of Man,
366c-368b;   369b372c;   387d;   395a-480a  passim;  482b-486c;  532a-d;
543d-545d;  580c-581b  53  James:  Psychology, 14b 54 Freud: Ego and Id,
711d-712a  8c(5) Factors aflfecting fertility and sterility 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk hi, ch ii
[518^1-3] 43a; bk
v, ch ii
[543^21-31]
70c; CH 14 71b-73b; bk vii, ch i
[58i^22]-ch
3
[583*25] 107b-108d passim; ch 5 [585*33]-ch 6
[585^29] lllb-d; bk IX, ch 50 [631^19-632*32]
157a-c / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 4
[717*29-^5] 257b; CH 7 258a-b; ch 18 [725*4726*7] 265a-266a; ch 19 [727*^6-26] 267c-268a;
BK II, ch 4 [739*26-35] 280b; ch 7 [746^i2]-ch 8
[749*5] 287d-290a,c; bk hi, ch
i
[749^26750*13] 291a-b; bk iv, ch 2 [767*13-35] 308cd; ch 5 [773^29-33] 315d / Politics, bk vii, ch
16 [1335*7-^1] 540a-c 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3 9c10a;
par  19-23  16c-18c  /  Aphorisms, sect v, par 46 139b; par 59 139d; par
62-63 139d140a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[1233i277]60b-d
36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 474b-475a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs,
bk  xxiii, 190c-d 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 404b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  lOa-b;  47d-48a;  132a-133a; 136a-151d esp 136a-b,
141a-c, 143b-145c; 230b-231b / Descent ofMan, 354b355a

[102a]
'44 (8. The generation of animals.^ 8</. Comparison of human with animal
reproduction 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[489^36-'^i8] lOd-lla; bk v-vii 65a-114a,c esp
BK  V,  CH I 65a-66a, ch 8 [542*17-^1] 68d-69a, BK VI, CH 18 97b-99c, BK
VII  106b,d-114a,c / Generation of A?iimals, bk i, ch 9-1 i 258d259b; bk
ii,'ch   i   [732^24-733^23]  272c-274a;  ch  4-7  278b-288b  esp  ch  4
[737^25-739^33]  278c-280d  / Politics, bk i, ch 2 [1252^26-31] 445c; BK
VII,  CH 16 [1335^11-18] 540a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxii, ch 24,
609b-610a  19  Aquinas:  Swmna  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75,  A  6, REP
i383c-384c;q92,a i, ans 488d-489d; Q 98, A 2, ANS and REP 1,3 517d-519a;
q 118, AA 1-2 600a-603b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-78] 91d-92a
25 Montaigne: Essays, 399a-b; 424d-425c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
338a-496d  esp  449a-454a,  463d-464a,  470c-472c  36  Sterne:  Tristram
Shandy,  555a-556a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  346b-d;  348d 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  ii  [6838-6847] 167b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 256c-257a;
354b355a  54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children^  121d  9. The
development   of  the  embryo:  birth  and  infancy  9a.  Oviparous  and
viviparous development 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[489^34-^19]
lOd-lia; BK V, ch 18
[549^3055o'*3i] 76d-77b; bk vi, ch 3 87c-88d; ch 10
[564^26-565^12] 91a-b; ch
13
[567^27-568*4]
93d-94a;  bk  vii,  ch  7  112b-c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  BK  IV, CH 12
[693^21-27]  225c  /  Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 8-13 258b-260b; BK
II, CH I [732*24-733^23] 272c-274a; ch 4
[737^7-25]
278b-c;
[739^21-33]
280c-d; bk III, CH I [749^12-33] 29Cb-d; ch i [751^5 ]-ch 4
[755*34]
292a-296c / Politics, bk i, ch 8
[1256^11-15] 450b-c
28  Harvey:  Motion  ofthe Heart, 277c-d; 298b-c / On Animal Generation,
338a-496d  esp 449a454a, 463d-464a, 470c-472c 9b. The nourishment of the
embryo or foetus CH 87c-88d; ch 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk
[550*16-24] 77a; bk vi, ch 3
[564^26-565*12] 91a-b;
[565^2-10] 91c-d; ch
13
[568*1-4]
94a;  bk  vii,  ch  8  112c-113a  /  Generation  ofAnimals,  bk i, ch 22
[730*33-^9] 270d; BK II, CH 4 [740*17-741*2] 281a-d; ch 7
[745^22-746*28] 287a-c; bk hi, ch
i [751*6-7] 292a; ch 2 [752*24-^28] 293b-294a; [753*36754*15] 294c-295b;
ch 3
[754'"i-755^6] 295c-

[102b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 8^ to 9d 2-24] 317c-d; ch 8 296a; bk iv, ch 6 318b-319c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 118, A I, REP 4 600a-601c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl,
[775^
Q  80,  A 4, REP 5 959c-963a 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 298b-c / On
Animal Generation, 366d-367b; 373b-c; 378bd; 379b-381a; 396b; 398d-399c;
408b-415b;    438c-443b;446c-447a;   458a-461d   esp461a-d;   463b-466b;
471d-472a;  481d-482b; 484c; 485c-488c 9c The process of embryogeny: the
stages of foetal growth 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4 [1014^2022]
535a  9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch 3 87c-88d; ch 10
[564^26-565*12] 91a-b; ch 13
[567^27-568*4] 93d-94a; bk vii, ch 3 [583^28]
109a; -8 112b-113a; bk viii, ch 2 116b-c / Parts of Animals, bk 7-
[589*^29-590*11]
III,  CH  4  [665*31-^1]  193a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk I, CH 20
[729*i2]-cH   23   [731*21]  269b271c;  BK  II,  CH  I  [733^^22-735*28]
274a-276a; CH 3 [737''i8-34] 278a-b; ch 4 [739^21-741*5] 280c-282a; ch 5
[74i^5]-ch 6 [745^22] 282c287a; bk hi, ch 2
[752^i2]-ch
4
[755*34]
293d-296c;  ch  ii  [762*10-^19]  303a-d;  bk iv, CH I 304b,d-308a; ch 4
[771^19-772*39]  313c314b  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 5-6
169b170c;  bk II, CH 3 185a-186d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
118,  A  I,  REP  4  600a-601c;  a  2,  rep 2 601c-603b 21 Dante: Divine
Cofuedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-78] 91d-92a
28  Harvey:  Motion  ofthe  Heart,  277c-d;  298b-c; 302 b-c / On Animal
Generation,  359a-c;  363d398c  esp  394b-d;  402d-405c;  407c-431b  esp
415a-b;  438c-456a  esp 451c-453b; 478a-488d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
352b-353b   49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  143d-144a;  219d225b  esp
219d-222a  /  Descent  of  Man, 257c258b 54 Freud: General Introduction,
509d-510a 9d. Multiple pregnancy: superfoetation Old Testament: Genesis,
25:24-26;  38:27-30 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 112d-113a 9 Aristotle :
History of Animals, bk v, ch 9
[542^30-33] 69c; bk vi, ch 3 [562*24-^2] 88c-d;
CH  II [566*15-16] 92b; ch 12 [566''6-8] 92c-d: ch 19 [573^19-32] 99c-d;
ch 20
[574^25-26]
lOOc; ch 22 [575^34-576*3] lOlc; ch 30 [579* 20-21] 104d; CH 31
[579*34-^12] 105a-b; ch
33-35 105c-106a; ch 37
[580^10-20] 106b-c;
bk  vii,  ch  4 [584^26-585*27] llOc-lUb / Parts ofAnimals, bk iv, ch 10
[688*28-^25]  220a-c  /  Generation  of  Animals, bk i, ch 18 [723^9-16]
263c-d; ch 20 [728^33-729*20] 269a-b; bk iv, ch 4-5 311c-316c

[103a]
,  r  9eio 10 Chapter 2: ANIMAL 45 .• 10 Hippocrates: Aphorisms, sect v,
par  38  139a  :  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 363a; 382d384a; 481a;
482b;   482d-483a;  484b;  488a;  488c  9e.  The  period  of  gestation:
parturition,  delivery, birth Old Testament: Genesis, 25:24-26; 38:27-30
/  Job,  39:1-4  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:2— (Z)) OT, Boof^of
Wisdom,  7  -.2  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 112d-113b; bk VI, 197b-c;
198b-d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch ii
[543^14-17] 70b; cH
12
[544*1-3] 70c; ch
14
[545^6-9] 72b;
[546^1-14] 73a-b; ch 17 [549*
14-20] 76a; [549^1-13] 76b-c; ch 18
[55o''2629] 77b; [550^6-14] 77c; ch 20 [553*2-11] 79d;
BK VI, CH 2 [559^11-16] 86b; [560^17-24] 87ab; CH 4
[562^15-31] 89a; ch
10
[565*22-31]
91c; [565^24-32] 92a; ch ii
[566*15-16] 92b;
CH 12
[566^19-20] 92d; CH
13
[567*28-''27]
93c-d; CH 17 96b-97b; ch 18 [572^31-573*32] 98d-99a; ch 19 [573^21] 99c;
ch  20  [574*20-^7]  lOOa-b;  ch 21 [575*25-29] 101a; ch 22 [575^ 26-27]
lOlc;
[576*21-25]
101d-102a; ch 23
[577*24-^10] 102d-103a; ch 26 [578*io]-ch 29
[578^18]
103d-104b; ch 30
[579*i9]-ch
31
[579^5]
104d-105a; ch 33
[579b3i]-CH
35
[580*19] 105c-106a; bk vii, ch
i
[582*16-21]
107d; ch 3
[583*^1 i]-ch 4 [584^25] 109b-110c;
CH 9 [586^26]-cH 10 [587^5] 113a-d; bk viii, CH 21
[603^34-604*3] 129d; CH 24
[604^29605*1] 130c / Generation of Animals, bk
i,  ch  II [719*2-30] 259a-b; bk ii, ch 8 [748*27-31] 289c; BK III, CH 2
[752*10-^17] 293a-d; bk iv, ch 4
[772^5-11]
314b-c; ch 6
[775*28-^2]
317b-c; CH 8
[777*22]-ch
10
[778*12] 319b320a,c /
Politics, bk vii, ch 16
[1335*11-22]
540a;  [1335^12-19]  540c 10 Hippocrates : Airs, Waters, Places, par 4-5
lOa-d;  par 7, lla-c / Aphoristns, sect v, par 29-62 138d-139d 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch  3 200a201a; ch 12, 208c-d 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  5c-6b;  8c-9c  28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  343d;  353ab; 381b-382d; 406a-b; 458c-459d; 476c 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  268a-b; 270a-274a 48 Melville: Moby Dicl^, 254a-255a;
287a-b  49 Darwin : Origin of Species, 94a / Desce?it of Man, 341b.d [fn
32];  384b-c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk iv, 180d-183b 54 Freud:
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety  737c-738a passim 9/. The care and
feeding of infant offspring: lactation 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 362b-c 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk h, ch r
[500*13-33] 22b-c; ch
13 [504^22-27] 27a-b;

[103b]
BK hi, ch 20 [52i*'2i] CH 21 [525*1:5] 46d 48c; bk V, CH 18 [550*32 '"6]
77b-c; ch 22 [55:5''24554''61 80c 81b; ch 26 27 82a-c; en 33
[558*4] CH 34
[558^'4| 84d-85a,c; bk vi, ch 4
88d 89b; ch 69 89c-90d; en 12
[566^^16567*7]
92d-93a; ch 14
[568^13-569*4]
94c95a; cii 20 [574^7-13] 100b; ch 21
[575*^9
12] 101b; CH 22
[576''ii
12] 102a-b; ch 26-27 103d; CH 33
[580*2-5] 105c-d; bk
vii, ch 3
[583*26-33] 108d-109a; cn 5 [585*29-33] 111b;
CH II 114a, c; bk viii, ch i
[588^31-589*3]
115b;  bk  IX,  CH  4  [6ri*9]-cH 5 [611*21] 136d; CH 7 [6i2''26-6i3*i6]
138c-d; ch 8 [613^7-33] 139a-c; ch ii [614^31-34] 140c; ch 29 143c-d; CH
32-34 144b-145c passim; ch 37 [621*21-^1] 146d-147a; ch 49
[63i*>i3-i7]
156d-157a / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[688*19
''34]  219d-220d  /  Generation  of Animals, bk hi, gh 2 [752^17-753*17]
293d-294b; ch 10 [759*36- ^8] 300c; BK IV, CH 8 318b-319c / Politics, BK
I, CH 8
[1256*^7-15] 450b-c; bk vii, ch 17
[1336*3-22] 541a-b
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [806-815] 71c 28 Harvey: Motion of
the  Heart,  288d  /  On Animal Generation, 350c-d; 361b-362c; 381b382d;
402a-b; 439a-d; 461b; 464c-d; 487c488a 33 Pascal: Weight of Air, 415a 35
Locke:  Civil Government, ch vii, sect 78-80 42b-43a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  316b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336a-b; 337b; 340c 44 BoswEi.1.:
Johnson,  510b-c  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 286b-287b 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  llOc-lllb  /  Descent  of  Man, 289d-290a; 339d-340c; 441 c-d;
443b-444a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 661d; 662c-d 53 James:
Psychology,  709a-710a  54  Freud:  Netv Introductory Lectures, 854c 9g.
Characteristics  of  the  offspring  at  birth  9  Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk vi, ch 20
[574*20-29] 100a; ch 30 [579*2 i]-ch 31 [579^9]
104d-105b; ch 33
[58o*4]-ch
35
[580*29]
105d-106a / Generation ofAnimals, bk iv, ch 6
[774^5-775*6]
316c-317a;  bk  v  320a-331a,c  passim  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species,
222b-223b  53  James: Psychology, 49b-50a; 691a-b; 710a 10. Heredity and
environment:  the  genetic  determination  of individual differences and
similarities 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 340b-341a 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk vi, ch 19
[573^32-574*9] 99d; ch 29 [578^26-30] 104c;
BK vii, ch 6 [585^29-586*14] llld-112b / Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*14-28]
162c-d;
[641^27-39] 164d-165a; ch
17 [72ibi4]-cH 18

[104a]
(10.  Heredity  and environment: the genetic determination of individual
differences and similarities.^
[724*13]
261c-264b; bk iv, ch i
[766^7-12]
307d; CH 3-4 308d'315b / Politics, bk ii, ch 3
[1262*14-24] 457a; bk vii, ch 16 [1335^17-19]
540c  10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  14  15a-b / Sacred
Disease,  155d-156a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk hi [741-753]
39c-d;  BK  IV [1209-1232] 60a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
119,  A  2,  REP  2  607b-608d  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 363a-c;
386d-387b;  391c-393b;  395a-396a;  425b-d;  446b-c; 455d'456a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  hi, ch vi, SECT 23 274b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  191b-192b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335a- b; 337a; 347a'b 39
Smith:  Wealth  ofNations,  bk  i,  7d-8a  42  Y^a^t:  Judgement,  580a;
581d-582a  49  Darwin:  Origin  ofSpecies,  9b-12a  esp 9b-10d; 53b-55b;
62a-63a; 65a-71a; 98c; 132a-134c esp 134a-c; 144a; 149b-150c; 182d-183a;
220b228a  esp  222a-224b  /  Descent  of  Man,  268b269a;  375a-382d esp
381c-382a;  413d  [fn  61];  429d-430c; 500a-525a passim, esp 500a-502a,
511a-b,  524d-525a;  529d-531a,c  53  ]am-es:  Psychology, 853a-858a esp
857b;  890b897b  esp 896a-897a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 594d-595a
11.  The  habitat  of  animals  1  \a.  The geographical distribution of
animals:  their natural habitats Old Testament: Genesis, 1:20-21,24-26 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  113a-b;  bk  v,  161b-c;  BK  VII, 236d 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*14-^5] 8a-b; bk iv, ch
i [525*12-25] 51ac; bk v, ch 15 [547*4-12] 73d; ch 15 [547^11]- ch 16
[548*28]
74b-75a; ch 16
[548^18-30]
75c-d;  CH  17  [549^14-22]  76c; ch 22 [554^818] 81b-c; CH 28 [556*4-6]
82d; ch 30 [556*2124] 83a; ch 31 [557^4-32] 83d-84a; bk vi, ch 5
[563*5-12] 89b; BK VIII, CH 2-20 115c-129b esp
ch 2
[589*10-590*19]
115c-116c,  CH  12-17  122d-127b;  ch  28-29  131c-132d; bk ix, ch 11-27
140c-143c  passim;  ch 32 [618^18-619*8] 144b-c / Generation of Animals,
bk hi, ch ii
[761^9-24] 302c-d
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk ii [532-540] 21d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, qq 7172 367a-369d 32 Mii^tok: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[387-498]  225b228a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  630b-c  [n 43] 48
Melville: Moby Dic{, 146b-148a

[104b]
46  THE  GREAT IDEAS 11 to \2a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 181a-206a,c
esp  181a-184d,  196a-199d,  204d-206a,c;  231b-c;  237c-238b  11^.  The
relation between animals and their environments 6 Herodotus: History, bk
iv, 129a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[198^16-33]
275d-276a  /  Longevity  710a-713a,c  passim  9  Aristotle:  History  of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*14-^33]
8a-d; bk hi, ch 12
[519*3-19]
43d-44a; ch 21
[522^12-523*1] 47d-48a; bk
IV,  CH  5  [530^19-24]  57c;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [543^1931]  70b-c;  CH 22
[553^20-24] 80c; bk viii, ch 2-29 115c-132d; bk ix, ch i [608^18-610*34]
134a-136a; ch 37
[622*8-15] 147c /
Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 16 [658^30-659*36] 185d186b; BK IV, ch 5
[680*28-^^3] 210d; ch
8
[684*1-14] 215b; CH 12 [693*10-24] 225a/ Gait
of  Animals,  ch  15  [7i3*4]-ch  18  [714^8]  250d252a  / Generation of
Animals, bk ii, ch 4
[738*9-27] 278d-279a; bk
iv,  ch  2 308b-d; BK v, CH 3 [782^23-783^22] 324d-325d 10 HippocR.\TEs:
Airs,  Waters, Places, par 12 14b-d; par 19 16c-17a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk v [845-854] 72a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  iv,  242a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 223c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day, 160cd; second day, 187b-188c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  13,  146c  33  Pascal:  Equilibrium of Liquids, 401a-403a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part ii, 79a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 224b; 295b-296b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xiv, 102b,d-104a 42 Ka^t: Judgement,
553c-554b; 585b 43 Feder.\list: number ii, 56a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Cliemisiry,  part ii, 57b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 209b 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  534c-535b  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species,
9a-10d;  32a-39a,c passim, esp 34c-36a, 39a,c; 40d-42c; 53d-55b; 65a-69c
esp  65b-66a;  106b-107a;  144a-145c;  182d-183a; 230d-231b / Descent of
Man, 268b-269a; 320a-c; 341b,d [fn 32]; 354c-355a; 430d-432c; 442a-443b;
468d-469a;  525b527c;554d-555b  53  James:  Psychology,  857b  54 Freud:
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 791d792a 12. The treatment of animals
by men 12a. The taming of animals 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk iv [625-637] 205c
5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [459-468]  44d 5 Sophocles: y^w/Z^^ow^
[332-352] 134a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 128a-d

[105a]
12-^/0  12r  Chapter 2: ANIMAL 47 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i,
ch i
[488*26-31] 9b; BK VI, CH 21
[575^1-3] 101a;
BK IX, CH I (608*24-27] 133b, d;
[608*^^0609*3] 134b;
[610*24-34] 135d; ch 26 143b;
CH 46 [63o'*i8-2i] 156a / Politics, bk i, ch 5
[i254Vi3]'^48a
14  Plutarch: Alexander, 542d-543b 19 Aquixas: Summa Theologica, part i,
Q96,  a  i,  REP 2 510b-511b 20 Aquinas: Su?nma Theologica, part i-ii, q
50, A 3, REP 2 8b-9a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 220d-222c 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv,  146b-  148b;  164b;  167b-168a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337a;
356d-357a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall.  86d; 107a-b; 221d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 56 26b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
13c-d;  121b-122c  passim;  233c-d  50  Marx:  Capital,  87b  53  James:
Psychology,  708a-709a  \2b. The use and abuse of animals Old Testament:
Genesis,  4:4;  8:6-12;  22:1-13  /  Exodus,  20:8-11;  22:19;  23:12  /
Leviticus  passim,  esp  II,  18:23,  20:15-16  /  'Numbers,  22:2134  /
Deuteronomy, 5:12-14; 22:6-7,10; 25:4; 27:21 / Proverbs, 12:10 / Daniel,
6:6-28  Apocrypha:  Bel  and Dragon, 23-28— (D) OT, Daniel, 14:22-27 New
Testament:  Matthew,  21:1-11  /  Mar\,  1:6;  6:34-44;  ii:i-ii / Lul^,
19:29-38  /  John,  12:14-15  /  /  Corinthians, ^:^ / I Timothy, 5:18 4
Homer: Iliad 3a-l79d passim, esp bk i [428471] 7c-8a, BK II
[394-431] 14a-b,
[760-779]
17c-d, BK IV
[104-111]
25a, bk v
[191-208]
32a-b,  bk XXIII [262-611] 164a-167c / Odyssey, bk III [418-463] 197b-d;
bk xi [23-50] 243b-c; BK XII [260-419] 252d-254c 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus
Bound [459-468] 44d 5 Aristophanes: Peace
[1-181]
526a-528a  /  B/ri/ [294-382] 545d-547b; [1076-1087] 556a-b 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  ii,  57b-58b;  59b-c;  62c-64c;  bk  hi, 95b-c; llld-112c;
113c-d;  bk  IV, 127d-128a; 146d-147a; bk v, 183b-d 9 Aristotle: History
of Animals, bk hi, ch 20
[522*25}-cH 21 [523*13] 47b-48c; bk v, ch 22
80b-81c; BK IX, ch i [610*15-34] 135d / Politics, bk I, ch 8
[1256^8-26]
450b-c; ch ii
[1258^12-20] 452d-453a; bk ly, ch 3 [1289^3340] 488d-489a; bk vi, ch 7 [1321*9-12] 524d;
bk VII, ch 2 [1324^36-41] 528d-529a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[860-870]  72b-c  12  EpicTETijs:  Discourses, bk i, ch 16, 121d-122a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk vi, sect 23 276b 13 Virgil: Aeneid 103a-379a
esp bk hi [218-257] 153a-154a, bk v [84-99] 189b, bk vhi [81-87] 261a 14
Plutarch: Marcus Cato, 278d-279c / Alexander, 541 b-c

[105b]
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 72, A I, rep 6 368b 369d; q 96,
a  i  510b  511b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 102, A 3
272b-276c;  q  105,  a  2, rep ii 12 309d316a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  143b-d;  bk  iv,  245d-248c  25 Montaigne: Essays,
139c-143c;  206b-208a;  219b-d;  220d-222c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  37,  schol  i,  435a-b  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv 135a-184a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  474b-477a; 483b485a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
330d-331b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 38b 39a; 139c140a; 411d-412c;
619d-620a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 107a-b; 221c222a 44 Boswei,l:
Johnson,  312b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 82b-83a; 307b-310b 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  13c-d;  233c-d  50  Marx:  Capital, 86b; 183b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 19c-d; bk vii, 278a-287a; 296d-297d; bk
viii,  330d-332a;  bk  XII, 538a-d; bk xiv, 592a-c 53 James: Psychology,
705a;  720a  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  758b-c / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 771d-772a 12c. Friendship or love between animals and men 4
Homer: Iliad, bk xvh [426-455] 126c-d; bk XIX [399-424] 141a,c; bk xxiii
[272-286] 164a / Odyssey, bk xvii [290-327] 280a-c 5 Aristophanes: Birds
[294-382]  545d-547b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  5b-d 9 Aristotle:
History of Anijnals, bk ix, ch 44
[630*9-12] 155b; ch 48 [631*7-10] 156b-c
14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  12Ia-b  /  Marcus Cato, 278d-279c / Alexander,
562b;  570a-b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 25, A 3
502c-503b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  206b-208a;  224c-225b;  227b-228b 26
Shakespeare:  Ttvo  Gentlemen  of Verona, act IV, sc IV [1-42] 248b-d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part i, 2c-d; 112b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  prop 37, schol i, 435a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, xixa; part iv, 180a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 483b-485a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 221c-d
passim  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 229a 49 Darwin: Descent
ofMan,  289c;  303c;  307a-c;  317d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii,
278a-287a passim; bk xih, 575b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers KaramazoVy bk vi,
167c; BK X, 282a-288d 53 James: Psychology, 722a-b

[106a]
13.   The   attribution  of  human  qualities  or  virtues  to  animals:
personification  in  allegory and satire Old Testament: Genesis, 3:1-5 /
Numbers, 22:21-31 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xvii
[426-455]
126c-d; BK XIX [399-424] 141a,c; bk xxiii [272-286] 164a 5 Aristophanes:
Knights
[591-610] 477b-d
/ Wasps 507a-525d / Birds 542a-563d / Frogs
[205-270] 566d-567b
6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 21d-22a; 33a-b; BK II, 61a-b; bk vi, 211a 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 3l9c-320c / Statesfnan,
583c-d; 588b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488V25]
9c-d; bk VIII, CH i
[588^18-^3]
114b.d; BK IX, CH i [608*11-^19] 133b,d-134a; CH 29
[618=^25-30] i43d; CH 38 148b; ch 48
[631^8-20]
156b-c / Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[1284*11-18] 482b
/ R/ietoric, bk ii, ch 20
[1393^8-1394*1] 641b-c
14  Plutarch: Lysander, 357a / Sulla, 382c-d 17 Plotinus : Third Ennead,
tr iv, ch 2, 98a CROSS-REFERENCES Emotion ic.

[106b]
48 THE GREAT IDEAS 13 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i
[i-iii]
la2b; VI [1-33] 8b-d; xii [1-30] 16b-c; xvi [106]- XVII
[36]
23c-24b; purgatory, xiv
[16-66]
73d-74b; xxix 97d-99b; xxxii
[106-160]
103c-104a  22  Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale [i4>853-i5,452] 450b-460b 23
Machiavelli:   Prince,  ch  xviii,  25a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,   bk  i,  2b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  215a-232b  passim  27
Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens,  act  iv,  so  III  [320-348] 414b-c 29
Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 39b.d; 40d'41a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk ix [48-96] 248b249b;
[523-612]
258b-260b esp
[549-566]
259b;  BK x [209-590] 279a-287a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv 135a-184a 44
BoswEi.!.:  Johnson,  215b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i,
253b254d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1202-1209] 30a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{
esp  131a-145a,  248b249a,  289b-292a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii,
553d-554a  For:  The  general  discussion  of the grades of life and the
kinds  of  soul,  see  Life  and  Death  3,  3b;  Soul  20-20(3).  Other
considerations  of  the  issue concerning continuity or discontinuity in
the  relation of plants, animals, and men, as well as between living and
non-living  things,  see  Evolution 3e, 7a-7b; Life and Death 2, 3a; Man
la-ic;  Nature  3b;  Sense  2a. The comparison of men and animals, or of
different  species  of  animals,  with  respect  to sensitivity, memory,
imagination, and intelligence, see Memory and Imagination i; Mind 3a-3b;
Reasoning  la;  Sense  2b-2c.  The general theory of instinct, see Habit
3-3e;  and  for  the  emotional  aspect  of  instincts,  see Alternative
theories  of  the  origin  and  development  of  living  organisms,  see
Evolution  4a,  4c.  Other  discussions of heredity, see Evolution 3-3e;
Family   6b.   Other  discussions  of  sexual  attraction,  mating,  and
reproduction, see Change lob; Family 7a;

[107a]
ADDITIONAL,  READINGS  J  J Listed below are works not included in Great
Bool(s  ofthe  Western  World,  but relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  arc divided into two groups:
—T^i-Sasr"—"  j^  Works  by  authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great Ideas. I. Galen. On the Utility of Parts HoBBES.
Concerning  Body,  part  iv, ch 25 Goethe. Metamorphose der Pflanzen 11.
Aesop's  Fables  Theophrastus.  Enquiry  into Plants Ovid. Metamorphoses
Pliny.  Natural  History  Vesalius.  The  Epitome  SuAREZ. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xliv  (3)  La  Fontaine. Fables Linnaeus. Systema Naturae
Lamettrie.  Man  a Machine CoNDiLLAC. Traite des animaux BuFFON. Natural
History  E.  Darwin.  The Loves of the Plants Cuvier. The Animal Kingdom
Balzac.  A  Passion  in  the Desert Comte. The Positive Philosophy, bk v
Schwann.  Microscopical  Researches into the Accordance in the Structure
and Growth of Atiimals and Plants LoTZE. Microcosmos, bk i, ch 5

[107b]
Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 49 Bernard. Introduction to Experimental Medicine E.
Hartmann.  Philosophy ofthe Unconscious, {c)iit IV T. H. Huxley. Methods
and  Results,  v  Frazer.  The  Golden Bough, part v, ch 9, 13-17 WuNDT.
Outlines  of Psychology, (19) Jennings. Behavior of the Lotver Organisms
Sherrington.  The  Integrative Action of the Nervous System Driesch. The
Science  and  Philosophy  ofthe  Organism  Henderson. The Fitness of the
Environment Koehler, The Mentality of Apes D. W. Thompson. On Growth and
Form  LoEB.  The  Organism  as  a Whole . Forced Movements, Tropisms and
Animal  Conduct  J.  S. Haldane and J. G. Priestley. Respiration Pavlov.
Conditioned  Reflexes Alverdes. Social Life in the Animal World Wheeler.
Foibles  of  Insects and Men Bose. Life Movements in Plants . Growth and
Tropic  Movements  of Plants Needham. Order and Life Whitehead. Modes of
Thought,   lect  vii-viii  Large.  The  Advance  of  the  Fungi  Wiener.
Cybernetics

[108a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  forms  of  government have been variously enumerated,
differently  classified,  and  given  quite  contrary evaluations in the
great  books  of  political  theory.  In the actual history of political
institutions,  as  well  as  in  the tradition of political thought, the
major  practical  issues  with  respect  to the forms of government— the
choices  open, the ideals to be sought, or the evils to be remedied—have
shifted  with  the times. In an earlier day—not merely in ancient times,
but  as  late  as  the  i8th  century—  the  form  of  government called
"aristocracy"  presented  a  genuine  alternative to monarchy, and set a
standard  by which the defects and infirmities of democracy were usually
measured.  If  aristocracy  was not always regarded as the ideal form of
government,  the  principle  of  aristocracy  always  entered  into  the
definition  of  the political ideal. Today, both in theory and practice,
aristocracy  is  at  the  other  end  of  the scale. For a large part of
mankind,  and  for  the  political  philosopher as well as in prevailing
popular  sentiment,  aristocracy  (together  with monarchy) has become a
subject  of  historical interest. It is a form of government with a past
rather  than  a  future.  It  no  longer  measures,  but is measured by,
democracy.  If  the  aristocratic  principle still signifies a factor of
excellence  in  government  or  the state, it does so with a meaning now
brought into harmony with democratic standards. This change accounts for
one  ambiguity  which  the  word "aristocracy" may have for contemporary
readers.  Formerly  its  primary,  if  not  only,  significance  was  to
designate  a  form of government. It is currently used to name a special
social  class,  separated  from  the  masses  by  distinctions of birth,
talent, property, power, or leisure. We speak of "the aristocracy" as we

[108b]
Chapter  y.  ARISTOCRACY speak of "the efite" and "the four hundred"; or
we follow Marx and Engels in thinking of the "feudal aristocracy" as the
class  "that  was  ruined  by  the bourgeoisie." The Communist Manifesto
wastes  little sympathy on the aristocrats who, while seeking an ally in
the  proletariat,  forgot that "they [too] exploited under circumstances
and  conditions  that  were  quite  different." For Marx and Engels, the
aristocracy  and the bourgeoisie alike represent the propertied classes,
but  they  differ in the manner in which they came by their property and
power.  The  landed gentry and the feudal nobility got theirs largely by
inheritance,  the bourgeoisie by industry and trade. Today, for the most
part,  we call a man an "aristocrat" if, justly or unjustly, he claims a
right  to  certain social distinctions or privileges. We seldom use that
word  today  to  indicate a man who deserves special political status or
preeminence,  though  we do sometimes use it to name the proponent ofany
form ofgovernment which rests upon the political inequaUty of men. Since
the  discussion  of aristocracy in the great books is largely political,
we  shall  here  be  primarily  concerned  with aristocracy as a form of
government. The general consideration of the forms of government will be
found in the chapter on Government. Here and in the other chapters which
are devoted to particular forms of government, we shall consider each of
the  several  forms, both in itself and in relation to the others. There
is  one  element  in the conception of aristocracy which does not change
with changing evaluations of aristocratic government. All of the writers
of  the  great  political  books  agree with Plato that aristocracy is a
"government of the few," according as the few rather than 50

[109a]
the  one or the many exercise political power and dominate the state. By
this  criterion  of  number,  aristocracy  is ahvays differentiated from
monarchy  and democracy. Though he uses the word "oHgarchy" to name what
others  call  "aristocracy," Locke defines the three forms of government
by reference to numbers. When the majority themselves exercise the whole
power  of the community, Locke says, "then the form of the government is
a  perfect  democracy." When they put "the power of making laws into the
hands  of  a  few select men . . . then it is an oligarchy; or else into
the  hands  of  one  man,  and  then  it  is  a monarchy." Kant proceeds
similarly, though again in somewhat different language. "The relation of
the  supreme  power  to  the  people," he says, "is conceivable in three
different forms: either one in the state rules over all; or somcy united
in  relation  of  equality with each other, rule over all the others; or
all together rule over each individually, including themselves. The form
of  the  state  is  therefore  either  autocratic,  or  aristocratic, or
democratic Hegel claims, however, that "purely quantitative distinctions
like  these  are  only  superficial and do not afford the concept of the
thing."  The  criterion  of  number  does not seem to suffice when other
forms  of  government  are  considered. It fails to distinguish monarchy
from  tyranny or despotism, which may consist of rule by one man, as has
usually  been  the  case  historically.  Number  alone likewise fails to
distinguish  aristocracy  from  oligarchy.  In  the deliberations of the
Medean  conspirators, which Herodotus reports or invents, the rule of "a
certain  number  of  the  worthiest"  is  set against both democracy and
monarchy  and identified as "oligarchy." How, then, shall aristocracy be
distinguished  from  oligarchy.''  There  seem to be two answers to this
question.  In  the Statesman, Plato adds to the characteristic of number
the  "criterion of law and the absence of law." The holders of political
power,  whatever  their  number,  may  govern  either  according  to the
established  laws,  or by arbitrary caprice in violation of them. "To go
against  the  laws, which are based upon long experience, and the wisdom
of  counsellors  who have graciously recormnended them and persuaded the
multitude to pass them, would be,"

[109b]
Chapter   3:  ARISTOCRACY  51  the  Eleatic  Stranger  declares  in  the
Statesman^  "a  far greater and more ruinous error than any adherence to
written  law."  Taking  the division of governments according to number,
"the  principle  of  law  and  the absence of law will bisect them all."
Monarchy  divides  into  "royalty  and tyranny" depending on whether "an
individual  rules  according to law ... or governs neither by law nor by
custom,  but  .  .  .  pretends  that  he  can  only act for the best by
violating  the  laws,  while  in  reality appetite and ignorance are the
motives."  By  the  same  criterion,  the  rule of the few divides "into
aristocracy,  which  has  an  auspicious  name,  and  oligarchy."  While
democracy  is  subject  to  the same division, Plato makes the same name
apply  to  both  its  good  and  bad  forms.  The  second  way  in which
aristocracy differs from oligarchy is also brought out in the Statesman.
Since  "the  science  of  government," according to Plato, is "among the
greatest  of  all  sciences and most difficult to acquire . . . any true
form  of  government  can  only be supposed to be the government of one,
two,  or,  at any rate, of a few . . . really found to possess science."
Because  of  this  demand  for  "science,"  which presupposes virtue and
competence  in  ruling,  monarchy  and aristocracy came to be defined as
government  by  the  single  best  man  or  by  the  few best men in the
community.  A  high  degree of competence or virtue is, however, not the
only  mark  by  which  the  few  may be distinguished from the many. The
possession  of  wealth  or property in any sizeable amount also seems to
divide  a small class in the community from the rest, and Plato at times
refers  to  aristocracy  simply  as  the  government of the rich. Yet if
wealth  is  the  criterion  by  which the few are chosen to govern, then
oligarchy  results, at least in contrast to that sense of aristocracy in
which  the criterion is excellence of mind and character. Aristocracy is
called aristocracy, writes Aristotle, "either because the rulers are the
best  men, or because they have at heart the best interests of the state
and  of  the  citizens."  By these additional criteria— never by numbers
alone—  the  ancients  conceive  aristocracy.  When it is so defined, it
always  appears to be a good form of government, but never the only good
form, or even the best. The same

[110a]
52  THE  GREAT  IDEAS criteria also place monarchy among the good forms,
and—at  least in Plato's StatesTnan—democracy is a third good form, when
it  is  lawful  government  by  the  many,  the  many being competent or
virtuous  to some degree. In this triad of good forms, aristocracy ranks
second-best,  because  government  by  one  man  is  supposed to be more
efficient,  or  because,  in the hierarchy of excellence, the few may be
superior,  but only the one can be supreme. Aristotle, however, seems to
rank  aristocracy  above monarchy. "If we call the rule of many men, who
are  all of them good, aristocracy, and the rule of one man royalty," he
writes,  "then  aristocracy will be better for states than royalty." The
introduction  of  democracy  into the comparison tends to complicate the
discussion.  Not  only  are the many usually the poor, but they are also
seldom  considered pre-eminent in virtue or competence. According to the
way  in  which  either  wealth  or human excellence is distributed, both
oligarchy  and  aristocracy organize the political community in terms of
inequalities  in status, power, and privilege. This fact leads Rousseau,
for  example,  to  use  the different kinds of inequality among men as a
basis  for distinguishing "three sorts of aristocracy—natural, elective,
and hereditary." Natural aristocracy, according to Rousseau, is based on
that  inequality  among  men  which is due primarily to age and is found
among  simple  peoples,  where  "the young bowed without question to the
authority  of  experience." Elective aristocracy arose "in proportion as
artificial  inequality  produced by institutions became predominant over
natural inequality, and riches or power were put before age." This form,
in  Rousseau's  opinion,  is  "the  best, and is aristocracy properly so
called."  The  third,  which  is  characterized  as  "the  worst  of all
governments,"  came  about  when "the transmission of the father's power
along  with  his  goods to his children, by creating patrician families,
made  government  hereditary."  This  emphasis upon inequality radically
separates   aristocracy   from   democracy.   From   Aristotle  down  to
Montesquieu,  Rousseau, and our own day, equality has been recognized as
the  distinctive  element of democracy. Disregarding slaves who, for the
ancients, were political

[110b]
pariahs, Aristotle makes liberty the other mark of democracy—all freemen
having, apart from wealth or virtue, an equal claim to political status.
As  "the  principle  of  an aristocracy is virtue," Aristotle writes, so
wealth  is  the principle "of an oligarchy, and freedom of a democracy."
,:  rJ To the defenders of democracy, ancient or modern, aristocracy and
oligarchy  stand  together,  at least negatively, in their denial of the
principle  of equality. To the defenders of aristocracy, oligarchy is as
far  removed as democracy, since both oligarchy and democracy neglect or
underestimate  the  importance  of  virtue  in organizing the state. Yet
oligarchy  more  than  democracy  is  the  characteristic  perversion of
aristocracy.  It  also  puts  government in the hands of the few, but it
substitutes wealth for virtue as the criterion. The democratic critic of
aristocracy  usually calls attention to the way in which oligarchy tries
to  wear  the  mask  of  aristocracy.  However far apart aristocracy and
oligarchy  may be in definition, he insists that in actual practice they
tend  to  become  identical, in proportion as wealth, or noble birth, or
social  class  is  taken  as  the  sign of intrinsic qualities which are
thought  to  deserve  special  political  recognition.  The defenders of
aristocracy  have  admitted  the  tendency of aristocratic government to
degenerate  into  oligarchy.  Its  critics  are  not satisfied with this
admission.  They  deny  that  aristocracy  has ever existed in purity of
principle  they deny that the governing few have ever been chosen solely
for their virtue. Machiavelli assumes it to be a generally accepted fact
that "the nobles wish to rule and oppress the people . . . and give vent
to  their  ambitions."  Montesquieu,  although more optimistic about the
possibility  of a truly virtuous aristocracy, recognizes its tendency to
profit  at the expense of the people. To overcome this he would have the
laws make it "an essential point . . . that the nobles themselves should
not  levy  the taxes ... and should likewise forbid the nobles all kinds
of  commerce  .  .  .  and  abolish the right of primogeniture among the
nobles,  to  the  end  that  by a continual division of the inheritances
their  fortunes  may  be always upon a level." But perhaps the strongest
attack upon aristocracy in all of the great political books is

[111a]
made  by  Mill  in  his  Representative  Government. He admits that "the
governments  which  have been remarkable in history for sustained mental
abihty  and  vigour  in  the  conduct  of  affairs  have  generally been
aristocracies."  But  he  claims  that,  whatever  their abilities, such
governments  were  "essentially  bureaucracies,"  and  the  "dignity and
estimation"  of  their  ruling members were "quite different things from
the  prosperity  or  happiness  of the general body of the citizens, and
were often wholly incompatible with it." When their actions are dictated
by  "sinister  interests," as frequently happens, the aristocratic class
"assumes   to  themselves  an  endless  variety  of  unjust  privileges,
sometimes  benefiting  their  pockets  at  the  expense  of  the people,
sometimes  merely  tending  to  exalt them above others, or, what is the
same  thing in different words, to degrade others below themselves." Yet
except by those political thinkers who deny the distinction between good
and  bad  government,  and hence the relevance of virtue to institutions
which  are  solely  expressions  of power, the aristocratic principle is
seldom, entirely rejected. Even when the notion of a pure aristocracy is
dismissed   as  an  ideal  w^hich  can  never  be  fully  realized,  the
aristocratic  principle  reappears  as  a  counsel  of perfection in the
improvement  of  other  forms  of  government.  Even  so, one difficulty
remains,  which  tends  to  prevent  aristocracy  from being realized in
practice,  quite  apart from any question of its soundness in principle.
It  lies  in  the  reluctance  of  the best men to assume the burdens of
public  office.  The  parable  told  in  the  Book  of Judges applies to
aristocracy  as  much  as to monarchy. The trees went forth on a time to
anoint  a  king  over them; and they said unto the oHve tree, Reign thou
over  us.  But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
wherewith  by  me they honor God and man, and go to be promoted over the
trees? And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.
But  the  fig tree said unto them. Should I forsake my sweetness, and my
good  fruit,  and  go to be promoted over the trees? Then said the trees
unto  the  vine.  Come  thou, and reign over us. And the. vine said unto
them,  Should  I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be
promoted over the trees?

[111b]
Chapter 3: ARISTOCRACY 53 Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come
thou,  and  reign  over  us. And tlic hramhle said unto the trees, If in
truth  ye  anoint  me  king over you, then come and put your trust in my
shndow:  and  if  not,  let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the
cedars  of  Lebanon. Socrates thinks he has a solution for this problem.
In the Republic, he proposes a new way to induce good men to rule. Since
"money and honor have no attraction for them," necessity, Socrates says,
"must  be laid upon them, and they must be induced to serve from fear of
punishment.  .  .  . Now the worst part of the punishment is that he who
refuses  to rule is liable to be ruled by one who is worse than himself.
And the fear of this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office . .
.  not  under  the  idea  that  they  are  going  to have any benefit or
enjoyment  themselves, but as a necessity, and because they are not able
to  commit the task of ruling to anyone who is better than them' selves,
or   indeed   as   good."  The  political  issues,  in  which  monarchy,
aristocracy,  oligarchy, and democracy represent the major alternatives,
cannot   be  clarified  without  recourse  to  the  distinction  between
government by laws and government by men. It has already been noted that
in  the Statesman Plato makes respect for the law^s and violation of the
laws  the  marks  of  good  and bad government respectively. But he also
proposes  that  "the  best thing of all is not that the law should rule,
but  that  a  man  should  rule,  supposing him to have wisdom and royal
power." The imperfections of law could then be avoided, because one or a
few men of almost superhuman wisdom would govern their inferiors even as
the  gods  could direct the affairs of men without the aid of estabhshed
laws.  But if no man is a god in relation to other men, then, in Plato's
opinion,  it is better for laws or customs to be supreme, and for men to
rule  in accordance The larger issue conceiTiing rule by law and rule by
men  is discussed in the chapters on Constitution and Monarchy. But here
we  must  observe  how  the  difference  between these two types of rule
affects  the understanding of all other forms of government. This can be
seen in terms of Aristotle's distinction between royal

[112a]
54 THE GREAT IDEAS and political government, which closely resembles the
modern  conception  of  the  difference  between  absolute  or  despotic
government  on  the one hand, and limited, constitutional, or republican
government  on  the other. There are passages in which Aristotle regards
absolute rule by one or a few superior men as the divine or godlike form
of  government.  When one man or a few excel "all the others together in
virtue,  and  both  rulers and subjects are fitted, the one to rule, the
others  to  be  ruled,"  it  is  right,  in Aristotle's opinion, for the
government   to   be   royal   or  absolute  rather  than  political  or
constitutional—whether  one  man  rules  or a few. "Royal rule is of the
nature  of an aristocracy," he says. "It is based upon merit, whether of
the  individual or of his family." But in other passages Aristotle seems
to  regard  absolute government as a despotic regime, appropriate to the
family  and  the  primitive  tribe, but not to the state, in which it is
better for equals to rule and be ruled in turn. In either case, it makes
a difference to the meaning of aristocracy, as also to monarchy, whether
it  be  conceived  as  absolute or constitutional government. When it is
conceived as absolute government, aristocracy differs from monarchy only
on  the  point  of  numbers—  the  few as opposed to the one. Otherwise,
aristocracy  and  monarchy  are  defended  in  the same way. The defense
usually  takes  one  of two directions. One line of argument which stems
from  Plato  and  Aristotle  claims  that inequality in wisdom or virtue
between  ruler  and  ruled  justifies absolute rule by the superior. The
other  line  is  followed by those who, like Hobbes, maintain that since
sovereignty  is  absolute,  unlimited,  and  indivisible, the difference
between  kinds of government "consisteth not in the difference of Power,
but  in the difference of Convenience, or Aptitude to produce the Peace,
and  Security  of  the  people."  When  they  are  conceived as forms of
absolute  government, aristocracy and monarchy are attacked for the same
reason;  to  those  who  regard absolutism or despotism in government as
unjust  because  it  violates  the  basic  equality  of men, an absolute
monarchy  and  a  despotic  aristocracy  are  both  unjust. Aristocracy,
however,  can  also  be  conceived as a form or aspect of constitutional
govern-

[112b]
ment.  Montesquieu,  for  example,  divides governments into "repubhcan,
monarchical,  and  despotic,"  and  under  "republican" places those "in
which  the  body,  or  only  a  part,  of the people is possessed of the
supreme  power," thus including both democracy and aristocracy. In both,
laws,  not men, are supreme, but the spirit of the laws is different. In
democracy,  the "spring," or principle, "by which it is made to act," is
virtue resting on equality; in aristocracy, "moderation is the very soul
...  a  moderation . . . founded on virtue, not that which proceeds from
indolence  and  pusillanimity."  Hegel's comment on this theory deserves
mention.  "The  fact  that  'moderation'  is  cited  as the principle of
aristocracy,"  he  writes,  "implies  the  beginning  at this point of a
divorce  between  public authority and private interest." For Aristotle,
in  contrast to Montesquieu, the two major types of constitution are the
democratic  and  the  oligarchical, according as free-birth or wealth is
made   the   chief  quaUfication  for  citizenship  and  public  office.
Aristocracy  enters  the discussion of constitutional governments mainly
in connection with the construction of the polity or mixed constitution.
Although  in most states "the fusion goes no further than the attempt to
unite the freedom of the poor and the wealth of the rich," he points out
that  "there  are three grounds on which men claim an equal share in the
government,  freedom,  wealth,  and  virtue."  When  the  fusion goes no
further than the attempt to unite the freedom of the poor and the wealth
of the rich, "the admixture of the two elements," Aristotle says, is "to
be  called  a  polity."  But  sometimes  the  mixture  of democracy with
oligarchy   may  include  an  ingredient  of  aristocracy,  as  in  "the
distribution  of  offices  according to merit." The union of these three
elements  "is  to  be called aristocracy or the government of the best,"
and  "more  than  any  other form of government, except the true and the
ideal,"  it has, in Aristotle's judgment, "a right to this name." Polity
and aristocracy, as mixed constitutions, are fusions of some of the same
elements; hence, he says, it is "obvious that they are not very unlike."
Beginning  in  the  i8th  century,  and  with the rise of representative
government, the discus-

[113a]
sion  of  aristocracy  as  a  distinct  form  of  government  is largely
superceded  by  the  consideration  of  the  role which the aristocratic
principle  plays  in  the  development  of  republican institutions. The
writers of The Federalist, for example, respond in several places to the
charge  that  the constitution which they are defending shows tendencies
toward  aristocracy or oligarchy. Yet in their consideration and defense
of  the  new  instrument  of  government as essentially republican, they
frequently  appeal  to  principles  that  arc aristocratic in nature. In
giving  their own meanings to the terms "republic" and "pure democracy"—
that  is,  government by elected representatives on the one hand, and by
the  direct  participation  of  the  whole  people  on  the  other—  the
Federalists  also  give  an  aristocratic  bent  to  the  very notion of
representation.  They  seem to share the opinion of Montesquieu that "as
most  citizens  have sufficient ability to choose, though unqualified to
be  chosen,  so  the people, though capable of calling others to account
for  their  administration,  are incapable of conducting administrations
themselves."  Thus Madison praises "the delegation of the government ...
to a small number of citizens elected by the rest" as tending "to refine
and  * enlarge the public views, by passing them through the medium of a
chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern the true interest
of  their  country." He further points out that "it may well happen that
the  public voice, pronounced by the representatives of the people, will
be more consonant to the pub-
[lic good
than  if  pronounced  by  the  people  i  themselves,  convened  for the
purpose."  On  such  a  view,  the people's representatives ment. in the
legislature,  or  other  branches  of government, are supposed to be not
their   minions,  but  their  betters.  For  the  American  constitu-  ,
tionalists,  as  for  Edmund  Burke,  the  representI  ative  serves his
constituents by making independent decisions for the common good, not by
doing  their  bidding.  This theory of representation, to which Mill and
other   democratic   thinkers   agree   in   part,   supposes  that  the
representative  knows  better  than  his  constituents what is for their
good.  The  eftbrt  to ensure leadership by superior men may involve the
aristocratic principle, yet

[113b]
Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 55 it is also claimed by Hamilton, Madison, and
Jay  to be a necessary safeguard for popular government. The senate, for
instance,  is  not only to provide elder statesmen, but is also to serve
as "a salutary check on the government . . .
[which] doubles the security to the people, by
requiring   the  concurrence  of  two  distinct  bodies  in  schemes  of
usurpation  or  perfidy,  where  the ambition or corruption of one would
otherwise be sufficient." The electoral college aims directly at placing
the  immediate  election  of  the  president  in  the hands of "men most
capable  of  analyzing  the qualities adapted to the station . . . under
circumstances favorable to deliberation." In addition it may serve as an
"obstacle  .  . . opposed to cabal, intrigue, and corruption," which are
the  "most  deadly  adversaries  of republican government." In all these
respects,  as well as in the restrictions on suffrage which it permitted
the  states  to  impose,  the unamended American constitution appears to
have  adopted  an  aristocratic  principle  in  government.  Whether the
motivation of its proponents was in fact simply aristocratic, or whether
it was partly or even largely oligarchical—leadership being the right of
men  of "good" family and substantial property—will always be a question
to  be  decided  in the light of the documents and the relevant historic
evidence.  More democratic than the American constitutionalists of the 1
8th century, certainly so with regard to the extension of suffrage, John
Stuart  Mill  appears to be no less concerned than they are to introduce
aristocratic    elements    into   the   structure   of   representative
governAccording to Mill, two grave dangers confront a democracy: "Danger
of  a  low  grade of intelligence in the representative body, and in the
popular  opinion  which  controls it; and danger of class legislation on
the part of the numerical majority." Claiming that much of the blame for
both  dangers  lies in the rule of the majority. Mill looks for means to
overcome  the  situation  in  which  "the numerical majority . . . alone
possess  practically  any  voice in the His major remedy was a system of
proportional representation. This would supposedly

[114a]
56  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  constitute  a  democratic improvement by securing
representation for "every minority in the whole nation ... on principles
of  equal  justice."  But  it may also serve to increase an aristocratic
element,  since  it  "affords  the  best  security  for the intellectual
qualifications  desirable in the representatives." This would be brought
about  by  making  possible  the  election  of  "hundreds of able men of
independent  thought,  who would have no chance whatever of being chosen
by  the  majority,"  with  the  result that Parliament would contain the
"very  elite  of  the  country."  To make still more certain that men of
superior  political  intelligence  exert an effect upon government, Mill
also   proposes   a   plurality  of  votes  for  the  educated  and  the
establishment  of  an  upper  legislative  chamber  based on a specially
qualified  membership.  Such  proposals seem to indicate Mill's leanings
toward aristocracy, not only because they aim at procuring a "government
of the best," but also because they are designed to prevent a government
based  on a majority of "manual labourers" with the consequent danger of
"too  low a standard of poUtical intelligence." The issues raised by the
theory  of  aristocracy, or by the aristocratic principle in government,
seem  to  be  basically the same in all centuries, however different the
terms or the context in which they are expressed. Even when, as today, a
purely  aristocratic  form  of  government  does  not  present a genuine
political  alternative  to  peoples  who  have espoused democracy, there
remains  the  sense  that  pure  or  unqualified democracy is an equally
undesirable   extreme.   The  qualifications  proposed  usually  add  an
aristocratic  leaven.  One issue concerns the equality and inequality of
men.  The  affirmation that all men are created equal does not exclude a
recognition  of  their  individual  inequalities—  the wide diversity of
human  talents  and  the  uneven  distribution of intelligence and other
abilities. Nor does it mean that all m^en use their native endowments to
good  purpose  or  in  the  same degree to acquire skill or knowledge or
virtue. To grasp the double truth— that no man is essentially more human
than another, though one may have more of certain human abilities

[114b]
than  another—  is to see some necessity for the admixture of democratic
and  aristocratic  principles  in constructing a political constitution.
But  the  issue is whether distributive justice requires, as a matter of
right,  that  the  best  men  should  rule  or  hold public office. Some
political  philosophers,  like  Plato  and  Aristotle,  tend to take the
aristocratic  view  that men of superior ability have a right to govern—
that  for  them  to  be  ruled  by their inferiors would be unjust. This
theory places greater emphasis on the inequality than on the equality of
men.  Their  democratic opponents insist that the equality of men as men
is  the  fundamental fact and the only fact having a bearing on the just
distribution   of  suffrage.  That  certain  individuals  have  superior
aptitude  for the exercise of political authority docs not automatically
confer  that  authority  upon  them.  The inequality of m.en in merit or
talent  does  not establish a political right, as does their equality in
human  nature.  The  selection  of the best men for public office is, on
this  theory,  not  a  matter of justice, but of expediency or prudence.
Another  issue  concerns  the  weight  to  be  given  the opinion of the
majority  as  against  the  opinion  of  the wise or the expert when, as
frequently  happens,  these opinions diverge or conflict. As the chapter
on   Opinion  indicates,  the  experts  themselves  disagree  about  the
soundness  of  the  popular  judgment.  Where  Thucydides  believes that
"ordinary  men  usually  manage  public  affairs  better than their more
gifted  fellows," because "the latter are always wanting to appear wiser
than  the laws," Herodotus observes that "it seems easier to deceive the
multitude  than  one man." Where Hegel holds it to be "a dangerous and a
false prejudice, that the People alone have reason and insight, and know
what justice is," John Jay declares that "the people of any country (if,
like  the  Americans,  intelligent  and  wellinformed)  seldom adopt and
steadily  persevere  for  many  years in an erroneous opinion respecting
their interests," and Hamilton adds that "the people commonly intend the
public  good." Sometimes the same author seems to take both sides of the
issue,  as  Aristotle  does  when, though he says that "a multitude is a
better judge of many things than any individual," he

[115a]
yet  prefers  government  by the one or few who are eminent in wisdom or
virtue.  Each  side,  perhaps,  contributes  only  part  of  the  truth.
Certainly  those  who acknowledge a political wisdom in the preponderant
voice  of the many, but who also recognize another wisdom in the skilled
judgment of the few, cannot wish to exclude either from exerting its due
influence  upon  the course of government. Still another issue has to do
with  education.  Shall  educational  opportunity be as universal as the
franchise?  Shall  those  whose native endowments fit them for political
leadership  be trained differently or more extensively than their fellow
citizens?  Shall  vocational education be given to the many, and liberal
education  be reserved for the few? These questions provide some measure
of   the   extent   to   which  anyone's  thinking  is  aristocratic  or
democratic—or  involves  some  admixture  of  both strains. In the great
discussion  of  these  questions and issues, there is one everOUTLINE OF
TOPICS  1.  The  general  theory  and  evaluation  of  aristocracy  I a.
Aristocracy  as  a good form of government lb. Criticisms of aristocracy
as  unrealizable or unjust 2. The relation of aristocracy to other forms
of   government   2a.  Aristocracy  and  monarchy  2b.  Aristocracy  and
constitutional   government:   the  polity  or  mixed  constitution  2c.
Aristocracy  and democracy 2d. Aristocracy and oligarchy 26. Aristocracy
and   tyranny   3.   The   causes   of  degeneration  or  instabiUty  in
aristocracies:  aristocracy  and revolution 4. Aristocracy and the issue
of rule by men as opposed to rule by law 5. The training of those fitted
for  rule:  aristocratic  theories  of education 6. The selection of the
best men for public office: the aristocratic theory of representation in
modern constitutional government 7. Historic and poetic exemplifications
of aristocracy 62

[115b]
Chapter 3: ARISTOCRACY 57 present ambiguity. We have already noted it in
considering  the  reality of the line between aristocracy and oligarchy.
The agreement or disagreement of Mill and Aristotle, of Burke and Plato,
of  Hamilton  and Paine, of Veblcn and Pareto, or John Dewey and Matthew
Arnold  cannot  be  judged  without  determining whether the distinction
between  the  many  and the few derives from nature or convention. It is
this  distinction  which Jefferson had in mind when, writing to Adams in
1813, he said, "There is a natural aristocracy among men. The grounds of
this  are  virtue  and  talents  .  .  .  There  is  also  an artificial
aristocracy  founded  on  wealth  and  birth,  without  either virtue or
talents;  for with these it would belong to the first class. The natural
aristocracy  I  consider  as  the  most precious gift of nature, for the
instruction,  the trusts, the government of society . . . The artificial
aristocracy  is  a  mischievous  ingredient in government, and provision
should be made to prevent its ascendancy." PAGE 58 59 60 61

[116a]
58  THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. 1. The general
theory  and  evaluation  of  aristocracy  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi,
107c-108c 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii-vii, 316a-401d / Statesman, 598b-604b
/  Laws,  bk hi, 665c666c; 669d-672a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10
[1160^321161*2] 413a-b; ch ii [1161*23-25] 413c / Politics, BK HI, ch 7
[1279*33-37] 476d; ch
9
[1281*2-8] 478c-d; ch 15 [1286V5] 484d; ch
17 [1288*8-10] 486d; ch 18 487a,c; bk iv, ch 7 493a-b; ch 8
[1294*9-24] 493d-494a; ch
14
[1298^5-10]
499a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^32-39] 608a-b
20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANs 229b-230c; q
105,  a  i,  ans  307d309d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104d-lC'^a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  319-324  229b-230b;  335  232b;  337-338 232b-233a 35
Locke:  Civil Government, ch x, sect 132 55a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  ii,  6b- 7c; BK III, lOc-lla; bk v, 23a-25a; bk vii, 45b-c 38
Rousseau:   Inequality,  359a-c  /  Social  Contract,  BK  III,  410b-c;
411c-412c; 418c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-d

[116b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. Forexample, in 53 James :Pi>'(r/!6>/o^^,116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side ofthe
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g..
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (Z))  //  Esdras,  7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. la.
Aristocracy as a good form of government Old Testament: Exodus, 18:13-26
/ Deuteronomy, 1:9-17 / Proverbs, 29:2 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-2
{D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-2 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107d-108a 6
ThvCYDiDES  :  Peloponnesian  War, bk iv, 478d479b 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iii-iv,  339b-350a; bk VIII, 401d-402d / Timaeus, 442a-443b / Statesman,
598b-604b esp 603d-604b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch ii [1161*23-24]
413c  / Politics, BK III, CH 7 [1279*28-38] 476d; CH 15 [1286^3-7] 484d;
ch  18  487a,c;  bk  iv,  CH  7  493a-b;  ch  8 [1294*9-24] 493d-494a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47a-48d  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk xi, 106a-107b 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218d219b  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95,  A  4,  ANS  229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans
307d-309d  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp  ACT  I,  sc I
[51-192] 351d-353c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk ii, 7c 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 411c-412a 43 Mill: Representative Government,
340a-c,  353b-354b; 363d-364b 44 BoswELL:/oA;7io«, 125c-d; 141a; 211b-c;
220b

[117a]
\b  to  lb  Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 59 \h. Criticisms of aristocracy as
unrealizable or unjust 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 108b-c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesiatj War, bk vi, 520a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 368c-369c; bk
vi,  380b-383a;  bk vii, 401c-d; bk ix, 426d-427b 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk  hi,  ch  10-13  478d483a; bk iv, ch 8 [i293''2i-28] 493c 15 Tacitus:
Histories, bk i, 193c-194a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 105a; part iv,
273a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xi, sect 138 57b-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk ii, 7c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411 d 42
Kan't:   Science  of  Right,  442c-d;  445a-c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  366a-367b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 297
99b  /  Philosophy  of  History, part iv, 356c357a; 365a 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto, 420c 2. The relation of aristocracy to other forms
of  government  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 107c-108c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 579c-590c passim 7 Plato: Republic, bk i,
301c-d;  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  esp  bk  viii,  401d-402d / Statesman,
598b-604b / Laws, bk hi, 669d-672a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3
[1131^24-29]
378d;  bk  viii, ch io-ii 412c-413d / Politics^ bk hi, ch 5 [1278^15-34]
475b-c; ch 7 476c477a; ch 13
[1284*3-^34] 482a-483a; ch
15
[1286^8-22] 484d-485a; ch 17 [i287^37]-ch 18
[1288*37] 486c-487a,c; bk iv, ch 2 [1289*26-^4]
488b-c; ch 3 [1290*13-29] 489b; ch 14 [1298* 34-^10] 498d-499a; ch 15
[1299^20-1300*8]
500b-d;  ch  16  [1301*10-16]  502c/  Rhetoric,  bk  I,  CH  8 608a-c 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
Q95,  A  4, ANS 229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans 307d309d 23Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  73b; part ii, 104d-108b passim; 154b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 304
227b-228a  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch xi, sect
138  57b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii-hi 4a13d esp bk ii, 4a,
6b-7c,  bk hi, lOc-lla; bk VI, 34d-35a; bk viii, 56b-57c; bk xii, 90b-c;
bk XV, 109a-b; bk xviii, 125a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-c / Social
Contract,  bk  hi,  410b-c; 415d; 418c; bk iv, 427a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  81c-d  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 450a-452a esp 450b-d 43
Federalist:  number  39,  125b-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
363b-369b passim; 387c-d

[117b]
d  y  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273, 90d-91c; par 279,
94b  2a. Aristocracy and monarchy 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c
7  Plato: Republic, bk iv, 355d-356a / Statesman, 598b-604b 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  7  476c-477a;  ch  13  [1284*3-35] 482a-c; ch 15
[1286*23-^8] 484c-d esp [1286^4-8] 484d; ch 16 [1287^8-35] 486a-c; ch 17
[1288*5-25]  486c-487a;  ch 18 487a,c; bk iv, ch 2 [1289*26-35] 488b; bk
v, CH 10
[i3io*39-*'i4]
512d-513a;
[i3io*'3i1311*8] 513b / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 8 608a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 97b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  v,  ch 12, 218d219b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A
4, ANS 229b- 230c; q 105, a i, ans and rep 1-2 307d-309d 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  iv  7a-8a;  ch  ix 14c-16a passim; ch xix, 27a-b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  104d-109a  passim;  part hi, 201a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 6b-8c; bk hi, lOc-lld; bk v, 23a-25d; 32b-c; bk
viii,  53d-54a;  bk  xi,  75b-d;  77b-c;  bk  xii, 90c; bk xx, 147a-d 38
Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk hi, 418c 39 S:vhth: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  308b-c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81c-d 43 Federalist: number 17,
70a-d  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 351d-352b; 366a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  273,  90c-91d;  par  279,  94b /
Philosophy  of  History part iv, 356d-357a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi, 241c-242b; bk IX, 384c-388a,c; epilogue i, 668a-669c 2b, Aristocracy
and  constitutional  government:  the  polity  or  mixed  constitution 6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk viii, 579d'580d; 581b-c; 582a; 587a-b;
588a-589a;  590a-b  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 7 476c-477a; BK IV,
CH 8 493c-494a; ch ii
[1295*31-34]
495b-c; ch 14 [1298^5-10] 499a; bk v, ch 7
[1307*5-27]
509a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^22-1366*2] 608a-b
14  Plutarch  :  Lycurgus,  34d  / Dion, 800c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv,
72a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ans 229b-230c;
q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d309d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a;
6b-8c;  BK  V,  21d-22c; bk viii, 52c; bk xi, 71d-72b; 75b-d; 76c-77c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 81c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 439c-440a;
450a43  Federalist:  number 39, 125b-d; number 63, 194b-195b; number 71,
216a-b

[118a]
60  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (2. The relation of aristocracy to other forms of
government. 2b. Aristocracy and constitutional government: the polity or
mixed  constitution.)  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 353d-354b;
406a-409c;  419b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 279, 94b /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  275b-  ;  -  276a; 277c-d; part iv,
356d-357a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi, 238c-243d passim, esp
241c-242b;  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c  passim 2c. Aristocracy and democracy 6
Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
vi, 520ac; 533a-c; bk viii, 579c-581c; 582b-c; 590a-b 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  viii,  401d-402d;  408b409d  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  9  Aristotle:
Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281*39-
^25]  479b-c; ch 13 [1284^3-^^25] 482a-d; bk iv, CH 7 [1293^12-18] 493b;
bk v, ch 7 [1307^5-27] 509a-b; ch 8
[i307b39-i3o8'^24]
510a-b;
[1308^31-1309*10] 511a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^22-1366*2] 608a-b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d / Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-c / Dion, 792d-802a,c
esp  800c  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 97b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  95,  A  4,  ANS  229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans 307d-309d 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch ix 14c-16a passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
104d-105a 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-47]
351a-d; act ii, sc i [1-106] 361a-362a; act hi, sc I [140-161] 370d-371a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 294 225b-226b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii,
4a-7c;  bk  hi,  9b-lla; bk v, 23a-b; 23d; bk vii, 44d45c; BK VIII, 51d;
53d-54a;  bk  ix,  58b;  bk  x,  64a-d;  bk  xii,  90b-c; bk xv, 109b 38
Rousseau:  Political Economy, 369c-d / Social Contract, bk iv, 427a-d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-d 43
Federalist:  number  39,  125b-d; number 57 176d-179b passim; number 58,
181b-c;   number   60,   185b-187a   43   Mill:   Liberty,  298b-299a  /
Representative  Government,  353b-354b; 364b-d; 366a-369b passim; 376b-c
44 Boswell: Johnson, 125c-d; 141a; 211b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi, par 273, 91b-c; par 279, 94b / Philosophy of History, PART II,
275b-276a;   277c-d;  part  hi,  285b-d;  310a-c  2c?.  Aristocracy  and
oligarchy  7  Plato:  Republic, bk vhi, 401d-402d; 405c407a / Statesman,
598b-604b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3
[1131*24-29]
378d; BK viii, ch 10
[1160^11-16]
412d;

[118b]
2c to 3
[1160^32-1161*2] 413a-b / Politics, bk ii, ch ig
[1272*27-^10]
468c-469a;  ch  ii  469a-470b;  BK  III,  ch 5 [1278*15-24] 475b-c; ch 7
476c477a esp
[1279^4-10]
476d-477a; ch 13
[i283*25-b26]481b-d; CH 15 [1286^12-16] 485a;
BK IV, CH 2
[1289*26-^4]
488b-c; ch 4
[1290^17-20]
489d; ch 5
[1292*39-^6] 491d492a; ch 7 [1293^2-12] 493a-b; ch 8 [1293^301294*28] 493c-494a; ch
12
[1297*6-9] 497b;
BK V, CH 7 508c-509d; ch 12
[1316*39-^10]
519c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [1365^22-1366*6]  608a-b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-37b;  47a-48a  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 35d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 95, a 4, ANS 229b-230c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xvi
[64-78]
23a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  104d-105a; part IV, 273a-b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7b-c;  bk  V,  23a-25a; bk xx,
151c-152a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 419b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  hi,  165c-166a; BK V, 309c-310d 42 Kant: Science of Right,
450a-c   43   Federalist:   number  63,  194d  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  363d-364d  46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part ii, 277c-d;
part   hi,   292d-293b   2e.   Aristocracy  and  tyranny  6  Thucydides:
Pelopomiesian  War, bk vi, 533a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 401d-402d;
bk  viiiIX,  411d-421a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b passim, esp 603b-604b /
Laws, bk iv, 679c-680b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 10
[1310*401311*7]
512d-513b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^32-1366*6] 608a-b
15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk i, 193c-194a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica ,
part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  4,  ANS 229b-230c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
273a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  380  238a  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
xviii,  sect  201  71c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a; bk VI,
34d-35a;  bk  viii,  52c-d;  bk  xi,  70c;  78d79b;  BK  XV,  109a-b  43
Federalist:  number 47, 153d; number 48, 157b-c; number 70, 213d-214a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRight,  part  hi,  par  273,  91c  / Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  277c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk. i, 9b-c;
epilogue  I,  668a-669d  3. The causes of degeneration or instability in
aristocracies:  aristocracy  and  revolution  Old  Testament:  / Samuel,
7:15-8:5— (D) /A:/«^/, 7:15-8:5 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 108b-c

[119a]
4  /o 6 Chapter 3: ARISTOCRACY 61 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk v,
482d483a; bk viii, 579c-583c; 587a-589a; 590a c 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi
iv,  339b-350a;  uk  VIII, 403a-404a / Critias, 485a-c / Seventh Letter,
806d-807b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[i27o''7-34]
466d-467a; en 12 [i273^36-i274"7] 470c; bk III, CH 15
[1286^12-16]
485a; bk v, ch 3
[1303*2-10] 504b-c; CH 4
[1304*18-29] 505d506a; ch 7 508c-509d; ch 8 [i307^39-i3o8»24]
510a-b;  ch 12 [1316^39-^3] 519c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 35c-d; 47a-48a /
Coriolanus, 180a-184a / Lysander, 36la-368a,c / Cains Gracchus, 683b-c /
Cicero, 708a-b 15 Tacitl;s: Annals, bk i, lb-2a; 3a-b / Histories, BK I,
193c-194a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xvi
[64-78]
23a-b;  paradise,  xv-xvi 128b-132a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch iv 7a-8a;
en ix 14c-16a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 158a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk ii, 6c-7b; BK III, lOc-lla; BK V, 23a'25a; bk vii, 45b; BK
viii,  52c-53a;  bk  x,  64a-d; bk xii, 91c92b; bk xiii, 96d-97a; bk xx,
151c-152a  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 411c-d; 418c-419b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 420b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 451a
43  Federalist:  number  17,  70a-d  43 Mill: Representative Government,
366a-367b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 273, 91c /
Philosophy  of History, part iv, 355d357a esp 356c-357a; 364a-b 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  423d424b; 429c-430b 51 Tolstoy: War ajid
Peace,  epilogue i, 666c669d 4. Aristocracy and the issue of rule by men
as  opposed to rule by law 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 380b-c / Statesman,
598b-604b / Seventh Letter, 806d-807b 9 Aristotle :Po//V/W, bk hi, ch 10
[1281*29-38]  479a;  ch 13 [1284*3-18] 482a-b;cH 15 [1286*7- ^8] 484b-d;
ch  17  486c-487a  esp [1288*5-14] 486c-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
273a-c  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch xviii, sect 199202 71a-72a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 4a; bk viii, 52c; bk xi, 69a-c 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right, 450d-451d 5. The training of those fitted for
rule: aristocratic theories of education Old Testament: Exodus, 18:13-26
/  Deuteronomy,  1:9-17  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:24-34—  (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  38:25-39  7  Plato:  Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-339a; bk
vivii, 383b-401d esp bk vii, 389d-401d /

[119b]
Timaeus,  442c-d  /  Statesman,  607b 608a / Laws, BK VII, 728b; bk xii,
794b-798b esp 796d-798b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 4 [1277*14-^15]
474a-d;  ch  18  487a,  c;  bk  iv,  ch 15 [1:500*^-8] 500d; bk VI, ch 8
[i322*'37-i323*6] 526d; bk VII, ch 14
[i332''i3-i33^*i6]
537b-538a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 8 [i365*'32-39l 608a-b 14 Pli:tarch:
Lycurgus,  38a-45c  /  Alcibiades,  156b-158b / Marcus Cato, 286c-287b /
Lysander,  354b,d-355a  /  Dion,  781b,d-788b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
34c-d;  bk  xiii,  125d126a  /  Histories,  bk iv, 267c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, viii
[115148] 118b-c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d; part i, 94b'c; PART II, 112d; 154a;
158c-d;  164a,c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19d;
24a-30c; bk ii, 75a-77a; 78b-33b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 60a-62a; 63d-64a;
71d72b 26 Shakespeare: Taming of the Shrew, act i, sc I [1-45] 202c-203a
/  Ist  Henry  IV,  act i, sc II [218-240] 437c-d / Henry V, act i, sc i
[2266]  533b-c / As You Like It, act i, sc i [1-28] 597a-b 29 Cervantes:
Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  332c336a;  362a-c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
29b-31a;  part  iv, 158a-b; 166b-167a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
v,  18d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 347c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  86c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 508d-509d 43 Mill: Liberty,
298b-299a  /  Representative  Government, 384a-387d; 415a-417c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 169 145d / Philosophy of History, part
hi,  310a-c; part IV, 368a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 244d-245c
6.  The  selection  of  the best men for public office: the aristocratic
theory   of  representation  in  modern  constitutional  government  Old
Testament:  Genesis, 41:33-40 / Exodus, 18:13-26 / Deuteronomy, 1:9-18 /
Judges esp 9:8-15 / / Samuel, 1:1-25:1— (D) / Kings, 1:1-25:1 / / Kings,
3:5-15—   (D)  ///  Kings,  3:5-15  /  II  Chronicles,  1:7-12—  (D)  //
Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 / Proverbs, 29:2 / Daniel, 6:1-4 Apocrypha: Wisdom
ofSolomon,  6;  9— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 6; 9 / Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-3—
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-3 5 Euripides: Electra [367-400] 330c-d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 93c; 107d-108a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  ii, 396cd; BK III, 425b-c; bk iv, 478d; bk vi, 520b-c 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  44d-45b  / Republic, bk ii, 319a-320c; bk hi, 339b-341a; bk
v, 369c370a; bk vi, 373c-375b; 383b-d; bk vii.

[120a]
(6.  The  selection  of the best men for public office: the aristocratic
theory of representation in modem constitutional government^ 390b-391b /
Statesman,  598b-604b;  608c-d  / Laws, BK VI, 697a-705c passim; bk xii,
786b787b; 794b-799a,c esp 796d-798b / Sevanh Letter, 807a-b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[1270^71271^17] 466d-467b; ch
ii
[1272^33-1273*2]
469b-c; [1273*22-^7] 469d-470a; bk hi, ch 4
[1277*13-23] 474a'b; ch 5 [1278*40-^5] 475d;
CH 7
[1279*24-^4] 476c-d; ch
10-13 478d483a; ch 15 [1286*22-^14] 484c-485a; ch 16
[1287^12-14] 486a; ch 18 487a,c; bk iv, ch 7
[1293^2-21]
493a-b; ch 8
[1294*9-24] 493d494a; ch 14 [1298^5-10] 499a; ch 15 [1300*9-
^4]  500d-501b;  bk v, ch 8 [1308^31-1309*10] 511a-b; ch 9 [1309*33-^13]
511c-d; bk vi, ch 4
[1318^21-1319*4] 522b-c; bk vii, ch 9 [1328^
33-1329*17] 533b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^32-39] 608a-b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45c-d  /  Lysander, 365a366a / Lysandcr-Sulla,
387d-388a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  105d-107b  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 92, A I, rep 3 213c-214c; q 105, a i, ans and
rep  1-2  307d-309d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part ii, 136b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   364b-365a;  452a-d  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc
352b-353a;  act ii 361a-369a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, 46b; CH
viii,  sect  105-112 48c-51b passim 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28b-29a;
part ii, 73a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4d-5a; BK in, lOc-
lla;  bk v, 21d-22c; bk xi, 71a-72b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi,
412b-c;  BK IV, 427a-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271d; BK
V, 309c-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 61d-62a 43 Constitution of the
U.S. : article i, sect 2
[11-16] lib; sect 3
[67-72] 12a; article
ii, sect I 14b-15a; sect 2
[424-439]
15b;  amendments, XII 18a-c 43 Federalist: number 3, 33d-34a; number 10,
51d-53a;  number  28,  98a; number 35, 113a-114b; number 52-63 165a-195b
passim,  esp  number  57,  176d-177a;  number 68 205b207a; number 76-77,
225a-229b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  290d-291a;  320c-322a  /  Representative
Government,   336b-337a;   338a-b;   341d-424c  passim,  esp  363b-366a,
384a-387d;  439d-442a  44 B0SWEI.1.: Johnson, 125c-d; 141a; 178b-c; 191c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 279, 94b-c; par 291-295
97d-99a; par 308 102c-

[120b]
62  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6/0  7  103a;  additions,  169 145d; 182 148c-d /
Philosophy  of History, part ii, 277c-d; part IV, 368b-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk vi, 241c-242b 7. Historic and poetic exemplifications of
aristocracy  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 107c-108d; bk v, 160d-161a 6
Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  1, 355a356a; bk ii, 409a; bk hi,
434c-438b  passim;  bk  iv,  458d-459c;  463a-b;  465c; 478d-479b; bk V,
482d-483a;  bk  vi,  533a-c;  bk  viii,  568d569a;579c-590c 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch 9 [1270^7-34] 466d-467a; bk v, ch 7 [1307*27-^24]
509b-d  / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-4 i 553a-572a passim, esp ch 23-26
563c-565a  14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d  /  Romulus, 20c-21a / Lycurgus
32a-48d / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp 126d-127a / Coriolanus, 174b,d-184a /
Aristides,  263c-266a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i, lb-2a; 3a-b; bk ii,
32b-d;  34a-c;  bk  iv,  65a-c;  72a-b;  bk  vi, 97b; BK XI, 105d-107b /
Histories,  bk  i, 193c-194a; 212a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch
12, 218d219b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, viii
[i 12-139] 65c-d
22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Wife of Bath [6701-6758] 274b-275b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  181d-183c  27  Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc III
[33-54] 108c / AWs Well That Ends Well, ACT II, SC III
[i 15-15 1 ] 152c-153a / Coriolanus
351a-392a,c  esp  act  i,  sc  i  [1-47]  351a-d,  act  II, sc I [1-106]
361a-362a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part ii, 73a-76b; part iv, 157a-158b 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 6b-7c; bk V, 23a-25a; bk vii, 45b-c;
bk xi, 76c-84c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369c-d / Social Contract,
bk  hi,  418c-d  [fn  2] 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 165b-181a,c
passim 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 61d-62a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
71d-73c  passim; 217d-219a; 387d-390b passim; 427d-428a; 452d-456a,c esp
452d-453a,c,  453a-b;  570d;  574b-582c; 588a-589a 43 Federalist: number
17,  70a-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  363d-364d  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  ii, 277c-d; PART III, 285b-d; 310a-c; part
iv,  368b-d  50  Marx:  Capital,  355d-364a  esp  356a-357a,  359a-c  50
Makk-^.nge'ls: Communist Manifesto,^\9h,6.; 420b-c; 423d-424b; 429c-430b
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 384c-388a,c

[121a]
CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general theory of the forms of government, see
Government  2-2e.  Other chapters on particular forms of government, i^^
Constitution;  Democracy;  Monarchy;  Oligarchy;  Tyranny;  and  for the
conception  of  the  ideal  state,  see  State  6-6b.  The comparison of
aristocratic  with  democratic  theories of education, see Education 8d.
Discussions  of  the  role of virtue in political theory, in relation to
citizenship  and  public  office,  see  Citizen 5; Virtue and Vice y-yd.
Another  discussion  of  the  theory of representation, see Constitution
g-^h. The role of honor in the organization of the state, and the theory
of  timocracy,  see Honor 4a. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works
not  included  in  Great  Boo^s ofthe Western World, but relevant to the
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided
into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  I. Dante. Contnvio{The Banquet), fourth
treatise, CH 10-14 Spinoza. Tractatus Politicus {Political Treatise), ch
8-10 II. Volsung Saga Spenser. The Faerie Queene Campanella. a Discourse
Touching  the  Spanish  Monarchy  FiLMER.  Patriarcha Harrington. Oceana
Sevigne.  Letters  A.  Sidney.  Discourses Concerning Government Millar.
Observations  Concerning  the  Distinction  of  Ran!{s in Society Paine.
Common Sense J. Adams. A Defense ofthe Constitutions of Government ofthe
United  States  of  America  Jefferson.  Notes  on the State of Virginia
Sieyes.  An  Essay on Privileges Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning Political
Justice,  BK  V,  CH  lO-II,  13 Burke. An Appealfrom the New to the Old
Whigs  .  Letter  to  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe  . Letter to a Noble Lord
Austen.  Pride  and  Prejudice  J.  Mill.  An Essay on Government, iii-v
Stendhal. The Red and the Blacl{ Balzac. Gobsec)^ Tocqueville. Democracy
in America Thackeray. Vanity Fair Gobineau. The Inequality ofHuman Races
Emerson. "Aristocracy," in English Traits

[121b]
Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY  63  Montalembert.  On  Constitutional  Liberty
Arnold.  Culture  and  Anarchy  Whit\l\n.  Democratic  Vistas Kenan. The
Future of Science . Philosophical Dialogues H. James. The American T. H.
Huxley.  Methods  and  Results,  vi-vii  Ibsen.  An  Enemy of the People
Nietzsche.  Thus  Spal^e  Zarathustra  MoscA.  The Ruling Class Mallock.
Social Equality . Aristocracy and Evolution T. Veblen. The Theory of the
Leisure  Class  Santayana. Reason in Society, ch 4 BouGLE. Essais sur le
regime  des castes Sorel. Reflexions on Violence Wendell. The Privileged
Classes  Shaw.  Socialism and Superior Brains Wells. The New Machiavelli
Weber. Essays in Sociology, part iv PoNsoNBY. The Decline of Aristocracy
P.  E. More. Aristocracy and Justice Pareto. The Mind and Society Bryce.
Modern  Democracies,  part  i, ch 7; part hi, CH75 Dewey. The Public and
Its  Problems Mai ret. Aristocracy and the Meaning of Class Rule Tawney.
Equality  Bergson.  Two Sources of Morality and Religion, CH I, pp 62-82
J. B. S. Haldane. The Inequality of Man Nock. The Theory of Education in
the  United  States Madariaga. Anarchy or Hierarchy Landtman. The Origin
ofthe  Inequality  ofthe  Social  Classes  T.S.Eliot.  Notes Towards the
Definition of Culture

[122a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  word  "art"  has  a  range  of  meanings which may be
obscured  by  the  current  disposition  to use the word in an extremely
restricted   sense.   In  contemporary  thought,  art  is  most  readily
associated  with  beauty;  yet its historic connections with utility and
knowledge  are  probably  more  intimate  and  pervasive.  The prevalent
popular association reflects a tendency in the 19th century to annex the
theory'  of  art to aesthetics. This naturally led to the identification
of  art with one kind of art —the so-called "fine arts," "beaux arts" or
"Schone Klinste" (arts of the beautiful). The contraction of meaning has
gone  so  far  that  the word "art" sometimes signifies one group of the
fine  arts—painting  and  sculpture—as in the common phrase "literature,
music, and the fine arts." This restricted usage has become so customary
that  we  ordinarily  refer to a museum of art or to an art exhibit in a
manner which seems to assume that the word "art" is exclusively the name
for  something  which  can  be hung on a wall or placed on a pedestal. A
moment's  thought  will,  of  course, correct the assumption. We are not
unfamiliar  with the conception of medicine and teaching as arts. We are
acquainted  with  such  phrases  as  "the industrial arts" and "arts and
crafts"  in  which  the reference is to the production of useful things.
Our  discussions  of liberal education should require us to consider the
liberal  arts  which,  however  defined  or  enumerated, are supposed to
constitute  skills  of  mind.  We  recognize  that  "art" is the root of
"artisan"  as well as "artist." We thus discern the presence of skill in
even the lowest forms of productive labor. Seeing it also as the root of
"artifice"  and  "artificial," we realize that art is distinguished from
and sometimes even opposed to nature.

[122b]
Chapter  4:  ART The ancient and traditional meanings are all present in
our  daily  vocabulary. In our thought the first connotation of "art" is
fine  art;  in  the  thought  of  all previous eras the useful arts came
first.  As  late  as the end of the i8th century, Adam Smith follows the
traditional  usage  which  begins  with  Plato when, in referring to the
production  of  a woolen coat, he says: "The shepherd, the sorter of the
wool,  the  woolcomber  or carder, the dyer, the scribbler, the spinner,
the  weaver,  the  fuller,  the dresser, with many others, must all join
their different arts in order to complete even this hom.ely production."
In  the  first great conversation on art— that presented in the Platonic
dialogues—we  find  useful techniques and everyday skills typifying art,
by  reference to which all other skills are analyzed. Even when Socrates
analyzes  the  art  of the rhetorician, as in the Gorgias, he constantly
turns  to  the  productions  of  the  cobbler  and the weaver and to the
procedures  of the husbandman and the physician. If the liberal arts are
praised  as  highest,  because  the logician or rhetorician works in the
medium  of the soul rather than in matter, they are called arts "only in
a  manner of speaking" and by comparison with the fundamental arts which
handle  physical  material.  The  Promethean  gift of fire to men, which
raised them from a brutish existence, carried with it various techniques
for  mastering  matter  — the basic useful arts. Lucretius, writing in a
line  that  goes  from Homer through Thucydides and Plato to Bacon, Adam
Smith,  and  Rousseau,  attributes  the progress of civilization and the
difference between civilized and primitive society to the development of
the  arts  and  sciences.  "Ships and tillage, walls, laws, arms, roads,
dress,  and all such like things, all the prizes, all the elegancies too
of life without 64

[123a]
J  exception,  poems,  pictures,  and  the  chiselling  of  fine-wrought
statues, all these things practiced together with the acquired knowledge
of  the untiring mind taught men by slow degrees as they advanced on the
way  step  by  step." At the beginning of this progress Lucretius places
man's  discovery of the arts of metalworking, domesticating animals, and
cultivating the soil. "Metallurgy and agriculture," says Rousseau, "were
the  two  arts  which  produced this great revolution"— the advance from
primitive  to civilized life. The fine arts and the speculative sciences
come last, not first, in the progress of civilization. The fine arts and
the  speculative  sciences  complete  human life. They are not necessary
—except  perhaps  for  the  good  life. They are the dedication of human
leisure and its best fruit. The leisure without which they neither could
come into being nor prosper is found for man and fostered by the work of
the  useful  arts. Aristotle tells us that is "why the mathematical arts
were founded in Egypt; for there the priestly caste was allowed to be at
leisure." There is another ambiguity in the reference of the word "art."
Sometimes  we  use it to name the effects produced by human workmanship.
We  elliptically  refer  to  wor\s  ofart2iS art. Sometimes we use it to
signify  the  cause  of the things produced by human work— that skill of
mind  which  directs the hand in its manipulation of matter. Art is both
in  the artist and in the work of art— in the one as cause, in the other
as  the  effect.  What is effected is a certain ennoblement of matter, a
transformation  produced  not  merely  by  the  hand  of man, but by his
thought  or  knowledge. H<io>.o The more generic meaning of art seems to
be that of art as cause rather than as effect. There are many spheres of
art  in  which no tangible product results, as in navigation or military
strategy.  We  might,  of course, call a landfall or a victory a work of
art,  but  we  tend  rather  to speak of the art of the navigator or the
general.  So,  too, in medicine and teaching, we look upon the health or
knowledge  which  results from healing or teaching as natural. We do not
find  art  in them, but rather in the skill of the healer or teacher who
has helped

[123b]
Chapter  4:  ART ^ to produce that result. Hence even in the case of the
shoe  or  the  statue, art seems to be primarily in the mind and work of
the  cobbler  or sculptor and only derivatively in the objects produced.
Aristotle,  in  defining  art  as  a "capacity to make, involving a true
course  of  reasoning," identifies it with making as distinct from doing
and  knowing.  Though art, like science and moral action, belongs to the
mind  and  involves experience and learning, imagination and thought, it
is distinct from both in aiming at production, in being knowledge oi how
to  make  something or to obtain a desired effect. Science, on the other
hand,  is  knowledge  that  something is the case, or that a thing has a
certain  nature.  Knowledge is sometimes identified with science, to the
exclusion  of  art  or  skill;  but  we  depart  from this narrow notion
whenever  we  recognize that skill consists in l^owing how to make some-
"Even  in  speculative  matters," writes Aquinas, "there is something by
way  of  work;  e.g., the making of a syllogism, or a fitting speech, or
the work of counting or measuring. Hence whatever habits are ordained to
suchlike  works of the speculative reason, are, by a kind of comparison,
called  arts indeed, but liberal arts, in order to distinguish them from
those arts which are ordained to works done by the body, which arts are,
in  a fashion, servile, inasmuch as the body is in servile subjection to
the  soul, and man as regards his soul is free. On the other hand, those
sciences  which  are  not  ordained  to  any  suchlike  work, are called
sciences  simply, and not arts." The discussion of medicine in the great
books  throws  light on the relation of art and science, in their origin
as  well as their development. Hippocrates writes of medicine as both an
art  and  a  science.  In his treatise on Ancient Medicine^ he says, "It
appears  to me necessary to every physician to be skilled in nature, and
strive  to  know—if  he would wish to perform his duties —what man is in
relation   to  the  articles  of  food  and  drink,  and  to  his  other
occupations,  and what are the effects of each of them on every one. And
it is not enough to know simply that cheese is a bad article of food, as
disagreeing  with  whoever  eats  of  it  to  satiety,  but what sort of
disturbance it creates, and wherefore,

[124a]
66  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and  with what principle in man it disagrees. . .
Whoever  does  not  know  what  effect  these things produce upon a man,
cannot  know  the  consequences which result from them, nor how to apply
them."  As  a  science,  medicine  involves  knowledge  of the causes of
disease,  the  different  kinds  of  diseases,  and their characteristic
courses. Without such knowledge, diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy would
be  a  matter of guesswork of chance, as Hippocrates says—or at best the
application  of  rule-ofthumb  in  the light of past experience. But the
scientific  knowledge  does  not  by  itself  make  a  man  a  healer, a
practitioner  of  medicine.  The  practice  of  medicine requires art in
addition  to  science—art  based on science, but going beyond science in
formulating  general  rules  for  the guidance of practice in particular
cases.  The  habit of proceeding according to rules derived from science
distinguishes  for  Galen  the artist in medicine from the mere empiric.
The  antithesis  of  artist and empiric —suggesting the contrast between
operation  by tested rule and operation by trial and error—parallels the
antithesis between scientist and man of opinion. It has seldom, if ever,
been  suggested  that  an  art can be originally discovered or developed
apart  from some science of the subject matter with which the art deals.
This does not mean that an individual cannot acquire the habit of an art
without  being  taught  the relevant scientific knowledge. An art can be
learned  by  practice;  skill  can  be  formed by repeated acts. But the
teacher  of  an art cannot direct the learning without setting rules for
his  pupils  to follow; and if the truth or intelligibility of the rules
is  questioned,  the  answers  will come from the science underlying the
art. According to Kant, "every art presupposes rules which are laid down
as  the  foundation  which first enables a product if it is to be called
one  of  art, to be represented as possible." In the case of "fine art,"
which  he  distinguishes from other kinds of art as being the product of
"genius,"  Kant  claims that it arises only from "a talent for producing
that  for  which no definite rule can be given." Yet he maintains that a
"rule"  is still at its basis and may be "gathered from the performance,
i.e., from the product,

[124b]
.  which  others  may use to put their own talent to the test." Granting
that  there  is  no  art  without  science,  is the reverse true, and is
science possible without art } The question has two meanings. First, are
there  arts  peculiarly  indispensable  to the development of science.!*
Second,  does  every  science  generate a correlative art and through it
work productively ? Traditionally, the liberal arts have been considered
indispensable  to science. This has been held to be particularly true of
logic.  Because they were intended to serve as the instrument or the art
for  all  the  sciences, Aristotle's logical treatises, which constitute
the first systematic treatment of the subject, deserve the title Organon
which  they  traditionally carry. Bacon's Novum Organum was in one sense
an  effort  to supply a new logic or art for science, and to institute a
renovation  of the sciences by the experimental method. As an art, logic
consists  of  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the mind in the processes of
inquiry, inference, definition, and demonstration, by which sciences are
constructed.  Scientific  method  is,  in  short,  the  art  of  getting
scientific  knowledge. In the experimental sciences, there are auxiliary
arts—arts   controlling   the   instruments  or  apparatus  employed  in
experimentation.  The experiment itself is a work of art, combining many
techniques and using many products of art: the water-clock, the inclined
plane,  and  the pendulum of Galileo; the prisms, mirrors, and lenses of
Newton.  The  second question—whether all sciences have related arts and
through  them productive power— raises one of the great issues about the
nature  of scientific knowledge, discussed in the chapters on Philosophy
and Science, For Francis Bacon, and to some extent Descartes, art is the
necessary consequence of science. At the beginning of the Novum Organum,
Bacon  declares that "knowledge and human power are synonymous since the
ignorance of the cause frustrates the effect; for nature is only subdued
by  submission,  and  that which in contemplative philosophy corresponds
with the cause, in practical science becomes the rule.'* The distinction
Bacon  makes  here  between  the  speculative  and  practical  parts  of
knowledge corresponds to the distinction between science

[125a]
and  art, or as we sometimes say, "pure and applied science." He opposes
their  divorce  from  one  another.  If  science  is  the  indispensable
foundation  of art and consists in a knowledge of causes, art in Bacon's
view is the whole fruit of science, for it applies that knowledge to the
production  of effects. His theory of science and his new method for its
development  are  directed  to  the  establishment of man's "empire over
creation" which "is founded on the arts and sciences alone." Just as the
present  state  of the arts accounts for "the immense difference between
men's  lives  in  the most polished countries of Europe, and in any wild
and  barbarous region of the new Indies," so further advances in science
promise  the  untold  power of new inventions and techniques. On Bacon's
view,  not only the value, but even the vaHdity, of scientific knowledge
is  to  be  measured  by  its  productivity. A useless natural science—a
science   of   nature  which  cannot  be  used  to  control  nature—  is
unthinkable.  With  the  exception of mathematics, every science has its
appropriate  magic  or  special  productive  power. Even metaphysics, in
Bacon's  conception  of  it,  has its "true natural magic, which is that
great  liberty  and  latitude  of  operation  which  dependeth  upon the
knowledge  of  forms." The opposite answer to the question about science
and art is given by Plato, Aristotle, and others who distinguish between
speculative  and  productive  sciences.  They  differ  from Bacon on the
verbal  level  by  using  the  word "practical" for those sciences which
concern  moral  and  political  action  rather  than  the  production of
effects.  The  sciences  Bacon calls "practical" they call "productive,"
but  under  either  name  these  are  the sciences of making rather than
doing—sciences  which  belong in the sphere of art rather than prudence.
But  the  significant  difference  lies  in the evaluation of the purely
speculative  sciences  which  consist  in  knowledge  for  its own sake,
divorced  from  art  and morals, or from the utilities of production and
the  necessities  of  action.  In  tracing  the history of the sciences,
Aristotle  notes  that  those  men  who first found the useful arts were
thought  wise  and  superior. '*But as more arts were invented, and some
were

[125b]
Chapter  4:  ART  67  directed  to  the  necessities  of life, others to
recreation,  the  inventors of the latter were naturally always regarded
as  wiser  than  the inventors of the former, because their branches did
not  aim  at  utility.  Hence,  when  all  such  inventions were already
established,  the sciences which do not aim at giving pleasure or at the
necessities  of  life were discovered, and first in the places where men
first  began  to  have  leisure.  ...  So  that the man of experience is
thought  to  be  wiser  than  the  possessors  of  any  sense-perception
whatever, the artist wiser than the man of experience, the master-worker
than  the mechanic, and the theoretical kinds of knowledge to be more of
the  nature  of Wisdom than the productive." That the theoretic sciences
are  useless,  in the sense of not providing men with the necessities or
pleasures  of  life,  is  a mark of their superiority. They give what is
better than such utility— the insight and understanding which constitute
wisdom.  The  Baconian  reply  condemns the conception that there can be
knowledge  which  is merely contemplation of the truth. It announces the
revolution  which,  for  John  Dewey,  ushered  in the modern world. The
pragmatic  theory of knowledge had its origin in a conception of science
at  every  point  fused with art. The ancients, trying to understand the
natural  phenomena of change and generation, found that the processes of
artistic  production  provided  them  with  an  analytic  model. Through
understanding  how he himself worked in making things, man might come to
know  how  nature  worked.  When  a  man  makes  a house or a statue, he
transforms matter. Changes in shape and position occur. The plan or idea
in  the  artist's  mind comes, through his manipulation of matter, to be
embodied and realized objectively. To the ancients a number of different
causes   or   factors   seemed   to   be   involved  in  every  artistic
production—material to be worked on; the activity of the artist at work;
the  form  in  his  mind  which  he sought to impose on the matter, thus
transforming  it;  and  the  purpose  which motivated his effort. In the
medical  tradition  from  Aristotle  through  Galen  to Harvey, there is
constant emphasis upon the artistic activity of nature.

[126a]
158  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Galen continually argues against those who do not
conceive  Nature  as an artist. Harvey consciously compares the activity
of  nature in biological generation to that of an artist. "Like a potter
she  first  divides  her material, and then indicates the head and trunk
and  extremities;  like  a  painter,  she  first  sketches  the parts in
outline,  and then fills them in with colours; or like the ship-builder,
who  first lays down his keel by way of foundation, and upon this raises
the  ribs  and  roof  or  deck: even as he builds his vessel does nature
fashion  the  trunk of the body and add the extremities." Of all natural
changes,  the one most closely resembling artistic production appears to
be  generation,  especially  the  production  of living things by living
things.  In  both  cases, a new individual seems to come into being. But
upon  further  examination,  artistic  production and natural generation
reveal  significant  differences  —differences  which divide nature from
art.  Aquinas  considers  both and distinguishes them in his analysis of
divine  causation. In things not generated by chance, he points out that
there  are  two different ways in which the form that is in the agent is
passed  on to another being. "In some agents the form of the thing to be
made  pre-exists according to its natural being, as in those that act by
their  nature; as a man generates a man, or fire generates fire. Whereas
in other agents the form of the thing to be made pre-exists according to
intelligible  being, as in those that act by the intellect; and thus the
likeness  of a house pre-exists in the mind of the builder. And this may
be  called the idea of the house, since the builder intends to build his
house  like  to  the  form  conceived  in  his mind." Thus in biological
procreation  the  progeny  have  the  form  of  their  parents—a  rabbit
producing  a  rabbit,  a horse, a horse. But in artistic production, the
product  has,  not the form of the artist, but the form he has conceived
in his mind and which he seeks to objectify. Furthermore, in generation,
and  in  other natural changes as well, the matterwhich undergoes change
seems  to  have  in itself a tendency to become whatsit changes into, as
for  example  the  acorn  naturally  tends to become an oak, whereas the
oaken  wood  does not have in itself any tendency to become a chair or a
bed. The material the

[126b]
artist works on is entirely passive with respect to the change he wishes
to produce. The artistic result is in this sense entirely of his making.
The  realm  of art, or of the artificial, is then opposed to the natural
and  differentiated  from  it.  Kant, for whom art is distinguished from
nature  "as  making is from acting or operating in general," claims that
"by  right,  it is only production through freedom, i.e., through an act
of  will  that  places reason at the basis of its action, that should be
termed  art."  Consequently,  art is that which would not have come into
being  without  human  intervention.  The man-made object is produced by
man, not in any way, but specifically by his intelligence, by the reason
which  makes him free. Animals other than man are apparently productive,
but  the  question  is  whether  they can be called "artists." "A spider
conducts  operations  that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to
shame  many  an  architect  in  the  construction  of  her  cells. But,"
according to Marx, "what distinguishes the worst architect from the best
of  bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination
before  he  erects  it in reality. At the end of every labourprocess, we
get  a result that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at
its  commencement.  He not only effects a change of form in the material
on  which he works, but he also realizes a purpose of his own that gives
the  law  to  his  modus  operandi, and to which he must subordinate his
will."  As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Animal,  some writers, like
Montaigne,  attribute  the productivity of animals to reason rather than
to  instinct.  Art  then ceases to be one of man's distinctions from the
brutes.  But  if man alone has reason, and if the productions of art are
works  of  reason,  then  those  who  refer  to animals as artists speak
metaphorically, on the basis of what Kant calls "an analogy with art . .
.  As  soon  as  we  call  to  mind,"  he  continues,  "that no rational
deliberation forms the basis of their labor, we see at once that it is a
product  of  their nature (of instinct), and it is only to their Creator
that we ascribe it as art." - ?';iji:>^/ja*jii This in turn leads to the
question  whether  nature itself is a work of art. "Let me suppose," the
Eleatic  Stranger says in the Sophist, "that things which are said to be
made by nature

[127a]
are the work of divine art, and that things which arc made by man out of
these  are  the  work ol human art. And so there are two kinds of making
and  production, the one human and the other divine." If we suppose that
the  things  of  nature  are  originally made by a divine mind, how does
their  production  differ  from  the  work  of  human  artists,  or from
biological  generation?  One answer, given in Plato's Timaeus, conceives
the  original  production of things as a fashioning of primordial matter
in  the  patterns  set  by  the  eternal  archetypes or ideas. In consey
quence,  the divine work would be more like ; human artistry than either
would  be  like  natural reproduction. The emanation of the world i from
the  One, according to Plotinus, and the production of things out of the
substance of God in Spinoza's theory, appear, on the other , hand, to be
more   closely  analogous  to  natural  generation  than  to  art.  Both
analogies—of  creation  with  art  and  with generation—are dismissed as
false  by Christian theologians. God's making is absolutely creative. It
presupposes no matter to be formed; nor do things issue forth from God's
own  substance, but out of nothing. Thus Augustine asks: "How didst Thou
mal^  the heaven and the earth V And he answers: **It was not as a human
artificer, forming one body from another, according to the discretion of
his  mind, which can in some way invest with such a form, as it seeth in
itself  b)'  its  inward eye . . . Verily, neither in the heaven, nor in
the  earth,  didst  Thou  ma^e  heaven  and  earth\ ! nor in the air, or
waters, seeing these also be- ' long to the heaven and the earth; nor in
the  whole  world  didst Thou make the whole world; because there was no
place  where  to make it, before it was made, that it might be . , . For
what  is,  but  because Thou art } Therefore Thou spa\esty and they were
made,  and  in  Thy Word , Thou madest them.'" According to this view, I
human art cannot be called creative, and God cannot be called an artist,
except   metaphorically.   The  issue  concerning  various  theories  of
creation,  or of the origin of the universe, is discussed in the chapter
on  World.  But here we must observe that, according to the view we take
of the simihtude between human and di-

[127b]
Chapter  4: ART 69 vine workmanship, the Hne we arc able to draw between
the  realms of art and nature becomes shadowy or sharp. Thf. discussions
of  art  in  the  great  books  afford materials from which a systematic
classification  of  the arts might be constructed, but only fragments of
such  a  classification  are ever explicitly presented. For example, the
seven  liberal  arts  are  enumerated  by  various  authors,  but  their
distinction  from other arts, and their ordered relation to one another,
do  not  receive  full  explication.  There  is no treatment of grammar,
rhetoric,  and logic (or dialectic) to parallel Plato's consideration of
arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy in the Republic, nor is there
any  analysis of the relation of the first three arts to the other four—
traditionally  organized  as the trivium and the quadrivium. However, in
Augustine's  work  On  Christian  Doctrine we have a discussion of these
arts  as  they are ordered to the study of theology. That orientation of
the  liberal  arts  is  also the theme of Bonaventura's Reduction of the
Arts to Theology. Quite apart from the problem of hov>- they are ordered
to  one  another,  particular  liberal arts receive so rich and varied a
discussion in the tradition of the great books that the consideration of
them  must  be  distributed  among  a number of chapters, such as Logic,
Rhetoric, Language (for the discussion of grammar), and Mathematics. The
principles of classification of the fine arts are laid down by Kant from
"the  analogy  which  art  bears  to the mode of expression of which men
avail  themselves  in speech, with a view to communicating themselves to
one  another as completely as possible." Since such expression "consists
in  word,  gesture,  and  tone," he finds three corresponding fine arts:
"the  art  of  speech,  formative  art,  and  the  art  of  the  play of
sensations."  In these terms he analyzes rhetoric and poetry, sculpture,
architecture,   painting   and  landscape  gardening,  and  A  different
principle   of   division  is  indicated  in  the  opening  chapters  of
Aristotle's Poetics. The principle that all art imitates nature suggests
the   possibility  of  distinguishing  and  relating  the  various  arts
according to their char-

[128a]
70 THE GREAT IDEAS acteristic differences as imitations— by reference to
the object imitated and to the medium and manner in which it is imitated
by  the  poet,  sculptor  or  painter,  and  musician. "Color and form,"
Aristotle  writes,  "are  used  as  means  by some . . . who imitate and
portray many things by their aid, and the voice is used by others. . . .
Rhythm  alone, without harmony, is the means in the dancer's imitations.
.  .  .  There  is,  further,  an  art which imitates by language alone,
without  harmony,  in  prose  or  in  verse." Aristotle's treatise deals
mainly with this art—poetry; it does not develop for the other fine arts
the  analysis it suggests. Aristotle's principle also suggests questions
about  the  useful  arts. Are such arts as shoemaking and house-building
imitations of nature in the same sense as poetry and music? Does the way
in  which  the  farmer,  the  physician,  and the teacher imitate nature
distinguish  these  three  arts  from  the  way  in which a statue is an
imitation,  or  poem,  or  a  house?  The  Aristotelian dictum about art
imitating  nature  has,  of  course,  been  as  frequently challenged as
approved.  Apart  from  the  issue  of  its  truth, the theory of art as
imitation poses many questions which Aristotle left unanswered. If there
are  answers  in  the  great books, they are there by implication rather
than  by  statement.  The  most  familiar  distinction between arts that
between the useful and the fine— is also the one most frequently made in
modern  discussion.  The  criterion  of  the  distinction  needs  little
explanation.  Some  of man's productions are intended to be used; others
to  be  contemplated or enjoyed. To describe them in terms of imitation,
the  products  of  the  useful  arts  must  be said to imitate a natural
function  (the  shoe,  for example, the protective function of calloused
skin).  The  imitation merely indicates the use, and it is the use which
counts. But in the products of the fine arts, the imitation of the form,
quality,  or  other  aspect  of a natural object is considered to be the
source  of  pleasure.  The  least familiar distinction among the arts is
implied  in  any  thorough  discussion, yet its divisions are seldom, if
ever,  named.  Within  the sphere of useful art, some arts work toward a
result which can hardly be regarded as an

[128b]
artificial   product.   Fruits   and   grains  would  grow  without  the
intervention  of  the  farmer,  yet  the  farmer helps them to grow more
abundantly and regularly. Health and knowledge are natural effects, even
though  the  arts  of medicine and teaching may aid in their production.
These  arts,  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on Medicine and
Education,  stand in sharp contrast to those skills whereby man produces
the  useful  things which, but for man's work, would be totally lacking.
In  the  one  case, it is the artist's activity itself which imitates or
cooperates  with  nature's  manner  of working; in the other, the things
which  the  artist  makes  by operating on passive materials supplied by
nature  imitate  natural  forms  or  functions.  For  the most part, the
industrial  arts are of the second sort. They transform dead matter into
commodities  or tools. The arts which cooperate with nature usually work
with  living  matter,  as  in  agriculture,  medicine, and teaching. The
distinction  seems  warranted  and  clear.  Yet it is cut across by Adam
Smith's  division  of labor into productive and non-productive. The work
of  agriculture is associated with industry in the production of wealth,
but whatever other use they may have, physicians and teachers, according
to  Smith,  do  not  directly  augment  the wealth of nations. If to the
foregoing  we add the division of the arts into liberal and servile, the
major  traditional  distinctions are covered. This last division had its
origin  in the recognition that some arts, like sculpture and carpentry,
could  not  effect their products except by shaping matter, whereas some
arts, like poetry or logic, were free from matter, at least in the sense
that  they  worked  productively  in  symbolic  mediums.  But  by  other
principles  of  classification,  poetry and sculpture are separated from
logic and carpentry, as fine from useful art. Logic, along with grammar,
rhetoric,  and  the  mathematical  arts,  is  separated  from poetry and
sculpture,  as  liberal from fine art. When the word "Hberal" is used to
state  this last distinction, its meaning narrows. It signifies only the
speculative  arts,  or  arts  concerned  with  processes of thinking and
knowing.  The adequacy of any classification, and the intelligibility of
its  principles, must stand the test of questions about particular arts.
The

[129a]
great  books  frequently  discuss  the  arts  of  animal  husbandry  and
navigation,  the  arts  of  cooking  and  hunting,  the  arts of war and
government.  Each  raises a question about the nature of art in general,
and  challenges  any  analysis  of the arts to classify them and explain
their  peculiarities.  There  are two other major issues which have been
debated  mainly  with  respect to the fine arts. One, already mentioned,
concerns  the  imitative character of art. The opponents of imitation do
not  deny  that there may be some perceptible resemblance between a work
of  art  and a natural object. A drama may remind us of human actions we
have  experienced; music may simulate the tonal qualities and rhythms of
the  human  voice  registering the course of the emotions. Nevertheless,
the  motivation  of  artistic  creation  lies deeper, it is said, than a
desire to imitate nature, or to find some pleasure in such resemblances.
According  to Tolstoy, the arts serve primarily as a medium of spiritual
communication,   helping  to  create  the  ties  of  human  brotherhood.
According  to  Freud,  it  is emotion or subconscious expression, rather
than imitation or communication, which is the deepest spring of art; the
poet  or  artist "forces us to become aware of our inner selves in which
the  same  impulses  are  still extant even though they are suppressed."
Freud's  theory of sublimation of emotion or desire through art seems to
connect with Aristotle's theory of emotional catharsis or purgation. But
Freud  is  attempting to account for the origin of art, and Aristotle is
trying  to  describe  an effect proper to its enjoyment. The theories of
communication,  expression,  or imitation, attempt to explain art, or at
least  its  motivation.  But  there  is  also a conception of art which,
foregoing  explanation,  leaves it a mystery— the spontaneous product of
inspi-  ;  ration, of a divine madness, the work of unfathomable genius.
We encounter this notion first, but not last, in Plato's Ion.

[129b]
Chapter 4: ART 71 The other major controversy concerns the regulation of
the  arts  by  the state for human welfare and the public good. Here, as
before,  the fine arts (chiefly poetry and music) have been the focus of
the  debate.  It  is  worth  noting, however, that a parallel problem of
political regulation occuis in the sphere of the industrial arts. On the
question  of  state  control  over  the  production  and distribution of
wealth,  Smith and Marx represent extreme opposites, as Milton and Plato
are  poles  apart  on  the  question  of the state's right to censor the
artist's  work. In this debate, Aristotle stands on Plato's side in many
particulars,  and  Mill  with  Milton.  The  problem  of  censorship  or
political  regulation of the fine arts presupposes some prior questions.
Plato  argues in the Republic that all poetry but "hymns to the gods and
praises  of  famous  men"  must be banned from the State; "for if you go
beyond this and allow the honeyed muse to enter, either in epic or lyric
verse,  not  law and the reason of mankind, which by common consent have
ever  been  deemed the best, but pleasure and pain will be the rulers in
our  State."  Such  a view presupposes a certain theory of the fine arts
and  of  their  influence on the citizens and the whole character of the
community.  Yet because both Plato and Aristotle judge that influence to
be far from negligible, they do not see any reason in individual liberty
for  the state to refrain from interfering with the rights of the artist
for  the  greater good of the community. To Milton and Mill, the measure
of the artist's influence does not affect the question of the freedom of
the  arts from political or ecclesiastical interference. While admitting
the need for protecting the interests of peace and public safety, Milton
demands:  "Give  me  the  liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely
according  to  conscience,  above  all liberties." The issue for them is
entirely  one  of  liberty.  They  espouse the cause of freedom— for the
artist  to  express  or  communicate  his  work and for the community to
receive from him whatever he has to offer.

[130a]
72  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2. Art and nature 4. Diverse classifications of the
arts:  useful  and  fine, liberal and servile 6. Art and science 6a. The
comparison  and  distinction  of  art and science ya. Art as a source of
pleasure   or   delight  8.  Art  and  emotion:  expression,  purgation,
sublimation  ga.  The  use  of  nature  by  art:  agriculture, medicine,
teaching  gc.  The arts of war training of youth ship 12. The history of
the arts: progress in art as measuring stages of civilization

[130b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE 1. The generic notion of art: skill of mind in
making y^ 2a. Causation in art and nature : artistic production compared
with  natural generation 2b. The role of matter and form in artistic and
natural  production  74  3. Art as imitation yc 5. The sources of art in
experience,  imagination,  and  inspiration  76  6b. The liberal arts as
productive  of  science:  means and methods of achieving knowledge 77 7.
The  enjoyment of the fine arts 78 yb. The judgment of excellence in art
79  9.  The  useful arts 80 gb. The production of wealth: the industrial
arts  81  gd.  The  arts  of  government 82 10. The m.oral and political
significance  of the arts 83 10a. The influence of the arts on character
and  citizenship:  the  role  of  the  arts  in  the  lob. The political
regulation  of  the  arts  for the common good: the problem of censor11.
Myths and theories concerning the origin of the arts 84

[131a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the vohimc and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homkr:  Iliad, bk ii [265 283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a- 1 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page ri6 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends  in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164 Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nchemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation of Reference St vie: for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 11. The generic notion of art:
skill  of  mind in making 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45b / Phaedrus, 136b;
138c-139a  /  Ion,  145d-146c  /  Symposium,  160c-d;  l^Ad  /  Gorgias,
260a-262a; 280d-283c / Republic, bk i, 302c-306a; 307a-308a; bk III, 333
b-d;  bkx,427c-434c/  5/j/fJw^/2,593d595a  / Philebus, 633a-c / Laws, bk
iv, 679a-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[192^23-32]
268d-269a;
[i93''i2-i6]
269d-270a; ch 8
[199^26-31] 277a
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980^25-981^34]
499b-500b; bk vii, ch 7
[1032*25-^29] 555b-d; bk ix, ch 2 571c-572a;
ch  5  573a-c;  ch  7  [1048*^35-1049*12]  574c-d  9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*25-33] 162d/ Ethics, bk i, ch 7 [1097^231098*18] 343a-c; bk vi, ch 4 388d-389a; bk
IX, ch 7
[1167*^34-1168*18] 421b-c /
Politics, BK I, CH II [i258*'35-39] 453b; bk vii, ch 13
[1331^^30-38]
536c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354*1-12] 593a; [1355*^9-14] 594d-595a; ch 2
[1355*^26-36] 595b; [1356*^26-1357*7] 596b-c
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  16,  275c 17 Plotinus: Fifth
Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch i 239b240a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxii, ch
24, . 610a -c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30 651c-d

[131b]
Chapter  4:  ART  73  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 14, A 8
82c-83b;  q 15, a i, ans 91b-92a; a 2, ans and rep 2 92a-93b; q 36, a 3,
ans  194c-195d;  Q 117, A I, ans and rep 2 595d-597c; part i-ii, Q 14, A
4,  ans  679b-d;  q 21, a 2, rep 2 718a-d; q 34, a i, rep 3 768c-769d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, AA 3-4 37b-39a; q 58, a 2,
rep  i  42a-43a;  A  5,  rep  2  44d-45c;  q  65,  a i, rep 4 70b-72a 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 437b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 333a 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 85, 121d122b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi,
61b-c  42  Kant: Judgement, 523c-524b; 525c-527b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part i, par 68 29d-30a / Philosophy ofHistory, iNTRo,176a-c; part
ii,  266a-274a; part iv, 346c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude [134-157] 4a-b
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 278b-'' 50 Marx: Capital, 85b-d 53 James:
Psychology,  186b;  774a  2.  Art  and  nature  2a. Causation in art and
nature:  artistic  production  compared with natural generation 7 Plato:
Ion,  144b  /  Symposium,  155d-157a  / Timaeus, 447a-449c / Laws, bk x,
760a-761d

[132a]
74  THE GREAT IDEAS (2. Art and nature. 2a. Causation in art and nature:
artistic  production  compared  with  natural  generation.^ 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ii
[95^3-9] 129d / Physics, bk
i, ch 8 [191*33-^9] 267b; BK II, CH i [192^^8-32] 268b,d-269a; ch2
[194^33-^8]
270d-271a; ch 8-9 275d-278a,c esp ch 8
[199*8-^7] 276b-d / Generation and
Corruption,  bk ii, ch 9 [335^18-336*13] 437b-d / Meteorology, bk iv, ch
12 [390^2-14] 494c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 [988^1-7] 506a; ch 9
[992*29-34]
510c; BK VI, CH I
[1025^18-27]
547d;  BK  VII, ch 7-9 555a-558a; bk ix, ch 2 571c-572a; ch 5 573a-c; bk
xi,  ch  7 [1064*1016] 592b-c; bk xii, ch 3 [1070*4-8] 599b 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^12-640*35] 161d-162d; [641^13-29] 164cd
/ Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 21-22 269c-271a; bk n, ch i
[734''i 7-735^5]
274c275c; CH 4 [738^18-28] 279c; [740*13-18] 281a;
[740^25-741*2] 281 d; CH 6 [743^20-25] 285a;
bk III, CH II
[762*15-20] 303b; bk iv, ch 2
[767*16-25]
308c; CH 6
[775*20-23] 317b
/  Ethics, BK I, CH 9 [1099^18-24] 345a-b; bk vi, CH 4 [1140*11-16] 388d
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 7 170c171a; CH 12 172d-173c; bk
ii,  ch  3 185a-186d; ch 6, 189a-190a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
iv  [823-857] 55a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2 259d260a; bk
vi,  sect 40 277d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr viii, ch 3-4 130a-131a /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 10 147c148b; tr IV, ch 31, 174d-175a / Fifth
Ennead, TR VIII, ch 1-2 239b-240c; ch 5, 242a; tr ix, ch 2, 247a / Sixth
Ennead, tr ii, ch ii, 275c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A
3,  ANS 106b-107c; q 36, a 3, ans 194c-195d; Q 41, A 3, ans 219d-221c; q
45,  a  2,  ans  242d244a;  q  104,  a i, ans 534c-536c; q 105, a 5, ans
542a-543b;  q  117,  a  i,  ans and rep 1-2 595d-597c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q  80,  AA 1-2 956c-958b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b; paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d; 11 [112138] 109a; vni
[91-111] 117d-118a;
xiii
[5284] 126a-b
22 Chaucer: Physician's Tale [11,941-972] 366b367a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
intro,   47a-b   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  93b-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,          385a-c;400d401a;407c;412b-415b;427d-428c;442d-443b;
443d-444c;  447d-448a;  450c; 492a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii,
251d-252a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  4  107b  33 Pascal:
Geometrical Demonstration, 437a 35 Lockb: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxvi, sect 2 217b-d

[132b]
2a  to  2c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  188c-189a  /  Judgemerit,  523c-d;
557c-558b;  564d-565b  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 327b,d-328d
passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part ii, 266a267b 50 Marx:
Capital,  85b-d  53  James:  Psychology, 186b 2b. The role of matter and
form in artistic and natural production 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 7
[191*7-12]
266d; bk ii, ch i [193*9-^19] 269b-270a; ch 2
[194*21-^^13]
270c-271a; ch 3 271a-272c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[988*1-7] 506a; bk
VII,  CH  7-9  555a-558a  esp  ch 8 556b-557b; bk viii, ch 3 [1043^5-24]
567d-568b  /  Soul, bk II, CH I [412^10-18] 642c-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*10-641^42]
162b-165a  /  Generation  of Animals, bk i, ch 20 [729*9]-ch 22 [730^32]
269b-271a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [734''8-735*io]  275a-d  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties  167a-215d esp bk II, CH 3 185a-186d 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  vii,  sect 23 281b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch 2-3 21d23a /
Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch 1-2 239b-240c; TR IX, ch 2, 247a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk xi, par 7 90d-91a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  41,  A  3,  ANS 219d-221c; q 45, a 2, ans 242d-244a; Q 47, A I, REP I
256a-257b; q 91, a 3, ans ANS 534c-536c; q 105, 486b-487d; q 104, a i, A
5,  ANS  542a-543b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, A I, ANS
710a-711c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  79,  a 2, REP 4 953b-955c; q 80, aa 1-2
956c-958b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, i [i2y-i^2] 107c-d; xni
[52-84]  126a-b  28  Harvey  : On Animal Generation^ 412b-415b 30 Bacon:
Advancement ofLearning, 17b-d; 43c45a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[468-505]
185b-186a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRight,  part  i, par 56-57 26b-27a;
additions, 32 121d-122a / Philosophy of History, intro, 165a-166b; 185c-
d;  PART  II,  266a-267b  50  Marx: Capital, 17a; 85b-c; 86d-87c 2c. The
natural  and  the  artificial as respeaively the work of God and man Old
Testament:   Genesis,   1-2  /  Leviticus,  2.6:1  /  Numbers,  33:52  /
Deuteronomy,  5:7-10; 16:2122 / Job, 37:1-40:5— (D) Job, 37-39 / Isaiah,
40:18-26—  (D)  Isaias,  40:18-26  7  Plato: Republic, bk x, 427c-428d /
Timaeus,  447a-449c  /  Sophist,  577d-578d  /  Laws, bk x, 760a-761d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk vi, sect 40 277d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the
World, 1048a

[133a]
3/0  4  Chapter  4:  ART  75  17  Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch ^i,
174d175a / Fifth Ennead, tr viii, cii 5, 242a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  xi,  par 7 90d-91a / City of God, bk xxii, ch 24, 610a-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 30 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Sumtna Theologica, part i, q
2,  a  3, ANS and rep 2 12c-14a; q 14, a 8 82c-83b; a II, ANS 84c-85c; q
15  91b-94a;  q 16, a i 94b-95c; q 17, a i lOOd-lOld; q 22, a 2, ans and
REP  3 128d-130d; q 41, a 3, ans 219d221c; QQ 44-46 238a-255d passim; qq
65-66  339a-349d  passim;  q  74,  a 3, rep i 375a377a,c; q 91, a 3, ans
486b-487d;  q  93,  a  2, rep 4 493a-d; q 103, a i, rep 1,3 528b-529a; Q
104,  a  i  534c-536c;  part  i-ii, q i, a 2 610b-611b; q 13, a 2, rep 3
673c-674c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  3,  A  8, ans
729b-730b;  part  hi  suppl, q 75, a 3, REP 4 938a-939d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b; paradise, viii
[91-111] 117d-118a; ix
[103-108] 119d; X [7-21] 120b-c;
xiii
[52-84]
126a-b; xviii
[70-117] 134b-d esp
[109-111]
134d  22  Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [11,941-972]  366b367a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  intro,  47a-b  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 427d-428c;
442d-443b; 492a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[694-735]
150b-151b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 663d-664a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
188c-189a  /  Judgement^ 521b-523d t 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 87a-b
5.  Art  as  imitation  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk xviii [478-608] 135a-136c 7
Plato:  Cratylus,  104c-106c; 108c-110d / Republic, bk ii-ih, 320c-334b;
bk  vi,  382a-c;  bk X, 427c-434c / Timaeus, 443b-d; 455b-c / j Critias,
478c-d  /  Sophist, 552c-d; 560b-561d; I 577c-579d / Statesman, 596c-d /
Lati's,  bk ii, 654a-c; 660a-662a; bk x, 760a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
ii, ch 2
[194^22-26]
I  270c  '  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch ii [1281^10-15] 479b-c; bk
viii, ch 5 [1340^14-^19] 545c-546a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37i''4-io]
615a  /  Poetics 681a-699a,c esp ch 1-5 681a-684a I 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk v
[13791383] 79a
12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2 259d260a; bk xi, sect 10 303b-c
16  Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1048a 17 Plotinus : First Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  2-3  21d-23a  /  Fourth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 10 147c-148b / Fifth
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 1-2 239b-240c; tr IX, CH 2, 247a; ch ii 250c-251a /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii, ch ii, 275c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
ii, ch 25 649b-d

[133b]
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 9, rep i 8d-9c; q 93, a 2,
rep  4  493a-d; g 117, A I, ANS 595d-597c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xi
[91
in] 16a-b; purgatory, x
[22-99]
67c-68b; xii
[10-72] 70b-71a
22  Chaucer:  Trotlus  and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 149 41a / Physician's
Tale  [11,941-972] 366b367a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part iv,
262c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [576-592] 46b; ACT III, sc 11
[1-39] 49a-b
/  Timon  of  Athens,  act  i, sc i [28-38] 393d-394a; [156160] 395b-c /
Winter's Tale, act iv, sc iv
[77-108]
508c-509a   /   Sonnets,   lxvii-lxviii  596c-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  332c-333c;  438c;  444b-c;  492b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part   i,  82c-d;  184a-185b;  part  ii,  237b-c;  251d-252a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 33c-d / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 29 159b-c 31
Descartes:  Meditations, i, 76a-b 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes, 337a-338a
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 29 176a; 32-33 176a-b; 120 195a; 134 196a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  i, div 5, 452d-453a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
121b,d-123a;   243a-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  158d  42  Kant:
Judgement,  521b-524b;  525a-528c esp 527b-528c; 557a-558b 44 BoswEi.!.:
Johnson, 196d-197a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 68 29d-30a
/   Philosophy   ofHistory,  part  i,  219b-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karatnazov, bk x, 284b-d 53 James: Psychology, 186b; 686b-688a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  265c  /  Civilization  and Its Discontents,
779c-d  4. Diverse classifications of the arts: useful and fine, liberal
and  servile  7  Plato: Euthydemus, 74b-76b / Ion, 145d148a,c/ Gorg^/a^,
253c-255c;  260a-262a;  280d282b  / Republic, bk i, 305b-306a / Sophist,
552c-553a;  560b-561d;  577c-579d  /  Statesman,  592d-593a; 593d-595a /
Philebus, 633a-635b / Latvs, BK II, 662c-663b; bk x, 760a-b 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[194*33-^9]
270d-271a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [981^1324] 500a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch 7
[1097^15-23]
342c / Politics, bk i, ch ii
[1258^9-39] 452d-453b; bk viii, ch 2 [1337^323] 542c-d / Rhetoric, bk
i,  ch  2  [1355^26-36]  595b  /  Poetics, ch 1-3 681a-682c 17 Plotinus:
Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 31, 175a / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch ii 250c-251a
18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30 651c-d

[134a]
(4.  Diverse  classifications  of the arts: useful and fine, liberal and
servile?)  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i8,  A  3, ANS
106b-107c;  q  103,  a  2,  rep  2  529a530a; part i-ii, q 8, a 2, rep 3
656a-d; q 9, A I, ANS 657d-658d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  57,  A 3, REP 3 37b-38a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii,
82c-d; BK III, 190d-191a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-70d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  251b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38c-39d;
56a-b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  85, 121d122b 42 Kant: Judgement,
524a-b;  526a-527b;  532a535d  5.  The  sources  of  art  in experience,
imagination,  and inspiration Old Testament: Exodus, 31:1-11; 35:30-36:8
4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-7] 3a; bk
ii [484-493] 14d-15a / Odyssey, bk i [i-io] 183a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124a
/ Ion 142a-148a,c / Symposium, 160c-d / Apology, 202b-d / Gorgias, 253a;
260a-262a  /  Sophist,  561b-d;  577d-579d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  684b-c  8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[100*3-9]
13^^ / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980^25-982*1] 499b-500b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[1103*26-^13]
348d-349a; bk x, ch 9
[1180^29-1181^23]
435d-436a,c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [1354*1-12] 593a; bk hi, ch i
[1404*13-19] 654b; ch 2
[1405*3-9]
655b; ch 10
[1410*^5-8]
662c / Poetics, CH 17 [1455*22-36] 690c 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine
la-9a,c  esp  par  1-8  la-3b  /  Articulations,  par 10, 94d 13 Virgil:
Eclogues, iv
[1-3] 14a; vi
[1-12] 19a
/ Aeneid, bk i
[i-ii]
103a; bk vii
[37-44]
237a  14  Plutarch: Demosthenes, 692d-695d 17 Plotinus: Fifih Ennead, tr
viii,  ch i 239b240a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 68, A 4,
rep I 91b-92c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii
[7-9]
2c; XXXII
[1-12] 47c; purgatory,
i
[1-12]
53a; XXIV [49-63] 90a-b; xxix [37-42] 98a; paradise, I [1-36] 106a-b; 11
[1-18] 107d; [91-105] 108d; XVIII
[70-117]
134b-d esp
[109-111]
134d; XXII
[112-123]
140d; xxiii
[55-69]
141d-142a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 262c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk i, 2d-3a,c; bk hi, 129c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 52d-53a;
309c-310c; 450d-451a; 523c-524a; 532a-b 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-Night'
s  Dream,  act  v, sc I [1-27] 370d-371a / Henry V, prologue 532b,d; act
hi, prologue 543c-d

[134b]
l(i  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5  to  6a 27 Shakespeare: Sonnets, xxxii 591a-b;
Lxxviii-Lxxxv   598b-599b;   c-cvi   601c-602c   28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  332c-333c  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 251 d252a;
340b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d;  38c39b 31 Descartes:
Discourse, part i, 43b / Meditations, I, 76a-b 32 Milton: On Sha\espear.
1630  1^3.  / Paradise Lost, BK I [1-26] 93b-94a; bk in [1-55] 135b136b;
bk VII
[1-39] 217a-218a; bk ix
[1-47]
247a-248a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  97a-98a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  198a-b;  302a-b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 152a-155b; 190b-191c;
273a-274c;  280a;  296b,d-298a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 185b; 627b-d
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 528c 42 Kant: Judgement, 463a-464c; 473a-c;
482b483d;  523d-524b;  525c-532a  esp  526a-d,  528c-530c;  542b-543c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-c; 176a-c; part ii, 263d-268b
47 Goethe: Faust, dedication la-b; part ii
[9945-9960] 242a
49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 288d-289a; 292a-b 50 Marx : Capital, 85b-c 53
James:  Psychology,  165b  [fn  i];  686b-688a  54 Freud: Interpretation
ofDreams,  181a-b:  239c240a;  246c-248c;  383d  / General Introduction,
483c; 600d-601b / Group Psychology, 670a-b; 692c-693a 6. Art and science
6a. The comparison and distinction of art and science 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  vi,  386d-388a;  bk  vii,  391b-398c; bk x, 427c-434c / Laws, bk iv,
684b-685a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[100*6-9] 136c / Physics, bk
ii, ch 2 [194*21- ^13] 270c-271a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980^25-982*1]
499b-500b; bk vi, ch i
[1025^18-28] 547d; BK XI, ch 7 [1064*10-18]
592b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; bk III, ch 3
[iii2*30-''io] 358b-c; bk
vi, ch 3
[1139^14-18] 388b; CH
4
[1140*10-16] 388d;
CH  5  [1140*33-^2]  389b;  ch 7 390a-d 10 Hippocrates: Regimen in Acute
Diseases,  par  3  27a-c  17  Plotinus:  Third  Enneady  tr viii, ch 3-4
130a-131a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 16, A I, ANS 94b-95c
20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, A 3, ANS and rep 1,3
37b-38a;  a 4, ANS and rep 2 38a-39a; q 95, a 2, ans 227c228c 28 Harvey:
On Animal Generation, 333a-b

[135a]
6b  to  6c  Chapter  4: ART 77 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 5b-6a;
48d-49b;  50c-51d;  53a-b  31 Descartes: Rules, i, lab / Discourse, part
VI,  61b-d  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  388d  /  Judgement, 463a'464c; 515b-c; 523d-524a; 526a-527b esp
527a-b  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv,  346c348a 53 James: Psychology, 687a-688a; 863a-866a 54 Freud:
New  Introductory Lectures, 874c-875a 6b. The liberal arts as productive
of   science:   means  and  methods  of  achieving  knowledge  7  Plato:
Protagoras,  50d-52d;  57a-c  /  Phaedrus,  134a-d;  139d-140b  /  Meno,
179d-183c  /  Gorgjas,  252a-262a  / Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; BK VII,
391b-398c / Parmenides, 491a-d / Theaetetus, 525d-526b / Sophist, 571a-c
/  Statesman,  594d-595d  /  Philebus,  610d-613a;  633a-635a  / Seventh
Letter,  809c-810d  8  Aristotle:  Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 63d64b /
Posterior Analytics 97a-137a,c esp bk i, CH 1-3 97a-100a, bk ii, ch i-io
122b,d-128d  /  Topics,  BK  I, CH 1-3 143a-144b; ch io-ii 147b-148c; bk
viii, ch i
[155^1-16]
211a-b; CH 14
[163^8-16] 222a
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 9-11 234b-237c; ch 16
[175^1-12]
241a; ch 34 252c-253d / Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; ch 2
[184^25-185^19]
259c-260a / Heavens, bk i, ch 10 [279^4-12] 370d; bk hi, CH 7 [306*1-18]
397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  I, CH 2 [316*5-14] 411c-d /
Metaphysics, BK II, CH 3 513c-d; bk hi, ch i
[995*^3~N]
513b, d; bk iv, ch 3
[1005^1-4]
524c;  CH  4  [1005^35-1006*28]  525a-c;  bk  xi,  CH  3  589a-d;  ch  5
[1061^34-1062*19] 590a-c; BK XIII, CH 2 [io77^i]-cH 3
[1078*32] 608d609d; CH 4 [1078^18-32] 610b-c / Soul, bk
i,  CH I 631a-632d; bk ii, ch 4 [415*14-22] 645b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i 161a-165d / Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; CH 7
[1098*20-^8]
343c-344a; bk vi, ch 3 388b-c / Politics, bk i, ch i [1252*18-24] 445b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1358*3-33]
597d598b  11  Archimedes: Method, 569b-570a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
i,  ch  7  112b-113d;  CH 17 122d-124a; bk ii, ch 25 174b-c 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr hi 10a-12b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 20-24
^a7a / City of God, bk viii, ch 3-4 266a-267c esp CH 4, 267b / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 31-37 651d-654b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 117, A I 595d-597c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57,
A  3,  rep  3  37b-38a;  a  6,  rep 3 40a'41a; part III, Q 9, A 3, REP 2
765b-766b

[135b]
23  HoBREs: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a 61a; 65c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
69d-77a  passim;  240c242a;446d-450a  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation,
331a-337a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 56b 69c esp 56b-58c /
Novum  Organum,  pref 105a106d; BK I 107a-136a,c esp aph 11-26 107d108d,
aph 39-69 109c-116b, aph 103-106 127d-128c / Neu^ Atlantis, 210d-214d 31
Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c esp x 15d-17a / Discourse 41a-67a,c esp part
i,  41d-42b, part II, 46c-48b, PART III, 50b-51a, part iv, 52a, PART VI,
61d-62c  /  Meditations, i 75a-77c / Objections and Replies, 128a-129a /
Geometry,  BK  I,  295a-298b;  bk  ii, 304a-305a; bk hi, 353a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  1-4  171a-172d  /  Vacuum, 355a-358b passim; 365b-366a / Great
Experiment  382a-389b  / Geometrical Demonstration, 430a-434a; 442a-446b
34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  rules  270a-271b;  lemma 5 338b-339a;
general schol, 371b372a / Optics, bk hi, 542a; 543a-544a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  intro,  sect  4-7  94a-95c;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 18-20
317d319c;  CH VII, sect ii 340a-342d; ch xii, sect 1-8 358c-360c passim;
sect   14-15   362d-363b;  CH  XVII,  sect  II  378b  35  Hume  :  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div  7-10  453c-455b  passim; sect vii, div 48
470d-471c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-342b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of
Nations, bk v, 335d-336a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  la-13d;  15c-16c;  17d-19a;  36d-37d; 60a-c; 109d-112d; 119a-b;
146a149d;  193d-194b;  211c-218d;  223a-d  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253a-254d;  261cd; 264b-d / Practical Reason, 291a-296d; 310ab;
319c-321b;  329a-330c  43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  43 Mill:
Liberty,  283d-284d; 287c-288c 45 Lavoisier: Elements ofChemistry, pref,
lc-2d  45  Fourier:  Theory of Heat, 172a-173b 45 Fakaday: Researches in
Electricity, 659a; 774d775a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 31
19c-20a  50  Marx:  Capital,  lOa-lld  53  James: Psychology, 175a-176a;
385a-b;  674a675b;  677b;  687a;  862a-865a;  869a-878a  54  Freud:  New
Introductory  Lectures,  879c;  881b-c  6c.  Art  as  the application of
science:  the  productive  powers of knowledge 7 Plato: Lysis, 16c-18b /
Protagoras,  43b-d  /  Euthydemus,  70a-c  /  Ion 142a-148a,c / Gorgias,
261a-262a  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  391b-397a  esp  392b,  394b,  394d  /
Statesman,  580d-582a  / Laws, bk IV, 684c-685a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
ii, ch 2 [194*21-^13] 270c-271a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [980^25-

[136a]
(6.   Art   and   science.  6c.  Art  as  the  application  of  science:
theproductivepowers ofknowledge. ) 982^1] 499b-500b; bk vii, ch 7
[1032*251033*4] 555b-556a; ch 9
[1034*21-32] 557c;
BK IX, CH 2 571c-572a; ch 5 573a-c; ch 7
[1049*5-12] 574c-d; bk xi, ch 7 [1064*10-14]
592b-c 9 Aristotle: 'Ethics^ bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch 7
[1098*28-32] 343d; BK
II, CH 4
[1105*17-^4]
350d-351a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  388d-389a  10 Hippocrates : Ancient Medicine
la-9a,c  esp par 1-4 la-2c, par 14 5a-c, par 20-22 7b-8d / Epidemics, bk
hi,  sect hi, par 16 59b-c / Surgery, par i 70b / Articulations, par 58,
112d  /  The  Law  144a-d  10  Galen  :  Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 9,
195c197b  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812d-813a  12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  158d159b  13  Virgil: Gd'org'/Vj' 37a-99a
passim,  esp  11  [4755i5]65a-66a  14  Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a 16
Copernicus:   Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  510b  18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 14, a 8 82c-83b; q 17, a i, ans lOOd-lOld; q 19, a
4,  rep  4 lllc-112c; part i-ii, q 14, a 4, ans 679b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, A 3, REP 3 37b-38a; a 4 38a-39a; q 95, a 2,
ANS 227c-228c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60a-b; 73b; part II, 158c-d;
PART  IV,  267a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 450d-451a; 523c-524b 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone, bk v, lOOc-lOlc 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 289d-292a esp
289d,  291d-292a  /  Circulation  of the Blood, 305a-d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  145c-d;  part  II,  251b-252a  30 Bacon: Advancement
ofLearning,  42a-c;  48d49b;  50c-51d;  53a-b;  56b-58c  / Novum Organum
105a-195d  esp  bk i, aph 1-3 107a-b, APH II 107d, APH 19-21 108b-c, APH
81-82 120b-121b, APH 85 121d-122d, aph 92 125b-d, APH 103-105 127d-128c,
APH  124  133c-d, aph 129-130 134d-136a,c, bk ii, aph 1-9 137a-140c, APH
44-52  175d-195d  / New Atlantis, 210d214d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi,  61b-c; 66d67a,c 35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, sect
11-12 361c-362c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 5 452d-453b 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 103b-115b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
5b-6a 40 Gibbon: Decli7ie and Fall, 633c; 661c-663c

[136b]
78 THE GREAT IDEAS 6c to 7a 42 Kant: Intro, Metaphysic of Morals, 388d /
Judgement,  523d-524a  43  Mill  :  Representative  Government,  369a 45
Fourier:  Theory  ofHeat,  170a;  184a;  213a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part i, 218d219a; 251a-b; part iv, 347b-348a 50 Marx: Capital,
170b-c;  177a;  183b-189a;  239c-241a;  299b-d 54 Freud: Psycho-Analytic
Therapy,  123a-125a  / General Introduction, 484a / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  777a-c;  778b-779a  esp  778d 7. The enjoyment of the fine
arts  la.  Art  as  a  source  of  pleasure or delight 7 Plato: Gorgias,
260a-262a  /  Republic,  bk  x, 433a-434c / Timaeus, 455b-c / Statesman,
596c-d  /  Philebus,  628d-630c  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  654b-d;  658d-660d 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics^ bk i, ch i [981^1319] 500a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk vii, ch it [1152^18-19] 403d; CH 12 [1153*24-27] 404c; bk ix, ch 7
[1167^34-1168*18] 421b-c
/ Politics, bk vni, CH 3
[1337^27-1338*29] 543a-c; ch
5  544c546a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii [1371^4-11] 615a; BK III, CH I
[i403^i5]-cH  12 [1414*13] 653b,d667a esp ch i 653b,d-654c / Poetics, ch
4
[1448^4-23] 682c-d; ch 14 688b-689a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13791411] 79a-b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[440-493]
115a-116b; bk VIII [608-731] 275a-278b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
20-27 ^^' 7d; bk III, par 2-4 13c-14b; bk x, par 49-53 83c-85a / City of
God,  bk  i,  ch  31-33  147d149a;  bk  xxii,  ch 24, 610a-c / Christian
Doctrine,  BK II, CH 6 638a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i,
a  9,  rep I 8d-9c; part i-ii, q 32, a 8, ans 764c765b; q 34, a i, rep 3
768c-769d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  ii [106133] 55c-d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, lb,d-3a,c; bk m, 129d-130c;
190d-191a;  bk  IV,  232a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 104d-105c; 191c-192d;
399d-401a  26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the Shrew, act hi, sc I [10-12]
212d/  Merchant  of Venice, act v, sc I [66-88] 431b-c 29 Cervantes: Do«
Quixote, part i, 184a-185b; PART II, 251b-c 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes,
337a-338a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  la-2a;  35a-d; 49a-50c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  502c-503a 42 Kant: Judgement, 471d-473a; 476a-483d;
516d-518d;   527b-528c;   532a-d;  534c-539d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,
446d-447a; 451c 44 B0SWEL.1.: Joh7Json, 254c-d

[137a]
lbto%  Chapter  4:  ART  79  46  Hi:gel:  Philosophy  of History, intro,
185c186a  47  Goethe:  Faust,  prelude 2a-6a esp [89-132] 3a-4a; part ii
[9863-9869]  239b  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 569a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i, 37a-d; hk ii, 64d-65d; bk iv, 190d-192b; bk vi, 257c259a;
268b;  bk  vii,  288c-290b; 295c-296a; BK VIII, 318a-321d; 324b-325a; bk
xiv,  601c602d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk x, 284b-d 53 James:
Psychology, 157a; 727b; 755a-758a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 601a-b
/  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643c  /  War  and  Death, 756b-c /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  llZd774c; 775b lb. The judgment of
excellence  in  art  5  Aristophanes: Clouds [518-562] 494d-495c / Peace
[732-774]  534c-535a  /  Frogs [758-1533] 573a-582a,c 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
130c-141a,c / Ion 142a148a,c / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-334b / Critias,
478c-d / Theaetetus, 513c-d; 531c-532a / Statesman, 594a-595a / Laws, bk
ii,  653c-656b  esp  656a-b;  660a-662a;  bk  hi, 675c-676b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1097^231098*18]
343a-c; bk ii, ch 6
[1106*26-^15]
351d-352a;  bk  vi, ch 5 [1140^20-25] 389c; ch 7 [1141*9-12] 390a; bk x,
ch 9
[ii8i*i3-'^i3]
436a,c / Politics, bk i, ch 9 [1257^25-1258*18] 451d-452b; bk hi, ch ii
[1281^39-1282*23]
479d-480a; ch 12
[1282^32-1283^13]
480d481a; ch 13 [1284^3-12] 482c-d; bk viii, ch 5
[1339*41-^4]
544d-545a; ch 6
[1340^20-25]
546b;  [1340^35-40]  546b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  hi, ch 1-12 653b,d-667b /
Poetics,  ch  26  698c699a,c  10  Hippocrates: Fractures, par 30 86a-d /
Articulations,  par 78, 119d 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121c-122a; 128a-b 17
Plotinus:  First En?2ead, tr vi, ch 2-3 21d23a / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch
ii,  275c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 14 16d17a; BK IV, par 20
24b-c  19  Aquinas:  Sutnma Theologica, part i, q 21, A 2, ANS 125c-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 57, AA 3-4 37b-39a 21 Dante:
Divi7te  Comedy, purgatory, xi [79120] 69c-70a; xxvi [91-126] 93d-94b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  105a; 453d-454a; 455a-d 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of
Venice, act v, sc i
[89-110] 431d
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act ii, sc ii [454-471] 45a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part i, 184a-187c; 189d-193a; part h, 212a-215b 31 Descartes :
Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-d  32  Mii.TO^'.  Paradise Lost, bk ix [1-47]
247a-248a / Samson Agonistes, 337a-338a

[137b]
33  Pascal: Pensces, 28-33 176a-b; 114 194b; :}Hi 238b 37 FiELDiNc;: Fom
Jones,  la-2a;  19a-20a;  35a-d; 49b-50c; 73b-d; 121b,d-123a; 152a-155b;
189a  191c;  204b,d-205c;  223a-225a;  246a247a; 273a-274c; 296b,d 298a;
357a-d   41   Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  300a-b;  573a574a  42  Ka\t
:Judge?nent,   461a-495a,c   esp   492b-493b;  513b-518d;  527b-528c  43
Federalist:  number  47,  154a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  446d-447a 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  115c;  196d-197a; 202b; 284a-b; 373b-c; 546d-547a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 185c-d; parti, 219b-c 47 Goethe:
Faust,  prelude  [95-103]  3b  48  Melville: Moby Dic/{, 277a-b; 335b 49
Darwin:  Descent of Man, 302a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 37a-d; bk
iv,   186c-188a;   191d-192a;  bk  vi,  257c-259a;  bk  VII,  288c-290b;
295c-296a;  bk  viii, 318a321d; 324b-325a; bk x, 444a-445d esp 445a-c 53
James:  Psychology,  157a;  288a;  689b-690a; 755a-758a; 886b 8. Art and
emotion:  expression, purgation, sublimation Old Testament :/«^^<fi-, 11
:34  / I Samuel, 16:1523 ; 1 8 :6-7— (D) / Kings, 16:1 5-23 ; 1 8 :6-7 /
//   Samuel,   6:14-15—   (D)  //  Kings,  6:14-15  /  Psalms,  150:4  /
Ecclesiastes,  3:4  /  Jeremiah,  31:13—  (D)  Jeremias,  31:13 4 Homer:
Odyssey, bk i
[325-359] 186b-c; bk
VIII  [71-103]  222d-223a; [482-547] 227a-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi,
189c 7 Plato: Ion, 145a-b / Republic, bk hi, 325b326b; BK x, 431b-434a /
Timaeus, 455b-c / Philebus, 628d-630c / Laws, bk ii, 654b-d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ix, ch 7
[ii67''341168*18] 421b-c / Politics, bk viii, ch 5 544c546a; ch 6 [1341*20-23] 546d; ch 7 [1341^33134^
547c-548a,c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch
[1354*13-1355*3] 593b-594a; ch 2 [1356*1-25]
595b-d;  ch ii [1371^4-11] 615a; bk ii, ch i-ii 622b,d-636a; bk hi, ch 7
659a-660a; ch 16
[1417*37-^7] 671c-d; CH 19 [1419^10-27] 674c-d
/ Poetics, CH 6
[1449*^23-28]
684a; ch 9
[1452*1-10] 686c-d; ch
ii
[1452*37-^4] 687a;
CH  13-14 687c-689a; ch 15 [1454^7-14] 689c; CH 17 [1455*29-39] 690c; CH
18  [1456*19-23]  691c-d;  CH  19  [1456*33-^8]  691d-692a 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Thi?jgs, bk v
[13791435] 79a-d
13 Virgil: Eclogues, v-vi 16a-21a / Aeneid, bk i
[440-493] 115a-116b; bk viii [608-731] 275a278b
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 510a-b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 20-22 6a-c; par 25-27 7a-d; bk hi, par
2-4 13c-14b; bk x, par 49-50 83c-84b

[138a]
b  (8.  Art  and emotion: expression, purgation, sublimation.) 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, v [73-142] 7d8b; PURGATORY, II [76-133] 55b-d; xxiv
[496t,] 90a23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 69c 24 Rabelais: Garganttia and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  190a-191a;  bk  iv,  232a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays,
104d-105c;  191c-192d;  399d-40ia;  410a-c;  507b-c  26 Shakespeare: Two
Gentlemen  of  Verona, act hi, sc ii [66-95] 245a-b / Richard II, act v,
so  V [41-66] 350a-b / Merchant of Venice, act V, sc I [66-88] 431b-c 27
Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [575-633]  46b-d  / Measure for
Measure, act iv, sc i
[1-15] 192c / Cymbeline, act
ii, sc hi
[1-35]
459b-c  /  Tempest, act i, sc ii [375-397] 529d530a; act v, sc i [58-61]
545c / Henry VIII, ACT HI, sc I [1-14] 566a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i,  184a-185b  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38c-39d; 78a-d;
87c-d 32 Milton: UAllegro 17h-21a / II Penseroso 21a25a / Paradise Lost,
bk i
[549-559] 105b
/  Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 11 173b-174a; 13-16
174a-b;  135  196a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 306b-307a; 350b351a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a-b 42 Kant. Judgement, 509c-d; 532a-539d 44
BoswE-Lz.:  Joh?ison,  53c-d;  308b-c;  362b-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  153b;  PART  IV,  323b-c  49  Darwin:  Descent  ofMan,
570b-571b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 64d-65d; bk IV, 190d-192b;
bk  vi,  267d-268c;  bk vh, 288c290b; BK X, 444a-445d esp 445a-c; bk xh,
554c-d;  bk xiv, 601c-602d; bk xv, 638c-639c 53 James: Psychology, 288a;
747b-748a;  751a753b  esp  752b-753b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
239c-240a;   246b-248c   /  GcJteral  Introduction,  483b-c;  581d-582b;
600d-601b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 643c / Group Psychology,
692c-693a  /  War  and Death, 762c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 7
73d- 7 74c 9. The useful arts 9a, The use of nature by art: agriculture,
medicine,  teaching  Old Testament: Genesis, 2:15; 3:17-19,23 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus, 38:1-15— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 38:1-15 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk  xvhi  [541-589]  135d-136c  5 Sophocles: Antigone [332-364] 134a-b 6
Herodotus: History, bk hi, 117a-c 7 Plato: Lysis, 21 d / Phaedrus, 136c-
d / Syfnposium, \SSd-\SQc / Gorgias, 261a-262a; 289d-

[138b]
d  j  80  THE  GREAT IDEAS 9 to 9a 290a / Republic, bk hi, 334b-337a; bk
vii, 391c-d / Tifnaeus, 475a-d / Statesman, 599a-b; 599d-600a / Laws, bk
x, 760c 8 Aristotle: Pliysics, bk ii, ch i
[192^8-31]
268b,d-269a;
[193^12-17]
269d-270a; ch 2
[194=^22-27]
270c; CH 8
[199^26-31]
277a  /  Metaphysics,  bk vii, ch 7 [1032^6-29] 555c-d; CH 9 [1034*8-29]
557b-c  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk i, ch 8 [1256*15-^25] 450a-c; ch ii
[1258^9-34]   452d-453b;  bk  vii,  CH  17  [1336^40-1337*2]  542a,c  10
Hippocrates:   Ancient   Medicine,  par  3  ld-2b;  par  20-21  7b-8a  /
Prognostics,  par  i  19a-b  /  Injuries  ofthe  Head,  par 17 68d-69a /
Surgery,  par  15 73b-c / Fractures, par 1-3 74b, d- 76a; par 33 88a-b /
Articulations,  par 2-3 92a-c; par 14 96d-97d; par 42 104b-c / Aphorisms
sect  I,  par  i  131a;  sect  ii,  par 4 132b / The Law, par 2-3 144b12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13611378] 78d-79a
13  Virgil: Georgics 37a-99a esp i [50-159] 38b41b, II [8-46] 52a-53b 17
Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 31, 175a 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610a-d  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30 651c-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q iio, a 2, REP 3 565d-566d; q 117, a
i  595d-597c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A I, ANS
12b-13c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b;  paradise,  viii  [115-148]  118b-c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk hi, 207c-d; BK IV, 303c-304a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 52c-d;
63d-66b;  93b-d;  368d-370c;  523c-524a;  527a-529b 27 Shakespeare: King
Lear,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [1-19]  272b-c  /  Winter's Tale, act iv, sc iv
[79-103]  508c-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  438c  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 48d-49b; 53a-d / Novum Organum, pref 105a-106d;
BK  I  107a-136a,c  esp  aph 1-9 107a-d, aph 129 134d-135d; bk ii, aph 4
137d-138b;  aph  29  159b-c  /  New  Atlantis,  211b-214d  31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  vi, 61b-c; 66d67a,c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78a-b
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  195b-196a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 34b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  336b-337a;  349a;  352a-d  39  Smith:  Wealth of
Nations, bk ii, 157a-b - 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c-22b; 367d368a;
655d-656b  passim  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 221c-222a 43 Federalist:
number  14,  61d  43  Mill: Representative Government, 331 b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 56 26b; PART III, par 196 67a; par 203
68a-c / Philosophy ofHistory, part i, 244b-c; part ii, 267a-b

[139a]
9b  to  9c  Chapter  4: ART 81 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 18a-22c esp
18b-c,  20d-21a;  41c-d  50  Marx:  Capital, 16d-17a; 85a-88d csp 86a-b;
250a,c; 298c-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 421d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  ix,  372a-373b;  BK x, 449b-c; epilogue i, 654a-655c 53
James:  Psychology,  711b-712b  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of
PsychoAnalysis,  2a  /  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 777a'b; 778b;
779a  9^.  The  production of wealth: the industrial arts Old Testament:
Exodus,  35-39  /  /  Kings,  5-7—  (D)  ///  Kings, 5-7 / / Chronicles,
22:15-16—  (D) / Paralipomenon, 22:15-16 / // Chronicles, 2:11-5:14— (D)
// Paralipomenon, 2:11-5:14 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 38:27-34— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 38:28-39 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a /Statesman,
591c-593d;  596a-597b  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk i,ch i [981^13-19]
500a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i, ch 4 447b-c; ch S-ii 449d-453d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[12411268] 77b-c; [1350-1360] 78c-d
18  Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, A I 615d-616c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  85 121d122d / New Atlantis, 210d-214d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi,  61b-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 78a-b; part hi, 106a-112a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xxiii, 191a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
349a;  352a-d; 365b366b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6a-d; 27b28a;
52d-53b;  bk  ii,  157a-b;  bk iv, 288c-300d esp 288c-291c, 294d-295a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 88d-89d; 368a; 655d-656b; 658a-b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  314c-315b 42 Kant: Judgement, 524a-b 43 Federalist:
number  8,  45d-46a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 56 26b;
ADDITIONS, 125 137a / Philosophy of History, part i, 243d-244c; part ii,
267a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  79a-82a  50  Marx: Capital, 16d-17a;
31a-37c   passim;  85a89b;  96a-97a;  100a-147b  passim;  157a-188c  esp
158a-159a,   164a-166c,   180d-188c;  205a207c;  251b-255a  esp  254a-b;
279d-280a;   292d;   299b-c   50   Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,
420d421a;421d-422c Ik 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 654a655c

[139b]
9c.  The  arts  of  war  Old  Testament: Genesis, 14 / Exodus, 17:8-16 /
Numbers,  31  /  Deuteronomy, 2-3; 20 /Joshua, 1-12 esp 6, 8— (D) Josue,
1-12  csp  6, 8 / Judges esp 4, 7, 15 / / Samuel esp 17— (D) / Kings esp
17  / // Samuel— {D) II Kings Apocrypha: Judith, 7:8-31— (D) OT, Judith,
7  :8-25  /  / Maccabees— {D) OT, / Machabees / II Maccabees— {D) OT, //
Machabees  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv [292-309] 26d-27a; bk VII [433-463]
50b-c; BK viii [489-565] 56a-d; BK xiii
[125-154] 89c-d; BK xviii [509-540]
135b-d / Odyssey, bk viii [491-520] 227a-b 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[632-730]
264a-d  /  Trojan  Women  [1-14]  270a;  [511-571] 274b-d / Heracles Mad
[188-205]  366d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 41c-42b; bk iv, 141b-c;
144d-148d;  158d-159b; bk vi, 206d208d; BK VII, 239a-241c; 247d-259a; bk
viii  260a-287d  passim;  bk  ix 288a-314a,c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  ii,  389d391b;  BK  VI, 514d-516a; bk vii 538a-563a,c 7 Plato:
Euthydemus, 75a-b / Republic, bk ii, 319a-c; bk iv, 343b-d; bk v, 366a-c
/ Sophist, 552d-554c / Laws, bk vii, 716c-717c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
i,  ch  7 [1255^38-39] 449c; CH 8 [1256^20-26] 450c 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk v
[128 i1349] 77d-78c
13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk ii [13-198] 124b-129b; bk VII [519-530] 250b; bk
ix [25-76] 279b-281a;
[590-620] 295a-b
14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  90b-95b  /  Pericles,  131b-139a / Fabius-
Pericles,  154a-d  /  Aemilius Paulus, 216a-223a / Marcellus, 252a-255a;
257c-260c  /  Aristides,  266b-272c  /  Philopoemen  293a-302a,c / Caius
Marius,  338c-344c  /  Sulla,  382c-d  /  Lucullus  400a-421a,c / Nicias
423a-438d  / 5^/onw^457b,d-470d esp 464c-d / Agesilaus, 498a-d / Pompey,
528c-534d  / Alexander, 546b-550a; 555d-556b; 569b-d / Caesar, 583a-596a
/  Antony, 770a-773c / Marcus Brutus, 816d-824a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii,  26c-28c  esp 26c-27a; bk hi, 63a-b; bk xiii, 134a-136c / Histories,
bk  i,  210b-d;  bk  hi,  247a-c;  bk  iv,  275b-c  20  Aquinas  : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 57, A 4, REP 3 38a-39a; part ii-ii, q 40, a 3
580d-581b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch iii-v 3c-8c; ch x 16a-d; ch xii-xiv
17d-22a;  ch  xviii,  25a-c; ch xx-xxi 30a-33a; ch xxv 35a-36b; ch XXVI,
37b-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b; part ii, 103b-c;159a-b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk i, 28a-29b; 31d-35a; 39c-44a;
50c-52d;   55b-57c;   bk   II,   95a-d;   bk   hi,   127d-128b;  bk  iv,
276a282d;304a-305a   25   Montaigne:  Essays,  llb-13c;  21a-b;  133b-d;
136b-143c; 193a-194b; 327d-329d; 354b-358b

[140a]
(9. The useful arts. 9c. The arts of war.) 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI,
act ii, sc i [5077] 9b-d; ACT IV, sc iv 23b-d / 1st Henry IV, ACT IV, sc
III
[1-29] 459b-c / 2nd Henry IV,
ACT  I,  sc  III 472d-474a / Henry V, act hi, sc II [59-152] 544d-545d /
Julius  Caesar,  act iv, sc III [196-225] 590c-d 27 Shakespeare: Troilus
and Cressida, act i, sc III
[197-210]
llOa-b / Othello, act i, sc III
[1-47]
208d-209b;
[220-229]
211b  /  Antony  and Cleopatra, act hi, sc vii-x 331b-333a / Coriolanus,
act  i,  sc  11  354d355b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 145c147d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a; 54a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
23a-25b;  part  ii,  77a-78a;  part  iv,  150a-151b  36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  237b-238a;  448b453a; 505b-510b; 535a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
241a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit ofLatus, bk ix-x 58b,d68d 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  v,  301a-309a,c  esp 303d-305c, 308c-309a,c 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and   Fall,   4b-8a;  85a-86d;  281b-287d  passim;  365b-375d;
377c-378d;  411d-412c;  563a-566c  esp 564d; 633b-c; 638d639a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 3d-4c; 120a; 126d131d esp 127d-128a; 256a; 291d'292c;
311d312a;   321b-325a;  394d-395c;  499a-b;  509a510a,c;  542b-548d  esp
542b-543a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 453d-454c / Judgement, 502d-504b 43
Federalist:  number  8,  44c-45a;  45d-46a;  number  25, 91a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History, part iv, 343d344a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  52c-53c; 54c55c; bk II, 88b-89b; 92c-93d; 96c-97c; bk hi, 135c-137c;
144d-146d;  bk  v,  208c-210b;  bk  VII,  278a-287a;  bk  ix, 350d-354a;
358b'365c;  BK  X,  389a-391c;  405a-b;  421c-426a; 430b432c; 440c-443b;
445d-448c;  449c;  bk  xi,  470d-475a;  bk xiii, 563a-571a; bk xiii-xiv,
582a-590c; bk xiv, 609a-613d; bk xv, 618b621b 9d. The arts of government
Old  Testament:  Exodus,  18:13-26  5  Aristophanes  : Knights [147-222]
471d-472c  /  Lysistrata [506-586] 589c-590d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  366d  7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-47c / Euthydemus, 75c-76b /
Ion,  147d-148a,c / Meno, 188b190a,c / Gorgias, 285a-292b / Republic, bk
iii-iv,  339b-347a;  bk  vi,  382a-c; bk vii, 390c-391b/ Critias, 479c /
Theaetetus,  531a-b  /  Statesman  580a-608d  esp  585c-586a, 598b608d /
Laujs, bk iv, 679a-c

[140b]
m THE GREAT IDEAS 9d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; bk VI, ch
7
[1141*20-33]
390a-b; ch 8
[1141**
23-28]  390d; bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, BK II, CH 12 470b-471d;
bk hi, ch ii
[1281*39-1282*41] 479b-480b;
bk  iv, CH I 487a-488b; bk v, ch 8-9 509d-512d; ch II 515d-518c; bk vii,
ch  2  528a-529a;  CH  4  [1325^34-1326*4]  530a;  ch  13-14 536b538d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[11361160] 76a-b
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c; bk VI, sect 30 276d-277a
13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [418-440] 114b-115a; bk VI [847-853] 233b-234a
14  Plutarch:  Romulus-Theseus,  30c-d  /  Poplicola, 81b-c / Poplicola-
Solon,  87b-d  /  Camillus,  102d / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp 137b-138b /
Fabius, 143 b-d; USd-l^^Si /Alcibiades 155b,d174d passim, esp 167c-168a/
Coriolanus,  180d181b / Aristides 262b,d-276a,c esp 263d267a, 273d-275c/
Crassus-Nicias  ASSh,d-^Sld I Agesilaus, 482a-c / Phocion, 604b,d-605d /
Cato  the  Younger,  625b-627b  /  Agis, 648b,d649b / Caius and Tiberius
Gracchus-Agis  and  Cleo?nenes 689b,d-691a,c 15 Tacitus: Anfials, bk iv,
63d-67a;  72a-b  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xix, ch 16 521d-522a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  104, A 4, ANS 306d-307c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[91108] 126b-c
23  Machiavelli: Prince la-37d 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, intro 47a-d; part i,
67d-68a;  80d-81a; 82b-d; part ii, 112d; 122b124b; 127a-130a; 148c-159c;
164a,c  24  Rabelais;  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 131b,d-133b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  3a-5a;  324c-326b  esp  326a-b;  437b-c; 450d-451a;
451d-452d  26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II, act hi, sc iv [2966] 340c-d 29
Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 217a-b; 331a-336a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 4c-7c; 23a26a; 54a-b; 93c-95a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
ii [430-456] 120b121a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 82 186b-188b; 291-338 225a233a
passim 35 Locke: Toleration, 9b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78a-b; part
hi,  112a-115b; part iv, 157a-158a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
3b-d;  BK  ii-v  4a-33a,c; bk vi, 40a-b; 43c-d; bk VIII, 51a-53c; bk xi,
69a-75a;  bk  xii, 93c96a,c; bk xix, 135a-141a; bk xxvi, 214b,d; bk XXIX
262a-269a,c  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy  367a-385a,c esp 370c-d /
Social Contract, bk ii, 400c-406a; bk III, 409d-410a; 412c-414d

[141a]
10  to  10^  Chapter  4:  ART  83  40 Gibbon: Decline and FalL 24b,d-32d
passim;  48a;  61d-63b;  142c-144a;  153c-157c csp 155b, 157c; 240b-255d
passim;  284a-c; 288b-289a; 338d-344a,c csp 338d-339a, 343a-c; 577a 578c
41   Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  102c-103a;  176c177c;  504c-505c  43
Federalist:  number  35, 113b-c; number 37, 119c-120a; number 62, 190b-d
43    Mill:    Liberty,   322a-b   /   Representative   Govern-   ;w^«/,
327b,d-328d;331b-c;  338d-339a;  356b362c  passim;  411d-412a;  442a-d /
Utilitarianism,  445c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,
275d276a;  part  iv, 360b-c; 361d-362a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi,
238c-243d;  260a-262a;  bk ix, 350d-354a 53 James : Psychology, 201a 10.
The  moral  and political significance of the aFts 10^. The influence of
the  arts  on  character  and  citizenship:  the role of the arts in the
training  of  youth  5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [626-658] 462b-d / Wasps
[1009-1070]   519d-520c   /   Frogs  [10081098]  576b-577c;  [1482-1533]
581d-582a,c  7  Plato: Protagoras, 46b-c / Phaedrus, 140a-d / Symposium,
156b-c  /  Gorgias,  280d-282b  / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-339a; bk iv,
344b-d; BK vii 388a-401d esp 389d-398c; bk x, 427c434c / Timaeus, 455a-c
/  Laws,  bk  ii  653a663d;  bk  hi,  675c-676b;  bk  v, 696b-d; bk vii,
717b-728b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 17 [1336^30- ^24] 541b-d; bk
viii 542a-548a,c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i, sect 7, 253c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk VI
[847-853]
233b-234a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 33d-34a; 43b-d / Solon, 76a / Pericles,
121a-122b  / Timoleon, 195a-b / Demetrius, 726a-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xiv,  146b-d  16 Copernicus : Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i,
510a-b  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 1-2 lOa-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-22  6a-c;  par  25-27 7a-d; bk hi, par 2-4
13c-14b; bk x, par 49-53 83c-85a / City of God, bk i, ch 3133 147d-149a;
bk  ii,  ch  8-14  153d-157c;  bk  IV,  CH  26-27  202a-203c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  CH  6  638a-d; ch 25 649b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxii
[55-93] 87a-c; paradise,
i
[1-36]
106a-b; 11
[1-18] 107d; XVII [100-142] 133a-c
22 Chaucer: Intro, to Man of Law's Prologue
[4465-4510] 234b-235b / Prologue to Melibeus
400b-401a  /  UEnvoi 550a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
26d-30c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-80b passim

[141b]
26  Shakespeare: Two Gentlemen of Verona, act III, sc II [66-95 1 245a-b
/ Richard II, act v, sc V [41-6^] 350a-b / Merchant of Venice, act v, sc
i  [66-88]  431b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure, act iv, sc I
[1-15]  192c  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  la  3b;  12b-16c;
184a-187c;  189d-193c;  part  ii,  427c429d  30  Bacon:  Advancetnent of
Learning, 4c-6c; 38c39a; 78a-d; 79c-80a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i,
43a-b  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix [1-47] 247a-248a / Areopagitica,
385a-386b   33   Pascal:   Pensees,   11   173b-  174a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect i, div i 451a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, xviib-xviiia 36
Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 250b-251a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 253d-254d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv, 17b18d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
365c-366b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 337d-343d; 347c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 3a-b; 79a-b; 94a-b; 629a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  40d-41a;  225a-226a  esp  225c;  300a-b;  573a-574b 42 Kant:
Judgement,  521b-523c;  586d-587a  44 BoswEhi.: Johnson, 158a-b; 259b-c;
308b-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  ii, 259b-c; 263d-265c;
267b-268b;  276a-d;  part  iv,  347b-d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
47b-48d;  bk  II, 64d-65d; bk iv, 172d-173d; bk viii, 316b321d;324b-325d
54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 582a-b / War and Death, 762c 10^. The
political  regulation  of  the  arts for the common good: the problem of
censorship 5 Aristophanes: Acharfiians [366-382] 459c-d;
[480-508] 460d-461a
7  Plato: Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-339a; bk iv, 344b-d; bk x, 427c-434c
esp  432d-434c  /  Statesman,  601c-602c / Laws, bk ii 653a-663d; bk hi,
675c-676b;  bk  vii,  717b-730c;  bk viii, 731d-732c; bk xi, 782d-783b 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d  /  Politics, bk vii, ch 17
[1336^12-23]  541c-d  14 Plutarch: Solon, 76a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
56d-57b; bk iv, 67b-c; 72b- 73a; bk xiv, 152d-153c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk i, ch 31-33 147d-149a; bk ii, ch 9-14 154a-157c; bk viii, CH 13
273b-d  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xxi, 32d-33a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part ii, 102d-103a; 150c151a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 79d-80b; 191d-192b

[142a]
(10. The moral and political sign^cance of the arts. 1 Ob. The political
regulation  of the arts for the common good: the problem of censorship.^
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote^  part  i, 13b-16c; 117d-119d; 184a-187c 30
^\coyi:  New  Atlantis,  214a-b  32  Milton:  Areopagitica 381a-412b esp
384b389a,  398a-b  37  Fielding:  To?n  Jones, 253d-254d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  17b18d;  BK  XII,  90b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  347c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 148a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  220b-221b; 223a-c / Science of Right, 425c-426a 43 Constitution
of the U.S. : article i, sect 8
[214-217] 13b; amendments,
i  17a  43  Federalist:  number  43,  139d-140a  43 Mill: Representative
Government,  368d-369b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 259b-c; 300c-301a esp 301a-d
[fn  i]  11.  Myths  and  theories concerning the origin of the arts Old
Testament:  Genesis,  4:20-22;  10:8-9  /  /  Chronicles,  4:14—  (D)  1
Paralipomenon, 4:14 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[109-113]
41b,
[248-256]
42d,
[459-461]
44d  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44a-45a  /  Phaedrus, 138c139a / Symposium,
160c-d  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319c / Statesman, 589a-c / Philebus,
610d-613a  esp  611d-613a  /  Laws^ bk ii, 653ac; 662c-663b 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  6  [1341^2-8]  547a  /  RJietoric, bk hi, ch i
[i403''i5-i404^39] 653b,d-654c / Poetics, ch 3
[i448*25]-ch
5
[1449^19] 682b-684a
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine, par 3 ld-2b; par 7 3a; par 12 4b-c;
par 14, 5a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10281104] 74c-75c; [1241-1457] 77b-80a,c
13  Virgil:  Georgics,  i  [121-146]  40b-41a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk iv, 299a-300b 30 Bacon: Advancemefit of Learning, 38d-39a
/ Novum Organum, bk i, aph 109 128d-129c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 655d-656a 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory,
part  i,  239a-b;  252a-c;  part  ii,  261b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man,
278a-279c;  298a301c;  329c;  348d-349d; 567c-571a esp 569d570a, 570d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x,  284b-d  53 James: Psychology,
727b-728a  54 Freud: General Introduction, 512d-513a / Group Psychology,
670a-b; 692a-693a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 778b,d
[fn 2]
/ New Introductory Lectures, 862 d

[142b]
84 THE GREAT IDEAS 11 to 12 12. The history of the arts: progress in art
as measuring stages of civilization 4 Homer: Iliad, bk iv
[104-111]
25a; bk ix
[185-189] 59a; bk xi [15-46] 72b-c; bk xviii
[368-617] 133d-136d/ Odyssey, bk ix [105-115]
230b  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 5b; 5d-6a; bk ii, 49d-50a; 75b-76a; bk
hi, 102c; bk vii, 220d221b 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i,350b-d
7  Plato: Critias, 479d / Statesman, 602b-c / Laws, bk ii, 654c-655b; bk
hi, 675c-676b 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83''i6-i84b8]
253a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  I  [981^13-24]  500a;  bk xii, ch 8
[1074^11] 605a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098^21-25]
343c-d  /  Politics, bk ii, ch 8 [1268^23-1269^29] 464d-465b / Rhetoric,
bk  hi,  ch i [1403^151404^39] 653b,d-654c / Poetics, ch 4-5 682c684a 10
Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine, par 1-4 la2c; par 12 4b-c 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of Things, bk v [324-337] 65b-c; [925-1160] 73b-76b; [1241-1457]
77b80a,c 13 Virgil: Georgics, i [121-146] 40b-41a 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
127a-129b / MarcelluSy 252a-255a / Aratus, 830b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xv,  167c-168a  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk xii, c'h 10, 348b-c; bk
xviii,  ch  13-14  478d-479d;  bk XXII, CH 24, 610a-c 19 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 46, A 2, REP 4 253a-255a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory,  xi  [79120] 69c-70a; xxiv [49-63] 90a-b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  85c;  part  iv,  267c-269b  passim  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk ii, 81d-82c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning la-lOld esp
la-15a, 18b, 20b-25c, 29a-32c, 33d-34a, 35b36c, 38d-39a, 51d-54b / Novum
Organum,  bk  I,  aph  85  121d-122d;  aph  129  134d-135d 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  vi,  61a-c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 103b-115b esp
106a-107a   38   Rousseau:  Inequality,  338d-340a;  346d-347a;  352a-d;
365b-366b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6a-d; bk hi, 173d-175b; bk
iv,  191a;  bk  v,  308c-309a,c; 337d-338c 40 Gibbon: Decline a?id Fall,
18b-24a,c;  88d89d;  157d-159a; 171c; 237c-239a; 502d-503a; 633b-634a,c;
641b-642b;  655d-658b;  661c664d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 195d-197a;
225a-c;    291d-292c;   298a-300b;   327a-328a,c;   355a-d;   451c-452d;
509d-510a,c;  522b-528a,c  esp  528a,c; 573a-574a; 590a-598a passim, esp
596d-598a

[143a]
12  Chapter 4: ART 42 Ka^-t: Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Constitution of the
U.S. : article i, sect 8
[214-217] 13b
43  Federalist: number 43, 139d-140a 43 Mill: Representative Government,
367b-c  44 Boswell: Johnson, 70d-71b; 307c-d; 380d381a; 406c; 408d-409a;
446d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 69, 30b; part hi, par
356  113a-b  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-b; 182b-c; 185a-186a;
PART  I,  219b-c;  229b-d; 243d-244c; 247c248d; 251a-b; 253b-c; part it,
259a-282d   esp   261b,   267b-268b,  276a-d,  277d-278a;  part  CVkOSS-
ILEFEKENCES  For:  The  conception  of  art  as  a  habit  of mind or an
intellectual  virtue,  see  Habit  5a,  5cl; Virtue Progress 3c, 4a, 6a;
State  8d-8d(3); War and Peace lo-iof; Wealth 3c-3d. ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed  below are works not included in Great Books ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great Ideas. I. Dante.
Convivio  (The  Banquet)  Hume.  Ofthe  Rise and Progress ofthe Arts and
Sciences  Rousseau. Discourse on the Arts and Sciences A. Smith. "Of the
Affinity Between Music, Dancing and Poetry," in Essays Philosophical and
Literary

[143b]
85  PART  IV,  323c-d; 335a-d; 346cIII, 312c-d 348a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  13c; 19c-d / Descent of Man, 278a-279a; 320a-321a; 329a330a,c;
349b-d; 569d 50 Marx: Capital, 86b-c esp 86d
[fn
4]; 181 d
[fn 3]
50   Marx-Encels:   Communist   Manifesto,   420d421a;  421d  53  James:
Psychology,  727b  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 776c780b
esp   779a-b   /   New   Introductory  lectures,  882d-883b  Hegel.  The
Phenome?iology  of Mind, vii (b) , The Philosophy of Mind, sect hi, sub-
sect  a  . The Philosophy of Fine Art Goethe. Poetry and Truth . Travels
in  Italy  . Conversations with Eckermann . Maxims and Reflections J. S.
Mill. A System of Logic, bk vi, ch ii

[144a]
S6  THE GREAT IDEAS Tolstoy. What Is Art? Freud. Leonardo da Vinci . The
Theme  of  the  Three  Cas\ets . The Moses of Michelangelo . A Childhood
Memory  from  ''Dichtung und Wahrheit" II. Epicurus. Letter to Herodotus
Horace.  The  Art  of  Poetry  ViTRUvius.  On  Architecture  QuiNTiLiAN.
Institutio  Oratoria  (Institutes ofOratory), BK XII BoNAVENTURA. On thc
Reduction  of  the  Arts  to  Theology  Leonardo da Vinci. Noteboo\s . A
Treatise   on  Painting  Cellini.  Autobiography  SuAREZ,  Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xliv (13) CoRNEiLLE. Trois discours sur Vart dramatique .
Examens J. Harris. Three Treatises. The First Concerning Art. The Second
Concerning  Music,  Painting, and Poetry. The Third Concerning Happiness
Burke.  A  Philosophical  Efiquiry  into  the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime   and  Beautiful  Voltaire.  "Fine  Arts,"  in  A  Philosophical
Dictionary  Lessing.  Laocoon  Beattie.  An  Essay  on  Poetry and Music
Herder.  Plasti\  Joshua  Reynolds.  Discourses on Art Schiller. Letters
upon  the  Esthetic  Education  ofMan  ScHELLiNG.  Philosophic der Kunst
Coleridge.  Biographia  Literaria, ch 4 Schopenhauer. The World as W^ill
and  Idea, vol i, BK hi; vol III, sup, ch 34-36 Whevvell. The Philosophy
of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  VOL  II,  BK  XI, ch 8 Emerson. "Art," in
Essays,  i  E.  Delacroix.  Journal  Baudelaire. Curio sites esthetiques
Comte.  System of Positive Polity, vol i, General View of Positivism, ch
5

[144b]
LoTZE.  Microcosmos,  bk  viii, ch 3 Burckhardt. The Civilization of the
Renaissance  in  Italy  RusKiN. Modern Painters . The Stones of Venice .
Sesame  and  Lilies  Taine. The Philosophy of Art E. Hartman. Philosophy
ofthe  Unconscious,  (b) v Arnold. Essays in Criticism Van Gogh. Letters
Morris,  Hopes  and  Fearsfor Art . Art and Socialis?n . The Aims of Art
Guyau.  Uart  an point de vue sociologique Nietzsche. The Will to Power,
bk  hi  (4) Brunetiere. An Apologyfor Rhetoric Frazer. The Golden Bough,
part  i,  ch  17  Grosse.  The Beginnings of Art Shaw. The Sanity of Art
HiRN.  The  Origifis  of Art Mann. Tonio Kroger Santayana. Reason in Art
Croce.  Aesthetic  as  Science  of Expression . The Essence of Esthetics
Harrison. Ancient Art and Ritual BosANQUET. Three Lectures on Aesthetic,
11  T.  V^EBLEN.  The  Instinct  of  V/orI{manship, and the State of the
Industrial Arts, ch 2-4, 6-7 . The Vested Interests and the State of the
Industrial  Arts,  ch  3 Alain. Systeme des beaux-arts Maritain. Art and
Scholasticism  . An Introduction to Philosophy, part ii (9) Abercrombie.
An  Essay  Towards  a  Theory  of  Art  Lalo. Uart et la morale Ortega y
Gasset.  The  Dehumanization  of  Art Rank. Art and Artist H. Delacroix.
Psychologic  de Vart Gill. Art-Nonsense Coomaraswamy. The Transformation
of  Nature  in  Art  Dewey.  Art  as  Experience  MuMFORD.  Technics and
Civilization Adler. Art and Prudefjce

[145a]
Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY INTRODUCTION ASTRONOMY could take its place in this
jlV  catalog  of ideas on the ground that several of the great books are
monuments  of  astronomical  science,  exemplifying  the imaginative and
analytical powers which have made it one of the most remarkable triumphs
of the human mind. Its claim might further be supported by the fact that
other  great  books—of mathematics, physics, theology, and poetry—have a
context  of  astronomical  imagery  and  theory.  But  the  inclusion of
astronomy  can  be justified by what is perhaps an even more significant
fact, namely, that astronomical speculation raises problems and suggests
conclusions  which  have  critical  relevance for the whole range of the
great  ideas. Man has used astronomy to measure, not only the passage of
time  or  the  course of a voyage, ) but also his position in the world,
his  power  of  knowing,  his relation to God. When man first turns from
himself and his immediate earthly surroundings to the larger universe of
which  he  is  a  part,  the  object  which presses on his vision is the
overhanging  firmament with its luminous bodies, moving with great basic
regularity   and,  upon  closer  observation,  with  certain  perplexing
irregularities. Always abiding and always changing, the firmament, which
provides man with the visible boundary of his universe, also becomes for
him  a  basic,  in fact an inescapable, object of contemplation. Careful
and precise astronomical observations antedate the birth of astronomy as
a  science.  The early interest in the heavenly bodies and their motions
is  often  attributed  to the usefulness of the predictions which can be
made  from  a knowledge of celestial phenomena. Whether their motive was
entirely utilitarian, or partly religious and speculative, the Egyptians
and Babylonians, we learn from Herodotus, undertook patient study of the
heavens. They observed and recorded with 87

[145b]
immense  persistence.  They  calculated and predicted. They turned their
predictions  to  use through the priestly office of prophecy to foretell
eclipses, tides, and floods, and they employed their calculations in the
mundane  arts  of  navigation  and  surveying  to  guide  travel and fix
boundaries.  But  they  did  not,  like  the  Greeks,  develop elaborate
theories which sought to organize all the observed facts systematically.
With  the Greeks, the down-to-earth, everyday utility of astronomy seems
to  count for less than its speculative grandeur. The dignity which they
confer  upon  astronomy  among  the  disciplines  reflects the scope and
majesty  of its subject matter. The Greek astronomer, concerned as he is
with  figuring  motions that range through the whole of space and are as
old  as  time  or as interminable, takes for his object the structure of
the  cosmos.  Aristotle  and  Plato  pay eloquent tribute to the special
worth  of  astronomy.  In  the  opening  chapters  of  his  Metaphysics,
Aristotle  associates astronomical inquiry with the birth of philosophy.
"Apart  from  usefulness,"  he  says,  "men  delight ... in the sense of
sight"  and,  he  adds,  "it  is owing to their wonder that men both now
begin  and  at  first  began to philosophise." They wondered first about
"the  obvious  difficulties,"  but  little  by  little  they advanced to
"greater matters," and "stated difficulties . . . about the phenomena of
the  moon  and sun and stars, and about the genesis of the universe." In
his  own  philosophical  thought, Aristotle's treatise On the Heavens is
not  only  one  of  the  basic  natural  sciences,  but  certain  of its
principles  have  general  significance  for  all the other parts of his
physical science. A wider view of the importance ofastronomy is taken by
Plato.  In  the  Timaeus,  he  dwells on "the higher use and purpose for
which God has given eyes to us. . . . Had we never seen the

[146a]
88  THE  GREAT  IDEAS stars, and the sun, and the heaven," Timaeus says,
"none  of  the  words which we have spoken about the universe would ever
have  been uttered. . . . God invented and gave us sight," he continues,
"to  the  end  that  we  might behold the courses of intelligence in the
heaven,  and apply them to the courses of our own intelligence which are
akin  to  them,  the unperturbed to the perturbed; and that we, learning
them  and  partaking  of  the natural truth of reason, might imitate the
absolutely  unerring  courses of God and regulate our own vagaries." For
Plato,  then,  man's intellectual relation to the heavens does more than
initiate  philosophy.  Man's self-rule, his purity and peace of soul, is
at  stake in that relation. That is one reason why, in both the Republic
and  the  Laws,  Plato makes astronomy a required part of the curriculum
for  the  education  of rulers. "He who has not contemplated the mind of
nature which is said to exist in the stars . . . and seen the connection
of  music  with  these  things,  and  harmonized  them all with laws and
institutions,  is not able," the Athenian Stranger says in the Laws, "to
give  a  reason  for  such things as have a reason." Plato considers the
opposition to astronomy on religious grounds by those who think that men
who approach celestial phenomena by the methods of astronomy "may become
godless because they see . . . things happening by necessity, and not by
an  intelligent will accomplishing good." His answer points out that one
of  the  "two  things  which  lead men to believe in the gods ... is the
argument  from  the  order  of the motion of the stars and of all things
under  the  dominion  of  the mind which ordered the universe." It was a
false  understanding  of  these matters which "gave rise to much atheism
and perplexity." The issues raised by Plato concerning the importance of
astronomy  for  purification  and piety, for education and politics, run
through  the  tradition  of  western  thought.  Though they are somewhat
transformed  in the context of Jewish and Christian beliefs, and altered
by later developments in the science of astronomy itself, they remain as
matters  on  which  an  author's  strong  assent  or  dissent forcefully
reflects  his  whole intellectual position. On the one hand, astronomers
like Ptolemy,

[146b]
Copernicus,   and  Kepler,  for  all  their  differences  on  points  of
scientific  theory,  seem to concur in reaffirming Plato's conception of
the  bearing  of  their  science  on  religion and morals. Lucretius and
Augustine,  on  the other hand, while not agreeing with each other, seem
to  disagree  with  Plato.  In  the  tradition  of western thought, they
represent  different  types  of  opposition  to the Platonic view. Where
Plato  and his followers, including religious Christians like Copernicus
and  Kepler,  hold  that  true  piety  profits  from astronomical study,
Lucretius  hopes  that  astronomy  may  help  to free men from religious
superstitions.  If  when  they  '  'gaze on the heavenly quarters of the
great  upper world" and direct their thoughts "to the courses of the sun
and  moon,"  they do so with "a mind at peace" because they see only the
workings  of  natural law and no evidences of a controlling power in the
will  of  the  gods, then men achieve the natural piety of the scientist
—different  in  the opinion of Lucretius from the false worship which is
based on fear. From his own experiences in dealing with the astronomy of
the  Manichean  sect  in relation to their religious doctrine, Augustine
insists  that the teachings of religion in no way depend upon astronomy.
He  denies  that  such  knowledge is in any way essential to true piety.
Though  a  man does not know "even the circles of the Great Bear, yet is
it  folly  to  doubt," he writes, "that he is in a better state than one
who  can  measure  the  heavens  and  number  the  stars,  and poise the
elements,  yet  neglecteth  Thee  'Who  hast  made all things in number,
weight, and measure.' " When Faustus, the leader of the Manicheans, "was
found  out  to  have  taught falsely of the heaven and stars, and of the
motions  of  the  sun and moon (although these things pertain not to the
doctrine of religion)," his religious teachings, according to Augustine,
inevitably suffered ridicule because of his pretension that they derived
support from a science of the heavenly bodies. Augustine would disengage
theology  from  astronomy.  His position anticipates that later taken by
Cardinal  Barberini  who,  during  the  controversy  over the Copernican
hypothesis, is reported to have told Galileo that astronomy and religion
have  quite  separate  tasks,  the  one teaching how the heavens go, the
other how to go to heaven.

[147a]
Still   another  point  of  view  on  the  importance  of  astronomy  is
represented  in the skeptical and l^umanist attitude of Montaigne. "I am
very  r^ivell  pleased  with  the Milesian girl," he remarks, "who . . .
advised the philosopher Thales rather to look to himself than to gaze at
heaven."  In saying this, or in quoting with approval the question asked
of  Pythagoras by Anaximenes "To what purpose should I trouble myself in
searching  out  the  secrets  of  the  stars,  having  death  or slavery
continually  before  my eyes?" —Montaigne intends more than a preference
for the moral over the natural sciences. He regards astronomical inquiry
as  a prime example of man's "natural and original disease—presumption."
It  is  presumptuous  to  suppose  that our minds can grasp and plot the
course  of  the heavens when we fail to comprehend things much nearer at
hand.  Hence  Montaigne  advises  everyone  to  say,  in  the  spirit of
Anaximenes:  "Being  assaulted  as  I am by ambition, avarice, temerity,
superstition,  and  having  so  many  other  enemies of life, shall I go
cudgel my brains about the world's revolutions?" Kant can be as critical
as  Montaigne of the frailty of human knowledge. "The investigations and
calculations of the astronomers," he writes, have shown us "the abyss of
our  ignorance  in  relation  to  the  universe." But Kant—an astronomer
himself  as well as a moralist—does not, therefore, advise us to forsake
the study of the heavens. On the contrary, he recommends it not only for
its scientific value, but for its moral significance. "Two things," Kant
declares  in a passage which has become famous, "fill the mind with ever
new  and increasing admiration and awe, the oftener and more steadily we
reflect on them: the starry heavens above and the moral law within." The
two fit together to produce a single effect. Astronomy with its view "of
a  countless  multitude of worlds annihilates, as it were, my importance
as  an  animal creature." Morality "elevates my worth as an intelligence
by  my  personality,  in  which  the  moral  law  reveals  to  me a fife
independent  of  animahty  and even of the whole sensible world." Kant's
association  of the starry heavens with the moral life is not so much an
echo  of,  as a variant upon, Plato's precept that we apply "the courses
of intelligence in heaven ... to the f

[147b]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  89  courses of our own intelligence." But in one
passage  of  Freud  we  find  an  almost complete return to the Platonic
insight.  "Order  has  been  imitated  from  nature,"  he writes; "man's
observations  of the great astronomical periodicities not only furnished
him  with  a  model, but formed the ground plan of his first attempts to
introduce  order  into  his  own  life."  Astronomy has connections with
biology  and  psychology,  as  well as with mathematics and physics. The
obvious  fact that the sun supports terrestrial life—operating here as a
unique  and  indispensable cause—occasions the inference by Aquinas that
it  may  also  operate  as  a  cause in the production of new species by
spontaneous  generation  from  putrefying matter. This notion bears some
resemblance  to  the  theory  in  contemporary genetics of the effect of
cosmic  radiations upon gene mutations. Unlike these notions in biology,
speculations   concerning   celestial   influences   upon  psychological
phenomena  seem  to  cross  the  line  between  astronomy and astrology.
Sometimes  the  influence  upon  man  and  his  actions  is found in the
constellations  attending  a  nativity;  sometimes  it  is  a particular
influence  of  the  sort  still  signified  by  the  meaning of the word
"lunacy"; and sometimes omens and auguries are read in the aspect of the
heavens.  The  chapters  on  Prophecy  and Sign and Symbol deal with the
issues  raised  by  astrology.  Problems  more  closely  associated with
astronomical  science and speculation are treated in other chapters. The
cosmological problem of the origin of the material universe is discussed
in  the  chapters on Eternity, Time, and World; the question of its size
in  the  chapter on Space; the question of whether the celestial spheres
are  themselves  alive  or  are moved by intelligences or spirits in the
chapters  on  Angel  and  Soul;  and  the  question of the nature of the
heavenly  bodies  in  the  chapter  on  Matter.  This last problem is of
crucial  significance  in  the  history  of  astronomy  itself.  Opposed
theories  of  the  motions of the heavenly bodies become correlated with
opposed  theories  concerning  their matter—whether that is different in
kind  from terrestrial matter or the same. It is with reference to these
related issues that what

[148a]
90  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  has come to be called "the Copernican revolution"
represents  one  of the great crises, certainly one of the most dramatic
turning  points,  in  the  development  of astronomy, and of physics and
natural  science generally. The Copernican revolution did not take place
by  the  improvement and enlargement of astronomical observations alone,
nor   even   by   the   effect  of  these  on  alternative  mathematical
formulations.  If  it had not been accompanied by the radical shift from
ancient  to  modern physics — especially with regard to the diversity or
uniformity  of  the world's matter— the Copernican hypothesis concerning
the  celestial  motions  would  have  been  no  more than a mathematical
alternative  to the Ptolemaic hypothesis. Copernicus seems to advance it
only as such, but in the hands of Kepler, Galileo, and Newton it becomes
much  more  than  that. They, rather than Copernicus, seem to accomplish
the  revolution  connected  with  his  name.  When their contribution is
neglected  or inadequately grasped, the Copernican revolution appears to
be,  as  is  often  popularly  supposed,  merely a shift in astronomical
theory.  The  problem  being  to  organize  mathematically  the apparent
motions  of  the  heavens,  Copernicus offers an alternative solution to
that of Ptolemy. Instead of treating the earth as stationary and central
in  the  cosmic system, Copernicus attributes three motions to the earth
by  treating  it as a planet which revolves around the sun, spins on its
axis,  and varies the inclination of its axis with reference to the sun.
What  is  usually  supposed to be revolutionary about this hypothesis is
its  effect  on  man's  estimate of himself and his place or rank in the
universe. On either of the rival hypotheses, the apparent motions of the
heavens  remain  unaltered,  but not man's conception of himself, of his
earth,  or  of  the  universe in which the earth's orbit cuts so small a
figure.  As  Kant suggests, man's stature seems to shrink. He becomes "a
mere  speck  in the universe" which has been enlarged to infinity, or at
least  to  an unimaginable immensity. He is displaced from its center to
become  a wanderer with his planet. Humanity's self-esteem, according to
Freud,  was  thus  for  the  first time deeply wounded; he refers to the
theory  that "is associated in our minds with the name of Copernicus" as
the "first great outrage"

[148b]
which  humanity  "had  to endure from the hands of science." It has been
questioned whether this interpretation of the Copernican revolution fits
all  the  documents  in  the  case.  Freud may be accurately reporting a
popular  feeling which, since the 1 8th century, has become a widespread
consequence  of Copernican and post-Copernican astronomy. But in earlier
centuries when the Ptolemaic system prevailed, or even after Copernicus,
the  appraisal  of  man's rank seems to depend more upon the position he
occupies in the hierarchy of God's creatures— below the angels and above
the  brutes—  than upon the place or motion of the earth, or the size of
the  world.  Boethius,  for  example, finds the Ptolemaic universe large
enough to remind man of the infinitesimal space he occupies. Dante, too,
comments  on the smallness of the earth in the scheme of things. When in
his  visionary travel Dante reaches the Empyrean, he looks down upon the
earth and "with my sight," he tells us, "I returned through all and each
of the seven spheres, and saw this globe, such that I smiled at its mean
semblance;  and  that  counsel I approve as best which holds it of least
account."  Kepler,  a  passionate  Copernican  deeply concerned with the
human  significance  of  astronomy,  can  be  found arguing that the new
hypothesis  involves something more fitting for man than the old. In his
last  argument  in  defense of the Copernican view against that of Tycho
Brahe  as well as that of Ptolemy, he declares, "it was not fitting that
man, who was going to be the dweller in this world and its contemplator,
should reside in one place as in a closed cubicle. ... It was his office
to   move  around  in  this  very  spacious  edifice  by  means  of  the
transportation  of  the  Earth  his home." In order properly to view and
measure the parts of his world, the astronomer "needed to have the Earth
a  ship  and  its  annual voyage around the sun." Yet the very fact that
Kepler  argues in this manner may be interpreted as indicating his sense
of  the  drastic  implications  for  man of the altered structure of the
universe.  Kepler may even be thought to announce the problem of the so-
called  "Copernican  revolution" when, in denying that the earth can any
longer "be reckoned among the primary parts of the great

[149a]
world,"  since  it is only a part of a part, i.e., the planetary region,
he  deliberately  adds  the qualification: "But I am speaking now of the
Earth  in so far as it is a part of the edifice of the world, and not of
the dignity of the governing creatures which inhabit it." Whether or not
it  was  the  traumatic  blow  to the human ego which Freud conjectures,
there  can  be  little  doubt  that the shift from Ptolemy to Copernicus
involved  a real shock to the imagination. The Ptolemaic system conforms
to the look of the world, which is indeed the reason why it is still the
one  used  in practical courses in navigation. Here again Kepler defends
Copernicus by explaining why "our uncultivated eyesight" cannot be other
than  deceived  and why it "should learn from reason" to understand that
things  are  really  different  from  the  way  they  appear.  A certain
disillusionment  may  result  from  this  affirmation— repeated by every
schoolboy  who  is  taught  the Copernican system— that, despite what we
see,  the sun does not move around the earth, and the earth both rotates
and revolves. It undermines the trust men placed in their senses and the
belief that science would describe the world as they saw it. In order to
I "save the appearances," that is, to account for the phenomena, science
might  henceforward  be expected to destroy any naive acceptance of them
as  the reality. Furthermore, though the Ptolemaic world was very large,
the  Copernican  universe  was  much  larger.  Whereas in the former the
radius  of  the earth was deemed negligible in relation to the radius of
the  sphere  of  the  fixed stars, in the new universe the radius of the
earth's  orbit  around  the  sun  was negligible in relation to the same
radius  of  the sphere of the fixed stars. It can hardly be doubted that
this  intensified  some  men's sense of almost being lost in an abyss of
infinity.  "I  see those frightful spaces of the universe which surround
me,"  Pascal  writes, "and I find myself tied to one corner of this vast
expanse,  without  knowing  why  I  am  put in this place rather than in
another."  When  he  regards  the  world's  immensity  as  "the greatest
sensible  I  markof  the almighty power of God," Pascal exI periences an
awe  which  for  him is qualified by reverence. Other men may experience
the same feeling, but less with reverence than with a

[149b]
.  Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 91 gnawing loneliness, born of the doubt that so
vast  a  cosmos—  if  cosmos  it  is  rather  than chaos — can have been
beneficently designed as man's habitation. W^HATEVER THE TRUTH about the
effect  of  the  Copernican theory in the order of opinion, imagination,
and  feeling,  it did produce a direct result on the intellectual plane.
It,  more  than any other single factor, led to the overthrow of certain
crucial  doctrines  which  had  been  linked together in the physics and
astronomy  of  Aristotle;  it  thus  radically  changed  the fundamental
principles  in  terms of which man had understood the order and unity of
nature. That scientific event deserves not only the name but the fame of
the  "Copernican revolution." The revolution in the realm of theorv goes
much  deeper  than the substitution of one mathematical construction for
another  to  describe  the motions of the world's great bodies. As Freud
points  out,  the  heliocentric  hypothesis  associated with the name of
Copernicus was known to the Alexandrian astronomers of antiquity. It is,
for  example,  attributed  to  Aristarchus  by  Archimedes  in the Sand-
Reckpner  As far as the earth's rotation is concerned, Ptolemy admits it
is  quite  "plausible"  to  suppose  "the heavens immobile and the earth
turning  on the same axis from west to east very nearly one revolution a
day.  .  .  .  As far as the appearances of the stars are concerned," he
goes  on,  "nothing  would  perhaps keep things from being in accordance
with  this simpler conWhy, then, does Ptolemy reject a supposition which
is  not  only  plausible  but  also,  in accounting for the appearances,
simpler}  In part the answer may be that he does so because the contrary
supposition  conforms  to  our  ordinary sense-experience of the earth's
immobility and the motions of the heavens from east to west. But that is
far  from being the most important part of the answer. Ptolemy indicates
the  crucial  part  when  he  tells  us  that  the  otherwise  plausible
supposition  of  a  rotating earth becomes ''altogether absurd" wlien wc
consider  the  speed  and  direction of the motions of bodies within the
earth's  own  atmosphere. His strongest count against the supposition is
that it does not conform to the Aristotelian physics which

[150a]
92  THE  GREAT  IDEAS distinguishes between natural and violent motions,
assigns  certain  fixed directions to the natural motions of each of the
four  elements  of  matter,  and  denies  that these elementary kinds of
terrestrial  matter  enter  into the composition of the heavenly bodies.
That  Aristotle's  physics  and  cosmology  lie at the very heart of the
issue  is  confirmed  by  the  way  in which Kepler later argues for the
Copernican  theory  against Ptolemy. He does not defend its truth on the
ground  that  it  accounts  for  observable  facts  which  the Ptolemaic
hypothesis  cannot  handle.  Nor  does he prefer it merely because it is
mathematically  the simpler hypothesis. On the contrary, he specifically
notes  that  anything  which  can be claimed on mathematical grounds for
Copernicus  over  Ptolemy  can  be  equally claimed for Tycho Brahe over
Ptolemy. (Brahe's theory was that while the other planets revolve around
the sun, the sun, with its planets, revolves around a stationary earth.)
According  to Kepler, the truth of these competing theories must finally
be  ]udgtd physically, not mathematically y and when the question is put
that  way,  as it is not by Copernicus himself, Copernicans like Kepler,
Galileo,  and  Newton  take issue with what had been associated with the
Ptolemaic  theory—  the  physics  of Aristotle. In order to examine this
issue,  it  is  necessary  to  state  briefly  here  certain features of
Aristotle's  physics  which  are more fully discussed in the chapters on
Change,  Element,  Mechanics,  and  Physics. Just as Ptolemy's astronomy
conforms  to  what  we  sec  as  we  look at the heavens, so Aristotle's
physics   represents  a  too  simple  conformity  with  everyday  sense-
experience.  We  observe fire rising and stones falling. Mix earth, air,
and  water  in a closed container, and air bubbles will rise to the top,
while  the  particles  of  earth  will  sink  to  the bottom. To cover a
multitude  of similar observations, Aristotle develops the theory of the
natural motions and places of the four terrestrial elements— earth, air,
fire, and water. Since bodies move naturally only to attain their proper
places,  the great body which is the earth, already at the bottom of all
things, need not move at all. Being in its proper place, it is by nature
stationary.

[150b]
Two  other  observations  exercise  a  decisive influence on Aristotle's
theory.  The  naked  eye  sees  no type of change in the heavenly bodies
other  than  local motion or change of place. Unlike terrestrial bodies,
they  do not appear to com^e into being or perish; they do not change in
size  or  quality. Furthermore, whereas the natural local motion of sub-
lunary  bodies  appears  to approximate the path of a straight line, the
local  motion of the celestial bodies appears to be circular rather than
rectilinear.  To  cover  these observations, Aristotle's theory posits a
different  kind  of  matter  for  celestial  and  terrestrial bodies. An
incorruptible matter must constitute the great orbs which are subject to
local  motion alone and have the most perfect kind of local motion— that
of  a  circle.  Since  they are subject to generation and corruption, to
change  of  quality and quantity, and are in local motion along straight
lines,   terrestrial   bodies   are   of   a   corruptible  matter.  The
interconnection  of  all  these  points  is  marked  by  Aquinas when he
summarizes Aristotle's doctrine. "Plato and all who preceded Aristotle,"
he writes, "held that all bodies are of the nature of the four elements"
and  consequently  "that  the  matter of all bodies is the same. But the
fact  of  the incorruptibility of some bodies was ascribed by Plato, not
to the condition of matter, but to the will of the artificer, God. . . .
This  theory,"  Aquinas  continues,  "Aristotle disproves by the natural
movements  of  bodies. For since he says that the heavenly bodies have a
natural  movement,  different from that of the elements, it follows that
they  have a different nature from them. For movement in a circle, which
is  proper  to  the  heavenly  bodies, is not by contraries, whereas the
movements  of  the  elements are mutually opposite, one tending upwards,
another  downwards.  .  .  .  And  as generation and corruption are from
contraries,  it  follows that, whereas the elements are corruptible, the
heavenly  bodies  are  incorruptible."  The  same  points  which Aquinas
relates  in  his  defense  of  the Aristotelian theory, Kepler also puts
together  when  he  expounds  that  theory in order to attack it and the
Ptolemaic astronomy which tries to conform to it. "By what arguments did
the ancients establish their opinion which is the opposite of yours .f*"
he asks. "By

[151a]
four  arguments in especial: (i) From the nature of moveable bodies. (2)
From the nature of the motor virtue. (3) From the nature of the place in
which  the  movement  occurs. (4) From the perfection of the circle." He
then  states  each of these arguments, and answers each in turn. What is
extraordinary  about Kepler's attack upon the Ptolemaic astronomy cannot
be  understood  without  examining  Ptolemy's  defense  of his theory, a
defense  which  Copernicus  meets in Ptolemy's own terms rather than, as
Kepler  does,  by going outside them. Though his expressed intention was
to  construct a mathematical theory of the celestial motions which would
also   conform  to  Aristotle's  physics,  Ptolemy,  when  he  finished,
recognized  that the complications he had been compelled to add in order
"to save the appearances" left him with a theory that did not conform to
Aristotle's  doctrine  of  the  perfect  circular motion of the heavenly
spheres.  Instead  of  abandoning  Aristotle's  physics, he defended his
theory  on  the  ground  that  astronomy, being mathematical rather than
physical,  could  admit  such "unrealistic" complications if they served
the  purposes  of  calculation and of "savI ing the appearances." In the
thirteenth  and  last  book of the Almagest, when he faces the fact that
his mathematical devices have become exceedingly difficult —and strained
from  the point of view of the Aristotelian reality—Ptolemy writes: "Let
no  one,  seeing  the  difficulty  of our devices, find troublesome such
hypotheses.  ...  It  is  proper  to  try and fit as far as possible the
simpler hypotheses to the movements of the heavens; and if this does not
succeed,  then  any  hypotheses  possible.  Once all the appearances are
saved  by the consequences of the hypotheses, why should it seem strange
that  such  complications  can  come  about in the movements of heavenly
things?"  We  ought  not  to  judge the simplicity of heavenly things by
comparison  with  what  seems to be simple in the explanation of earthly
phenomena.   "We   should   instead  judge  their  simplicity  from  the
unchangeableness  of the natures in the heavens and their movements. For
thus  they would all appear simple, more than those things which seem so
here with us."

[151b]
Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 93 Ignoring the supposition that simplicity must be
judged  differently  in different spheres, Copernicus challenges Ptolemy
on  his  own  grounds  when he proposes "simpler hypotheses" to fit "the
movements  of  the  heavens."  But  in  doing  so, he seems to adopt the
traditional   view   of   the  mathematical  character  of  astronomical
hypotheses.  Yet,  as  will  appear,  he does not adopt this view in the
unqualified  form  in  which  Osiander  states  it in his Preface to the
Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres. "It is the job of the astronomer,"
Osiander   writes,  "to  use  painstaking  and  skilled  observation  in
gathering  together  the  history  of the celestial movements, and then—
since  he  cannot by any Ime of reasoning reach the true causes of these
movements—  to  think  or  construct  whatever  causes  or hypotheses he
pleases,  such  that,  by  the  assumption  of  these causes, these same
movements  can  be  calculated  from the principles of geometry, for the
past and for the future too. "It is not necessary," he adds, "that these
hypotheses  should  be  true,  or  even  probable;  it is enough if they
provide  a  calculus  which  fits the observations. When for one and the
same  movement  varying  hypotheses  are  proposed,  as  eccentricity or
epicycle  for  the  movement  of the sun, the astronomer much prefers to
take  the one which is easiest to grasp." What distinguishes Kepler from
both  Ptolemy  and Osiander is the way in which he is concerned with the
truth of alternative hypotheses in astronomy. He looks upon the truth of
an hypothesis as something to be judged not merely in mathematical terms
according to the adequacy and simplicity of a calculating device, but to
be measured by its conformity to all the physical realities. At the very
beginning  of  his  Epitome  of Copernican Astronomy, he flatly declares
that  "astronomy  is  part  of physics." And in the opening pages of the
fourth  book,  he  insists that astronomy has not one, but "two ends: to
save  the appearances and to contemplate the true form of the edifice of
the W^orld." He follows this immediately by observing that, if astronomy
had only the first end, Tycho Brahe's theory would be as satisfactory as
that  of  Copernicus. Early in his scientific career, before writing the
Epitome^ Kepler asserts that "one cannot

[152a]
m  THE  GREAT IDEAS leave to the astronomer absolute license to feign no
matter what hypotheses." He complains that astronomers **too often . . .
constrain  their  thought  from  exceeding  the limitsofgeometry." It is
necessary to go beyond geometry into physics to test the consequences of
competing  hypotheses  which are equally good mathematically. ''You must
seek the foundations of your astronomy," he tells his fellow scientists,
"in  a more elevated science, I mean in physics or metaphysics." Because
Kepler  thus  conceives  the  task  and truth of astronomy, Duhem in his
great  history  ofastronomy  calls him a "realistic Copernican." Galileo
also,  Duhem  thinks, was a realistic Copernican. "To confirm by physics
the  Copernican  hypotheses,"  he  writes,  "is the center towards which
converge  Galileo's  observations  as  an astronomer and his terrestrial
mechanics."  Newton  was  the  third member of this triumvirate. For him
there  remained  the  solution  of  tiie  problem  of  deducing Kepler's
formulation of the planetary orbits in a manner consistent with Gahleo's
laws of motion in the dynamics of bodies falling on the earth's surface.
But  the very posing of this problem itself depended on the insight that
terrestrial  and  celestial  mechanics can proceed according to the same
principles and laws. That insight entailed the complete overthrow of the
ancient  physics,  with  its  division of the universe into two distinct
parts,  having  different  kinds of matter and different laws of motion.
Copernicus,  who, despite Osiander's apologetics, believed his theory to
be true, did not himself face the great point at issue in the Copernican
revolution—  the  material uniformity of the physical universe. We shall
subsequently   consider  the  question  of  the  truth  of  astronomical
hypotheses,  but  whether  or  not Copernicus and the Copernicans had in
their  own  day  a  right  to  believe  their  theory  true,  it was the
acceptance  of  the  Copernican  hypothesis as true which led Kepler and
Galileo  to  deny the truth of Aristotelian physics. If the earth is not
at  the  center  and  stationary,  then  the basic doctrine of a natural
direction in motion and a natural place of rest for the various elements
is  completely  upset. If the earth is one of the planets, then anything
true

[152b]
on  the  earth—or of the earth, such as Gilbert's theory of the magnetic
fields  generated by the earth's axial rotation—could be equally true of
all  the  other  planets.  "Read  the  philosophy  of  magnetism  of the
Englishman  William Gilbert," writes Kepler; "for in that book, although
the  author  did  not believe that the Earth moved . . . nevertheless he
attributes a magnetic nature to it by very many arguments. Therefore, it
is  by no means absurd or incredible that any one of the primary planets
should be, what one of the primary planets, namely, the Earth, is." Such
a  statement  plainly  shows that when the earth becomes a planet, as it
does  in  Copernican  theory,  no obstacle remains to the assertion of a
homogeneity  between  the earth and the other planets both in matter and
motion. The old physical dualism of a supralunar and a sublunar world is
abandoned.  "Not the movement of the earth," Whitehead remarks, "but the
glory  of the heavens was the point at issue," for to assert the heavens
to  be  of  the  same  stuff and subject to the same laws as the rest of
nature  brings  them  down  to  the  plane  of  earthly physics. That is
precisely what Newton finally does when, in the enunciation of his Third
Rule  of  reasoning  in  natural  philosophy,  he  dryly  but explicitly
completes  the  Copernican  Revolution. Those "qualities of bodies . . .
which  are  found  to  belong  to  all  bodies  within  the reach of our
experiments,  are,"  Newton  maintains,  "to  be  esteemed the universal
qualities  of all bodies whatsoever." In the bifurcated world of ancient
theory,  astronomy  had a very special place among the natural sciences,
proportionate to the "glory of the heavens." But with Newton it could be
completely  merged  into  a  general mechanics whose laws of motion have
universal  application. That merger, begun by Newton, has been perfected
since  his  day.  The  last  obstacle  to  the generalization lay in the
apparent  discrepancies  between  electrical  phenomena on the subatomic
scale  and  gravitational  phenomena on the astronomic scale. But in our
own  time the unified field equations of Einstein's theory of relativity
embrace  the  very  large  and the very small motions of matter within a
single  conceptual scheme, with radical consequences for the revision of
the Newtonian or classical mechanics.

[153a]
Chapter 5 But the unification of nature whicli Kepler ( began and Newton
completed,  when  set  against  f  Aristotle's physics, may be even more
radical.  •  Newton's  theory,  because of the amazing way 1 in which it
covered  the  widest  variety  of  phe-  .  nomena by the simplest, most
universal  formula, is considered by Kant to have "established the truth
of  that  which  Copernicus at first assumed only as an hypothesis." But
the  larger  contribution,  in  Whitehead's opinion, is "the idea of the
neutrality  of  situation  and  the  universality of physical laws . . .
holding  indifferently  in  every part." Whatever position we take today
concerning  the  kind  of  truth  which  is  possessed  by hypotheses in
mathematical  physics,  we  now  demand,  in  the  spirit  of  the three
Copernicans—Kepler,  Galileo,  and,  above  all,  Newton—  that physical
hypotheses  account  at  once  for  all  the  phenomena of the inanimate
universe.  Whatever  the  truth of modern as opposed to ancient physics,
the  Newtonian  universe  is  so  thoroughly estabhshed in our minds and
feelings  that,  when we are reminded of the other universe in which men
lived  before  the  Copernican  revolution,  we tend to think it quaint,
incredible,  preposterous, superstitious, none of which it was. Finally,
from  the  point of view of our understanding of natural science itself,
the  astronomical  controversy  we  have  been  considering is almost an
archetypical  model.  It is necessary, of course, to appreciate the real
achievement  of  Ptolemy as well as of Copernicus and Kepler in order to
realize  how genuine and difficult the issues were. Facts unknown to all
of  them may now have closed the dispute decisiveh/, but issues in other
spheres  of  modern science, almost identical in pattern with that great
astronomical one, are not yet closed; and to the degree that we are able
to  re-enact  in  our minds the i motion of thought on both sides of the
Copernican   controversy,   we   can   confront   comparable  scientific
issues—still  open—with  open  minds. Darwin, for example, fi.nds in the
astronomical  controversy  a  precedent  to  which  he can appeal in the
defense  of  natural  selection against • its adversaries. "The behef in
the  revolution  of  the  earth  on its own axis," he writes, "was until
lately  not supported by any direct evidence." But the absence of direct
evidence does not leave a scientific theory without foundation,

[153b]
ASTRONOMY 95 Darwin argues, if it has the power to explain several large
classes  of  facts, which "it can hardly be supposed that a false theory
would explain" in so satisfactory a manner. Darwin defends the theory of
natural  selection  as having such power. To those who object that "this
is  an  unsafe  method  of  arguing,"  he replies citing an example from
astronomy—  that  "it  has  often  been  used  by  the  greatest natural
philosophers."  The  great  books  of astronomy most lucidlv exhibit the
essential  pattern  of that kind of natural science which has, in modern
times,  come to be called "mathematical physics." Though that phrase may
be modern, the ancients recognized the special character of the sciences
which apply mathematics to nature and which consult experience to choose
among  hypotheses  arising  from  different  mathematical  formulations.
Outlining  a  curriculum  for liberal education, Plato, in the Republic,
groups  music  and  astronomy  along  with  arithmetic  and  geometry as
mathematical  arts  or  sciences. In that context he treats them as pure
mathematics.  Astronomy  is  no  more concerned with the visible heavens
than  music  is  with  audible  tones. Music is rather the arithmetic of
harmonies,  astronomy  the geometry of motions. But in the Timaeus Plato
turns  mathematical  formulae and calculations to use in telling what he
calls  "a  likely  story"  concerning the formation and structure of the
sensible  world  of  becoming. Here rather than in the Republic we have,
according  to  Whitehead, the initial conception of mathematical physics
as  well  as  deep  insight  into  its  nature  and  pattern.  Aristotle
criticizes  the  notion  of  astronomy as a purely mathematical science.
Just  as  "the  things of which optics and mathematical harmonies treat"
cannot  be  divorced  from the sensible, so the objects of astronomy are
also  the  visible heavens. "Astronomical experience," Aristotle writes,
"supplies  the  principles  of  astronomical  science."  Yet, though its
subject  matter  is  physical  and  its  method  is  in  part empirical,
astronomy  like  optics  and  harmonics  takes  the form of mathematical
demonstration;  and  it is for this reason that Aquinas later calls such
disciplines "mixed and intermediate

[154a]
96 THE GREAT IDEAS The development of astronomy from Plato and Aristotle
through  Ptolemy,  Copernicus,  and  Kepler  to  Galileo and Newton thus
constitutes  an  extraordinary  set of "case histories" for the study of
what  }.  B.  Conant  calls  the  "tactics and strategy" of science, and
especially  mathematical physics. But astronomy has one peculiar feature
which  distinguishes  it from other branches of mathematical physics. It
is  empirical  rather than experimental. The astronomer does not control
the  phenomena he observes. He does not, like the physicist, chemist, or
physiologist,  produce  an  isolated  system  of  events by means of the
laboratory  arts.  Harvey  comments  on this aspect of astronomy when he
proposes  an experiment that will enable the physiologist to do what the
astronomer   cannot  do,  namely,  deliberately  prepare  phenomena  for
examination  by  the  senses.  The  astronomer  must be content with the
appearances  as  they are given. Defending psychoanalysis against attack
"on  the  ground  that it admits of no experimental proof," Freud points
out  that  his  critics  "might  have  raised the same objection against
astronomy;  experimentation  with  the  heavenly  bodies  is, after all,
exceedingly  difficult. There one has to rely on observation." Since the
invention  of  the  telescope, the astronomer has had instruments of all
sorts  to  increase  the range and accuracy of his observations; but the
fact  that  the  place  where  he  uses  such  apparatus  is  called  an
observatory rather than a laboratory indicates that these instruments do
not  make  astronomy  an  experimental  science.  Nevertheless, as Bacon
points  out,  the telescope enabled Galileo to do more than improve upon
the  accuracy  of  prior  observations.  It  brought within the range of
observation  certain  celestial phenomena, hitherto imperceptible to the
naked  eye,  such as the phases of Venus, the satellites of Jupiter, and
the  constitution of the Milky Way. Concerning the last of these, Pascal
later  remarks that the ancients can be excused for the idea they had of
the  cause of its color. "The weakness of their eyes not yet having been
artificially helped, they attributed this color to the great solidity of
this  part of the sky"; but it would be inexcusable for us, he adds, "to
retain  the  same  thought  now  that,  aided  by  the advantages of the
telescope, we have discovered

[154b]
in the Milky Way an infinity of small stars whose more abundant splendor
has made us recognize the real cause of this whiteness." Because it is a
mixed  science,  both empirical and mathematical, astronomy advances not
only  with the improvement and enlargement of observation, but also with
new  insights  or  developments  in  mathematics. Kant gives us striking
examples  of  how the work of the pure mathematicians contributes to the
advance  of  physics  and  astronomy.  Their  discoveries are often made
without  any  knowledge of their application to natural phenomena. "They
investigated  the  properties of the parabola," he writes, "in ignorance
of  the  law  of terrestrial gravitation which would have shown them its
application  to  the  trajectory  of  heavy  bodies. . . . So again they
investigated  the  properties  of the ellipse without a suspicion that a
gravitation  was  also discoverable in the celestial bodies, and without
knowing  the  law  that  governs  it  as  the distance from the point of
attraction varies, and that makes the bodies describe this curve in free
motion." So amazing are such mathematical anticipations that Kant thinks
Plato  may  be  pardoned  for  supposing  that  pure  mathematics "could
dispense with all experience" in discovering the constitution of things.
Whether or not Plato goes to this extreme, he does, in the Republic seem
to  suggest the reverse of Kant's conception of the relationship between
mathematics  and  astronomy.  "The  spangled heavens should be used as a
pattern,"    he    writes,   "and   with   a   view   to   that   higher
knowledge"—mathematics.   Astronomy   should   be   used   to  instigate
discoveries  in/7«r^  mathematics  by  suggesting  good  problems and by
requiring  formulations  which  transcend an interest in the truth about
the  heavens.  This  twofold relation between mathematical discovery and
empirical observation is present in the development of astronomy itself,
and of all branches of mathematical physics. But there is another aspect
of  the  relationship  which  must  be  taken  into  account ifwe are to
consider  the  problem  of  truth  in  such  sciences.  The way in which
mathematical  formulations fit the phenomena measures the truth of rival
hypotheses with respect to the same reality.

[155a]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  The Iof;ic of such verification has already been
suggested   in   the   discussion  of  the  geocentric  and  hehocentric
hypotheses. It is further considered in the chapter on Hypothesis. To be
satisfactory,  an  hypothesis  must—  in  the  language  used ever since
Simplicius—  "save  the  appearances," that is, account for the relevant
phenomena.  But  two  hypotheses  (as  for  example  the  geocentric and
heliocentric)  may,  at a certain time, do an equally good job of saving
the  appearances.  Then  the choice between them becomes a matter of the
greater mathematical elegance of one than the other. That, however, does
not give the mathematically superior theory a greater claim to truth. So
far  as  reality  is  concerned, it is only, in Plato's words, "a likely
story";  or  as  Aquinas  points  out  with  reference to the geocentric
hypothesis,  "the  theor)'  of eccentrics and epicycles is considered as
established  because  thereby  the  sensible appearances of the heavenly
movements  can  be  explained;  not  however,  as  if  this  reason were
sufficient,  since some other theory might explain them." Two hypotheses
may  be  equally  satisfactory for the range of phenomena they were both
devised  to  fit. But only one of them may have the quite amazing virtue
of  fitting  other  sets  of  observations  not originally thought to be
related  to  the  phenomena for which the hypothOUTLINE OF TOPICS 1. The
end,  dignity,  and  utility of astronomy 2. The method of astronomy 2a.
Observation  and  measurement:  instruments  and  tables  2b. The use of
hypotheses: the heliocentric and geocentric theories 2C. The relation of
astronomy  to mathematics: the use of mathematics by astronomy 3. Causes
in  astronomy  3^. Formal archetypal causes: the number and the music of
the  spheres 3^. Physical efficient causes: gravitation and action-at-a-
distance  4.  The  relation  of  astronomy to the other liberal arts and
sciences:  the  place  of  astronomy  in  the  educational curriculum 5.
Astronomy  and  cosmology:  the  theory  of  the  world  or  universe as
reflecting astronomical conceptions

[155b]
^1  esis  was  devised. The word "consilience" has been used to name the
property  of  an hypothesis which, in addition to saving a limited field
of  appearances,  succeeds in fitting many other phenomena which seem to
have  become  related  —  to  \\^vtjumped  together  under  its covering
explanation.  The heliocentric hypothesis, as developed by Newton's laws
of  motion  and  theory  of  gravitation, certainly has this property of
consilience  to  a  high  degree,  for  it  covers  both  celestial  and
terrestrial  phenomena,  and  a  wide  variety  of  the  latter.  Is the
heliocentric hypothesis true then? If the truth of an hypothesis depends
on  the range of the phenomena it fits or saves, it might seem to be so,
for  by  its  consilience  it  accounts for phenomena that the Ptolemaic
theory  cannot  handle.  But  though  this  may  cause  us to reject the
unsuccessful hypothesis, does it establish beyond doubt the truth of the
successful  one  ?  Or,  to  put  the  question  another way, is not our
judgment  here  a  comparative  one rather than absolute.? Are we saying
more  than  that one hypothesis is more successful than another in doing
what  an  hypothesis should do? Are we logically entitled to regard that
success  as  the  sign  of  its  exclusive  truth,  or  must we restrict
ourselves  to  the more modest statement that, as the better hypothesis,
it simply tells a more likely story about reality? PAGE 99 100 lOI

[156a]
98  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Sa. The special character of matter in the supra-
lunar  spheres  Sb.  Soul  and  intellect in the heavenly bodies (i) The
eternity  of  celestial  motion  Sd,  The creation of the heavens 9. The
particular  heavenly  bodies  ga. The sun: its position, distance, size,
and  mass  gc.  The  planets: their eccentricities, retrogradations, and
stations gd. The earth: its origin, position, shape, and motions gf. The
comets  and  meteors  10.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly bodies upon
terrestrial  phenomena  10^. The influence of the heavenly bodies on the
tides 13. The history of astronomy

[156b]
PAGE  6.  Astronomy  and  theology: astronomy as affecting views of God,
creation,  the  divine plan, and the moral hierarchy 102 8. The heavenly
bodies  in  general  103 Sc. Celestial motion: periodicity and the great
year  104  (3) The laws of celestial motion: celestial mechanics 105 gb.
The  moon: its irregularities 106 ge. The fixed stars: the precession of
the  equinoxes  107  loa. The influence of the heavenly bodies on living
matter: generation and corruption 108 12. The worship of the earth, sun,
moon, and stars 109

[157a]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  REFERENCES  To  find the passages cited, use the
numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are the volume and page numbers ot the
passages  rctcrred  to.  For example, in 4 Homkr: Iliad, bk ii [265-283]
12d, the number 4 is the number of the vokmne in the set; the number 12d
mdicates  that  the  passage  is in section d of page 12. Page Sections:
When the text is printed in one column, the letters a and b refer to the
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53 James :
Psychology,  116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half of page 116
and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is printed in two
columns,  the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the
lefthand  side  of  the page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of the page. For example, in 7 Plato:
Symposium,  163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-
hand  side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side
of  page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a
work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included in the
reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are given in certain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d.  Bible References: The references are to
book,  chapter, and verse. When the King James and Douay versions differ
in  title  of  books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King
James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows;
e.g.,  Old  Testament: Nehemiah, 7:45— (D) // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed intermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in  the  use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. • 1. The
end,  dignity,  and  utility  of astronomy Old Testament: /o^, 38:4-38 7
Plato:  Symposium,  156d / Gorgias, 254c / Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b /
Timaeus,  447a452b;  455b-c  /  Laws,  bk vii, 728b-c; 729d730d; BK XII,
797c-798b  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982^1117] 500d; BK XI,
CH  6 [1063^10-17] 591b; bk XII, CH 8 [1073^1-7] 603d 9 Aristotle: Parts
of Afiimals^ bk i, ch 5
[644^21-645*5] 168c-d
10  Hippocrates  :  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  2  9b-c 11 NicoMACHUs:
Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812b-813a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk v
[509-771]  67d-71a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi, sect 27 306b 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 14 Plutarch: Nicias, 435b-d 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6b;  bk  hi,  83a;  BK  IV, 135b; BK IX,
270b-273a;  bk  xiii,429a-b  16 Copernicus : Revolutions of the Heavenly
Spheres,  505a-506a;  509a-b; bk i, 510a-511a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
846a-851a;  852a853a;  888b-890a; 929a-b; bk v, 961a-965a / Harmonies of
the  World,  1080a-b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29 650d-651c

[157b]
$91  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, A I, rep 2 175d-178a 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b; x [1-27] 120b-c
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-70c;  213d-215a;  257d-259d  31  Descartes:
Meditations,  i,  76c 32 Milton: Paradise host, bk viii [1-202] 232a236b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 242 217b-218a 34 Newton: Principles,
la-2a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a passim 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  229a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
175b
[fn
i]  /  Practical  Reason,  360d-361c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,
additions,  120,  136c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  365b-367a 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  562c  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 779c /
New  Introductory  Lectures, 832a; 876b-d 2. The method of astronomy 2a.
Observation  and  measurement: instruments and tables 7 Plato: Republic,
bk vii, 394d-396b/ Timaeus, 455a-b

[158a]
(2.   The  method  of  astronomy.  2  a.  Observation  and  measurement:
instruments and tables.) 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30
[46^18-27] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[78''3 1-79*7]
108b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270^1-24] 361c-362a; bk ii, ch 4 [287*31-^14]
379a; ch ii 383b; ch 12
[292*2-9] 383c
/ Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8
[1073^17-1074*17]
604a-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^7-12] 161c-d
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  24b-26a;  bk i-iii, 29a-86b; bk iii-iv,
93a-119b; bk iv-viii, 123a-269a; bk ix, 273a-290b; bk ix-xiii, 296a-465b
16   Copernicus:   Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  ii-iii,
557b-626a;  bk  hi,  631b652b;  657b-674b;  bk  iv-v,  680a-739b;  bk v,
744b'812a;  bk  vi,  818a-838a  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 907b-908b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii, ch 29, 651b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, A I, rep 2
175d-178a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii [46-105] 108b-d 22
Chaucer:  FranJ^lin's  Tale [11,582-605] 360b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
iv,  267a-b 24 Rabelais : Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 29c 28 Harvey:
Circulation  of  the Blood, 320b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 109,
129b;  BK  II,  APH  39, 170b-c; aph 45, 176a; aph 46, 178a-b 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk i
[284-291] 99b;
BK  III  [588-590]  148a; bk v [261-263] 181a 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, phenomena 272a275a; prop 41-42 342a-368b /
Optics,  bk i, 412a-423b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 58-59 424a-b
36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 102a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-c 48
Melville: Moby Dic{, 365b-367a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 815a
2b.  The  use  of hypotheses: the heliocentric and geocentric theories 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  241c-242b;  247c  / Republic, bk VI, 386d-387d; bk vii,
395c-396b;  bk  x,  438c-439a/  Timaeus,  447b-d; 452a-b / Laws, bk xii,
797d-798a 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270^1-24]
361c-362a; bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a; ch 8 381a-382a; ch ii
[29i^io]-ch
13
[293^33]
383b-385b; ch 14 [296*24-297*9] 387d-388c / Meteorology, bk i, ch 7
[344*5-9] 450b
/ Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8
[1073^17-1074*17]
604a-c  9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 3 234a-c 11 Archimedes: Sand-
Recl^pner, 520a-b

[158b]
100  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2b  to  Ic  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[526-533]  67d-68a;  [720-730] 70c 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 55a-b 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b; 9a-12b; bk III, 83a; 86b-93a; bk iv,
120a-122b;  bk  ix, 270b-273a; 291a-296a; bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  505a-506a;  507a-508b;  bk  i,
513b515b; 517b-521a; bk hi, 628b-629a; 653b656b; BK IV, 675b-678a; bk v,
740a-b  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  852a-853a;  857b860b; 887a-890a;
907b-916a; bk v, 964b; 966a-967a / Harmonies of the World, 1014b1016a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a  i, rep 2 175d-178a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  257d-261c;  276c  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,
107c-116a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  5,  139a;  aph 36,
165c-166b;  aph  46, 178b-c; aph 48, 186b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi  [552-587]  147b148a;  bk  iv  [589-597]  165a-b;  bk  viii  [66-178]
233b-236a esp [122-158] 234b- 235b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 165a /
Vacuum, 368b-369a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, phenomenon ih 273d-274a;
general  schol, 371b-372a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 226b-227a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  8d  [fn  2] 43 Mill: Liberty, 284a-b 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  239c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue ii,
694d-696d  2c.  The  relation  of  astronomy  to mathematics: the use of
mathematics by astronomy 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b / Timaeus,
451b-c; 455b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[78^31-79*16]
108b-c / Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[193^25-194*11] 270a-c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 14
[297*3-9] 388c
/ Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[997^13-998*19] 516b-d; bk xii, ch 8 [1073^117] 603d-604a; bk xiii, ch 3 [1078*9-14] 609c
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^6-12] 161c-d
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic, bk i, 813d-814a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i,
5a-6a;  14a-24b;  26a-28b  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the Heavenly
Spheres,  507a-508a;  bk  i,  510a-b; 532b556b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v,
964b-965a;  968a986b  passim  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk v, par 3-6
27c-28c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 29, 651b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 32, A I, rep 2 175d-178a; part i-ii, q 35, a 8,
ANS  779c-780c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 9, A 2, rep 3
424b-425a

[159a]
3  to  5  .  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 37b; 46b c 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  i,  76c  34  Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi 269a-372a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  94b-103a passim 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
361c   /  judgement,  551a-552a  3.  Causes  in  astronomy  3</.  Formal
archetypal  causes:  the  number  and  the music of the spheres 7 Plato:
Phaedo,  241b-242b  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  395d-396b; bk x, 438c-439a /
Timaeus,  447a452b  8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 2-5 359d-364a; BK II,
CH 1-12 375b,d-384c / Metaphysics, bk I, CH 5
[985^22-986*21]
503d-504b; ch 8
[989^29-990^12] 508a-b; bk
xii,  ch  8  603b605a  11  NicoMACHUs:  Arithmetic,  bk  i, 811a-814b 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk i, 8a; bk ix, 270b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 511b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 846a-847b;
857b860b;  863b-887a  passim;  913a-b; 915b-916a; 925b-928a; 932a-933a /
Harmonies  of  the  World,  1016b-1018a;  1023b-1085b  esp 1049b1050b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  i  [76-126]  107a-c;  xxviii [1-78] 148d-149c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 185c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix,
371d-372a 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[i 17-140] 4b-5a / At
a  Solemn Musicl{ 13a-b / Arcades [54-83] 26b27a / Comus [238-243] 38b /
Paradise Lost, bk IV
[660-688] 166b-167b; bk v
[153-184]
178b-179a;  [616-627]  188b-189a;  bk  vni  [15168] 232b-235b 34 Newton:
Principles,   bk   hi,   general   schol,   369b-370a  "35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div  9,  454c-d  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
96b-97a  47  Goethe:  Faust, prologue [243-246] 7a 3^. Physical ef&cient
causes:  gravitation  and  action-at-a-distance 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk
it, ch 8 381a-382a; ch 12 [292^26-293*12] 384b-c / Meteorology, bk I, CH
4-8   447d-452d   /   Metaphysics,   bk   xii,   CH   8   603b-605a  esp
[1073^17-1074^17]  604a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533]
67d-68a  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 895b-905a; 922a-b; 935a-952a passim;
959a-960a;  bk  v, 965a-967a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi 106a-121a,c 30
Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35-37 162a-169c; aph 45 176a-177c; aph
48, 183b-c 31 Descartes : Rules, ix, 15c / Discourse, part v, 55b-c

[159b]
Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 101 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, rk hi [573-587] 148a;
bk  vih  [122-158]  234b-235b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, prop 1-9
276a284a  esp PROP 7 281b-282b; prop 35, schol 320b-324a; general schol,
371b-372a / Optics, BK HI, 531b; 540a-541b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  102-108 432d-434a passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, niv
9,  454c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a; 118b119a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  8d  [fn  2]  45  Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 670a-673d;
817a-b;  824a-b;  832b  [fn  i]  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
694c695c  4.  The  relation  of  astronomy to the other liberal arts and
sciences:  the place of astronomy in the educational curriculum 7 Plato:
Gorgias,  254b-c / Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c esp 394d-396b / Lau/s, bk
vii, 728b-730d; bk xii, 797b-798b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[193^25194*11]
270a-c / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 6
[1063*10-17] 591b; BK
xir, ch 8
[1073^1-7]
603d  11  Nicomachus: A^rithmetic, bk i, 812b-813d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk
vi  [847-853] 233b-234a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b  18  Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 29, 651b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  9,  A  2, REP 3 424b-425a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
72a-d  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 29c; bk ii, 82c-d 25
Montaigne: Essays, 69d-70c; 257d-259d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph
80  120a-b 31 Descartes: Meditations, i, 76c 5. Astronomy and cosmology:
the   theory  of  the  world  or  universe  as  reflecting  astronomical
conceptions 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-452b; 455a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
iv, ch 5
[212^7-21]
291d-292a  / Heavens 359a-405a,c / Meteorology, bk I, CH 1-3 445a-447d /
Metaphysics,  BK  XII,  CH  8  603b-605a ' 11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckpner,
520a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [951-1113] 12d-14d; bk ii
[1048-1104]
28b-29a; bk vi
[647-652] 89a
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius, 55a-b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 10b 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 511b; 516a-529a
esp 516a-517b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-857b; 882a886b

[160a]
(5.  Astronomy  and  cosmology:  the  theory of the world or universe as
reflecting  astronomical  conceptions.^ 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead^ tr i
35a-39d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy^ paradise, x
[7-21]
120b-c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v,
54d-56a  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [890-920] 130b131a; [1010-1055]
133a-134a; bk hi [418-429] 144b;
[501-539]
146b-147a;
[552-587]
147b148a; bk vii [261-273] 222b-223a; [551-557] 229a; [617-625] 230b; bk
viii  [66-178] 233b236a; bk x [282-329] 280b-281b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72
181a-184b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, hypothesis iprop 12 285a-286a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  SECT24  320c-d 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  360d-361a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue ii,
695c-d  54  Freud: General Introduction, 562c 6. Astronomy and theology:
astronomy as aflfecting views of God, creation, the divine plan, and the
moral  hierarchy  Old  Testament: Genesis, i:i-ig / Joshua, 10:1213— (D)
Josue,  10:12-13  /job,  9:6-9;  38:1-38  /  Psalms,  19:1-6; 147:4— (D)
Psalms,  18:1-7;  146:4  /Jeremiah,  33:22;  51:15— (D) Jeremias, 33:22;
51:15  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 43— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 43 / Song
of   Three  Children,  34-51—  (D)  OT,DamH  3:56-73  New  Testament:  /
Corinthians,  15:40-41 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 396a / Timaeus, 455b-c
/  Statesman,  586c-589c  / Laws, bk vii, 729d-730d; bk xii, 797d-798b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 4
[196^25-^4]
272d-273a;  bk  viii  334a-355d  esp ch 4-6 338d-346b, ch 10 353b-355d /
Heavens, bk II, ch I 375b,d-376a / Metaphysics, bk xii, CH 6-8 601b-605a
11  NicoMACHUs:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-814b  12 Lucretius: Nature of
Thi?igs, bk v [55-771] 61d-71a esp
[55-234]
61d-64a;
[1161-1217]
76b-77a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect 27 306b 14 Plutarch:
Nicias,  435b-c  15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 295c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest,
bk  i,  5a-6b passim 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
bk  i,  510a-511a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a; 915b916a; 933a /
Harmonies  of  the  World,  1017b1018a;  1025a-b;  1048a;  1061a; 1071b;
1080b1085b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a41a; tr ix, ch 8-9
70a-72a / Fourth Ennead, TR III, ch 17 150d-151b

[160b]
d  102  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (>tol 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6
27c28c;  bk XIII, par 6-48 112a-124a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 16,
644d-645a; ch 29 650d-651c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 23, A
7,  ANs and REP 2 138d-140a; q 50, a 3, ans and REP 3 272a-273b; q 58, a
i  300c-301a;  Q  63, A I, REP 2 325c-326c; a 7, ans 331c-332b; QQ 66-68
343d-359b;  q 70 362c-367a; q 102, A 2, REP I 525a-526a; q iio, a i, rep
2-3  564c-565d;  q  115,  aa 3-6 588c-592d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  5, A 2 736d-737c; part hi suppl, q 77, aa 1-3 943a-947a; q
91, aa 2-3 1017c-1022c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[67-96]
lOb-c; XXXIV
[100-139]
52b-d; paradise, i
[94-142]
107b-d; II
[46-148]
108b-109b; iv
[22-63]
llOd-lllb; vin
[16-39]
116d-117a;
[91-148] 117d-118c; X [1-45] 120b-d; xiii [5284] 126a-b; xxn [124-154] 140d-141b; xxvii
[97-120] 148b-c; xxviii 148d-150b
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213d-215a 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida,
act i, sc III [85-101] 109a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 89 124a-d
31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-56a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[694-732] 150b151b; bk V
[153-184]
178b-179a; bk viii
[66-178] 233b-236a esp [66-84] 233b-234a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72 181a-184b; 194, 207b; 242 217b-218a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi, general schol, 369b-371a / Optics, bk hi, 542a-543a
41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 226a-b; 227b-c 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
360d-361a 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue [243-266] 7a-b 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  239c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 695d696d 54
Freud:  General  Introduction,  562c  / New Introductory Lectures, 832a;
876b-d , Astronomy and the measurement of time: "7 calendars and clocks;
days  and  seasons Old Testament: Genesis, 1:4-5,14-18 / Isaiah, 38:7-8;
60:19-21— (D) Isaias, 38:7-8; 60:1921 /Jeremiah, 33:20,25— (D) Jeremias,
33:20,  25  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  43:6-8— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
43:6-8  New  Testament:  Revelation,  21:23-24;  22:5—  (D)  Apocalypse,
21:23-24; 22:5 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[454-461]
44c5  Aristophanes: Clouds [607-626] 496a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
49d-50a;  79c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v, 487d 7 Plato:
Republic, fk vii,394d-396b/ Timaeus, 451a-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv,
ch 14
[223^12224^1]
303c-d / Metaphysics, bk x, ch i
[1052^34-1053^12] 579b-c

[161a]
8/0  8^  9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk iv, en 10 [777^16-778*9]
319d-320a,c  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk v [614-750] 69a-70d 14
Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  58d-59c / Solon, 74a / Caesar, 599d-600a 16
Ptolemy:   Almagest,   bk  ii,  34b-38a;  bk  hi,  77a-86b;104b-107a  16
Coperimicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 510b; bk ii,
568a-576a;  bk  hi,  646a-652b;  672a-674b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  7-8 122d124c; CH 11-13 126a-129a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
xi,  par  29-30 95d-96c / City of God, bk xi, ch 6 325c-d; BK XII, ch 15
351b-352d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, A 6, ANS 45c-46d;
q  67,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2-3  352a-354a; q 70, a 2, ans and rep 3,5
364b365a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 77, A 2, ANS
945a-946b;  q 91, a 2, rep 1-3, 5,8 1017c-1020c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, i [37-45] Ib-c; purgatory, i
[13-21] 53a-b;
11
[1-9] 54c; iv
[55-84]
58a-b; ix
[1-12] 65d-66a; xv
[1-15]
75b-c; XXV [1-9] 91b-c; xxvii [1-6] 94c; paradise, I
[38-48]
106c; X
[28-33]
120c; xxvii
[97-120] 148b-c
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  267b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  69b,d-70a  25 Montaigne: £'^^«>'y,497b-c 30 Bacon:
Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 177c-178b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[40-44] 136b;
[555-623]
147b-149a;
[726-732]
151a; bk v
[166-179]
179a; bk viii
[66-84]
233b-234a;  BK x [651-679] 288b-289a 34 Newton: Principles, definitions,
schol,  9b10a;  BK III, prop 20 291b-294b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk ii, ch xiv, sect 17-31 158a-162a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  229a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 376a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  i,  219a-b; 251a-b 8. The heavenly
bodies  in  general  the 8a. The special character of matter supra-lunar
spheres  New  Testament:  /  Coriitthians,  15:40-41  7  Plato:  Phaedo,
247b-248c  /  Timaeus,  448a449c;  451d-452a / Laws, bk xii, 797d-798a 8
Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [270*12-^26]  361b-362a; bk i, ch 9
[279*i2]-bk ii, ch i
[284^6] 370b-376a; bk ii, ch 7 380c-d / Metaphysics, bk viii, ch 4 [1044*^2-8] 569a-b; bk ix,
ch  8  [1050^6-27]  576b-d;  BK  xi,ch  6 [1063*1017] 591b; BK XII, ch 2
[1069^24-27] 598d-599a

[161b]
Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 103 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk CH 5
[644*^21-645*5]
168c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c;
[1052-1094]
14a-c; bk v
[534-563]
68a-b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a; 8b; lOb-llb; bk XIII, 429a-b 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 517b-518a;
519b-520a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-857b;  888b890b; 894a-b;
904b-905a;  919b;  929b-930b;  931b-932a;934b-935b  17  Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d / Third Ennead, tr v, ch 6 103b-104a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 10, A 5, ANS 44b-45c; a 6, rep 2 45c-46d; q
46,  A  I, rep 2-3,5 250a-252d; q 55, a 2, ans 289d-290d; q 58, a i, ans
300c-301a;  a  3,  ANS  301d-302d; q 63, a i, rep 2 325c-326c; q 66, A 2
345d-347b; q 68, a i, ans 354a-355c; q 70, A 3, ans and rep 2 365b-367a;
q  75,  a  6,  ans 383c-384c; q 84, a 3, rep i 443d-444d; Q 97, A I, ANS
513c-514c;  q  104, a i, rep 1,3 534c-536c; q 115, a 3, ans 588c-589c; q
119, A I, ans 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A
4, ans 5a-6a; part hi, q 5, a 2, ans and rep 3 736d-737c; part hi suppl,
q  91,  a  3,  rep  3 1020d-1022c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[2830]  56a;  paradise, ii [19-45I 108a; [112-148] 109a-b; xxviii [1-78]
148d-149c   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213d-215a;  257d-258b  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  vi,  llOb-c  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 13,
146c147a  33  Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule hi
270b271a;  prop 1-7 276a-282b esp prop 7 281b282b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  226b  8^.  Soul  and  intellect  in  the heavenly bodies 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  12^c-d/  Apology, 204d-205a / Timaeus, 449b-450c; 451d-452b /
Philebus,  618b-619c  /  Laws,  bk  x,  762b-765c  esp 764a765c; bk xii,
797c-798b  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  375b,d377c;  CH 12
383b-384c / Metaphysics, bk xii, CH 8 603b-605a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[406*^26407^13] 636b-637b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[76-90]
62a-b;
[i 10-145] 62c-63a
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [724-738]  230b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
854b-856a;  890a895b;  896a-897a;  914a-b;  930b; 932a-933a; 959a-960a /
Harmonies  of  the World, 1080b1085b esp 1083b-1085b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr ii-ih 40a-50a / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 3, 84b; tr iv, ch 6,
99d:  TR  V, CH 6 103b-104a / Fourth Ennead, tr IV, CH 6-8 161b-162d; ch
22-27 168d-172a;

[162a]
104  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (8. The heavenly bodies in general. 8b. Soul and
intellect  in  the  heavenly  bodies^ . CH 30 174b-c; CH 35, 177c; ch 42
180d-181b;  TR  VIII, CH 2, 202a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk vii, ch 6
248a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A I, REP I 104c-105c;
Q  47,  A  I, ANS 256a-257b; Q 50, A 3 272a-273b; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-
.'•  278c;  Q 52, A 2 279b-280a; q 66, a 2, ans •c\ 345d-347b; q 70, a 3
365b-367a;  q  iio, a i, rep 2-3 564c-565d; a 3, ans 566d-567b; q 115, A
4, REP I 589d-590c; q 117, a 4, rep i 599b-d; part i-ii, q 6, a 5, rep 2
648b-649a  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 79, A I, ANS
951b-953b;  q  91,  a  2,  rep 10 1017c-1020c ^;21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, vii
[67-96]
lOb-c; paradise, i [103-126] 107b-c; 11 [112138] 109a; VIII
[16-39]
116d-117a;
[97-114]
118a; xni
[52-72]
126a; xxvni 148d-150b; XXIX [37-45] 150c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk ii, 38b; bk v, 104b105d 33 Pascal: Pensees,
482  258a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
[243-270]  7a-b  8c.  Celestial motion: periodicity and the great year 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  x,  438c-439a  /  Timaeus, 451a-452b / Statesman,
586c-587b / Laws, bk vii, 730a-c 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i-ii 359a-389d
/  Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 603b-605a 9 Aristotle: Motion ofAnimals, ch
3 [699^11]- CH 4 [700^5] 234a-235a 12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk v
[509-533] 67d-68a; [614-649] 69a-c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk vi, sect
13 271b; bk XI, SECT 27 306b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b; 12b-14a;
bk  IV, 109a-112b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk
i,  513b-514b  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 928a-933a 17 Plotinus : Second
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  40a-41a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 8, 162b-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk v, par 3-6 27c-28c / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii, ch 29, 651b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, A I, rep 2
175d-178a;  q  115, a 3, ans 588c589c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii, q 2, A 3, ANS 392d-393c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[112148]
109a-b; xxvii
[97-120]
148b-c; xxviii
[1-78] 148d-149c
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  llOb-c  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
fourth day, 245b-d

[162b]
8^  to  8<r(2)  30  Bacots*: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 177d; APH 48,
185c-d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [j26-'jt,2]  151a;  bk vii
[339-386]  224b-225b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  ii,  prop  53, schol
266a-267a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiv, SECT 19-22
158b-159d  passim 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 779c 8c(l)
The  eternity  of  celestial  motion  V,  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447  b-c;
450b-451a;  460c-d  8 Aristotle : Physics, bk viii, ch 1-2 334a-337b; CH
8-9 348b-353b / Heavens, bk i, ch 2
[269^2-10]
360c-d; 362a: CH 3
[270^17-26]
361dCH 9
[279^12-^4] 370b-d; bk
ii,  ch  i  375b,d-376a;  ch  6  379c-380c  /  Metaphysics,  bk IX, CH 8
[1050^20-27] 576c-d; bk xii, ch 7
[1073^3-10] 603a-b; ch 8
[1073^26-38] 603c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[55-70]
61d-62a;
[110-125]
62c-d;
[235-246]
64a-b;
[351-379]
65c-66a;
[1209-1217]
76d-77a;  bk  VI  [601-607] 88b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 28
293d294a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  846a-848b;  888b891a  17  Plotinus  : Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 3-5,
67b68b;  CH  7-8  69c-70d  /  Third Ennead, tr vii, CH 7-8 122d-124c; ch
11-13  126a-129a  /  Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 7-8 161d-162d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 10, A 2, rep 2 41d-42c; a 4, ans 43b-44b; a
5,  ANS  44b-45c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 77, A 2,
ans  945a-946b; q 91, a 2 1017c-1020c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
i
[73-81]
107a  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, 163a-b 34 Newton: Principles, bk
hi,  prop  285a / Optics, bk hi, 540a-541b 36 Swift-: Gulliver, part hi,
98a-b  APH  35,  10 284a8c(2) The form of celestial motion: circles, the
equant, ellipses 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 394d-396b; bk x, 438c-439a /
Timaeus, 451a-452b / Laws, bk vii, 730a-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii,
ch 8-9 348b-353b / Heavens, bk i, ch 2-5 359d-364a; bk ii, ch 4
[287^2-31] 378c-379a; ch 5 379b-c; ch 8 381a382a; ch 12 [293^4-14] 384c / Metaphysics, bk
XII,  ch  6  [io7i^32]-ch  7 [1072*22] 601d-602b; CH 8 [1073^17-1074*14]
604a-c  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b;  bk  hi, 83a; 86b; bk V,
148b-157a;  bk  ix,  270b;  291a-296a  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  507a-508a; bk i, 513b-514b; bk hi, 628b-629a; bk iv,
675b-678a esp 677b-678a; BK V, 740a-b; 784b-785b

[163a]
j  \Sc{3)to9a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 888b 893b; 929a933a; bk v,
968a-979b  esp  975a-977b;  984b985b / Harmonies ofthe World, lOlSa-b 17
Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 8 39c-d 19 Aquinas: Siwima Theologica,
part  i,  q 66, A 2, ANS 345d-347b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q 77, A 2, ANS 945a-946b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, llOb-d 28
Galileo:  Two Netv Sciences, fourth day, 245b-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk ii, apii 48, 186b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [616-627] 188b189a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  181a  34  Newton:  Principles^ bk i, prop ii
42b-43b;  prop  17 48b-50a 8c(3) The laws of celestial motion: celestial
mechanics 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 888a-895b passim; 897a-907a passim,
esp  897a,  904b-905a;  933a952a passim ; bk v, 975a-979b / Harmonies of
the  World,  1018a-b;  1019b-1020b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 1-3
and  schol 32b-35b; prop 4, corol vi 36a; prop 11-13 42b-46a esp prop ii
42b-43b;  prop  15  46b47a; prop 17 48b-50a; bk ii, prop 51-53 and SCHOL
259a-267a;  bk hi 269a-372a passim, esp RULE i-iii 270a-271a, phenomenon
i-prop  7  272a-282b,  prop 13 286a-b, prop 35, schol 320b-324a, prop 40
337b-338a,   general   SCHOL,   369a,   371b-372a   •   35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 9, 454c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d [fn 2] 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiii, 563b; EPILOGUE II, 694d-695c Sd. The
creation  of  the  heavens  Old Testament: Genesis, 1:1-8,14-19; 2:1-4 /
Nehemiah, 9:6— (D) // Esdras, 9:6 /Job, 26:7; 37:18; 38 / Psalms, 8:3-4;
19-15  89:11;  102:25; 136:5-9; 148:1-6— (D) Psalms, 8:4-5; 18:2; 88:12;
101:26;  135:5-9;  148  : 1-6 /Pror<?r^^, 3:1 9; 8:27 / Jeremiah, 31:35;
51:15—  (Z))  Jeremias,  31:35;  51:15  / Amos, 5:8 New Testament: Acts,
14:15;  17:24—  (D) Acts, 14:14; 17:24 / Hebrews, 1:10 / II Peter, 3:5 /
Revelation,  14:7—  (D)  Apocalypse,  14:7 7 Plato: Timaeus, 450c-452b 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk viii, ch i [251^13-19] 335b / Heavens, bk i, ch
10-12 370d-375d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Anitnals^ bk i, ch i
[641^13-29] 164c-d
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [416-508] 66c-67c; [1204-1213] 76d
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par 4-11 90a-92b; bk xii, par 2-9
99c-101c;  par  14-40  102b-110a;  bk xiii, par 6-48 112a-124a / City of
God, bk XI, CH 7 326a-c; ch 9 326d-327d;

[163b]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 105 cii 19-21 332b-333d; en 23 334c-335c; bk XII,
CH  15  351b  352d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 46, A I, rep
2-3,5  250a-252d;  a  3, ans and rkp i 255a-d; q 66, a i, ans and rep to
contrary 343d-345c; a 3 347b 348d; a 4, ans and rep 5 348d-349d; q 67, a
4  352a-354a;  q  68,  a  i  354a-355c; q 70, aa 1-2 362c-365a 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy, hell, vii [73-81] 10b; PARADISE, vii [121-148] 116b-c; X
[1-6] 120b; XXIX [13-45] 150b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
214d  30 Bacon: Adva?icement of Learning, 17b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part v, 54b-56a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iii [708-7:55] 150b151b; BK
VII
[192-386]
221b-225b; bk viii
[15-178] 232b-236a
34  Newton:  Optics,  bk hi, 542a-543a 9. The particular heavenly bodies
9a.  The  sun:  its  position,  distance,  size, and mass Old Testament:
Joshua,  10:12-14—  (D)  Josue,  10:12-14 / Psalms, 136:7-8— (D) Psalms,
135:7-8  / Isaiah, 13:9-11; 30:26; 60:19-20— (D) Isaias, 13:9-11; 30:26;
60:19-20  /  Joel, 2:10,31; 3:15 / A?nos, 8:9 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus^
43:1-5— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 43:1-5 New Testament: Matt/iew, 24:29-30
/  MarJ^,  13:24-25  /  L^^d",  23:44-45  6  Herodotus:  History, bk ii,
53d-54b;  79c;  BK IV, 130d-131a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
394c  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  98a  / Apology, 204d-205a / Republic, bk vi,
385c-386c   /  Timaeus,  451b-d  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  7
[289*26-35] 380d; CH 12 [291^29-292^27] 383c-384b; ch 13
[293^34-294*12] 385c / Meteorology, bk i, ch 8
[345^1-9] 451c-d
11  Archimedes: Sand'Rec\oner, 520a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
v  [564-574]  68b-c;  [592-704]  68d-70b; [751-771] 70d-71a 14 Plutarch:
Pericles, 138d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk hi 77a-107a; bk v, 171b-182b; bk
vi,  215a-222b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i,
520b-529a;  bk  iii,  646a-674b;  BK IV, 710b-714a; 716a-731a 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b-856a; 857b860b; 873a-876a; 882a-883b; 885b-886b;
895b-905a;  907b-916a  passim  /  Harmonies  of  the World, 1014b-1016a;
1080b-1085b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch 15, 176d177a 19 Aquinas
:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, a i, rep 5 362c-364b; q 119, a i, ans
604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part iii suppl, Q 91, a i, rep I
1016b-1017c;  a  2  1017c-1020c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv
[5584] 58a-b; paradise, i
[38-63]
106c-d; x
[1-48] 120b-d

[164a]
(9. The particular heavenly bodies. 9a. The sun: its position, distance,
size,  and mass.) 25 Montaigne: Essays, 257d-258b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
bk  vi,  112d-113a  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 165c-166b 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part v, 54d-56a passim / Objections and Replies,
231a;  233c  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk hi [555-623] 147b149a; bk iv
[539-543]  164a;  bk vii [354-373] 224b-225a; bk viii [66-168] 233b-235b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  181a  34  Newton:  Principles, bk i, prop 66
118a-128b;  bk  III, phenomenon III 273d-274a; prop 2 276a-b; hypothesis
i-prop  12  285a-286a;  PROP  25  299b-300b;  prop  36  324a-b;  prop 40
337b-338a  / Optics, bk hi, 518a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b 45
Faraday:   Researches   in   Electricity,   819d   9b.   The  moon:  its
irregularities  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 1:14-18 / Psalms, 136:7-9— (D)
Psalms,  135:7-9  / Isaiah, 13:911; 30:26; 60:19-20 (D) Isaias, 13:9-11;
30:26;  60:19-20 / Joel, 2:10,31; 3:15 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 43:6-8
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  43  :6-9  New  Testament: Matthew, 24:29-30 /
Marl{, 13:24-25 7 Plato: Cratylus, 98a-b / Apology, 204d-205a / Timaeus,
451b-d  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  ii [291^18-23] 383b; CH 12
[291*^29-292^27] 383c-384b; ch 14
[297^21-31] 389b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [471-479] 67b;
[575-584]
68c;
[629-649]
69b-c;
[705771] 70b-71a
14  Plutarch: Solon, 74a / Aemilius Paulus, 220d-221b / Nicias, 435b-d /
Dion,  789b790a  16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk iv-vi 108a-222b 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk iv 675a-731a 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk iv, 876a-878a; 918a928a; 952a-960a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi,
ch  5,  43d44a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, a i, rep 5
362c-364b  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 188c 26 Shakespeare: Romeo
and Juliet, act ii, sc ii
[107-110] 295b / Midsummer-Night's Dream,
ACT  II,  sc  I [103-114] 357a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36,
167a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [662-666] 125b; bk hi
[708-735] 150b-151b; bk v
[257-266]
180b-181a; bk vii
[346-386] 224b-225b; bk

[164b]
106 THE GREAT IDEAS 9b to 9d viii [122-158] 234b-235b / Samson Agonistes
[86-89] 341b
33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 164a / Pensees, 18 174b-175a; 817, 330b
34  Newton:  Principles, bk i, prop 43-45 92b101a; PROP 66 118a-128b; bk
hi,  phenomenon  VI  275a;  prop  3-4  and  schol  276b-278b; PROP 22-38
294b-329a  34  HuYGENs:  Light,  ch  i, 554b-555a 9c. The planets: their
eccentricities,  retrogradations,  and stations 7 Plato: Republic, bk x,
438c-439a   /  Timaeus,  451a-d  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  2
[285^28-33]  377b-c;  ch  7-12  380c-384c  /  Metaphysics,  bk XII, CH 8
603b-605a  16  Vto-l^my:  Almagest,  bk ix-xiii 270a-465b 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 521b-529a; bk v-vi 732a-838a
16  Kepler:  Epito?ne, bk iv, 860b-872b; 878b882a; 888b-905a; 907b-910a;
928a-952a  passim; bk V 961a-1004a / Harmonies of the World, 1015b-1080b
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  5,  44a  19 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 32, A I, rep 2 175d-178a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b; x
[1-27]
120b-c; xxii
[124-154]
140d-141b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 29c 30 Bacon:
Novum Organum^ bk ii, aph 36, 165c-166b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v,
54d-56a passim 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [481-483] 146a;
[573-587] 148a; bk v [166-170] 179a; [618-627]
188b-189a; bk vii [557-564] 229a-b; bk viii
[122-152] 234b-235b; bk ix [48-51] 248b; bk
X  [657-661] 288b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 368b-369a 34 Newton: Principles, bk
i,  prop  1-3  and SCHOL 32b-35b; prop 4, corol vi 36a; prop II 42b-43b;
prop  15  46b-47a;  prop  17  48b50a;  PROP  57-63 lllb-115a; prop 65-69
116b-130b;  bk  hi,  phenomenon  i-v 272a275a; prop 1-2 276a-b; prop 5-6
278b281b; prop 8-10 282b-285a; prop 13-19 286a291b 34 Huygens: Light, ch
i,  556a-557b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi, 102a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  227a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 171b 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  632b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiii, 563b 9d. The
earth:  its origin, position, shape, and motions Old Testament: Genesis,
1:1-10  /Job,  38:4-7  / Psalms, 90:2; 102:25; 119:90— (D) Psalms, 89:2;
101:26; 118:90 /Prof^^^, 3:19; 8:23-29/

[165a]
d  9eto  10  Isaiah,  45:12;  48:13— (D) Isaias, 45:12; 48:13 /Jeremiah,
51:15— (D) Jeremias, 51:15 New Testament: Hebrews, 1:10 7 Plato: Phaedo,
241b-242b;  247b-c/  Tifnaeus,  452a-b  8  Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch
13-14  384d389d  9  Aristotle:  Motion  ofAnimals,  ch  3 [699*27]- CH 4
[699^29]  234b-235a  11 Archimedes: Sand-Recl{oner, 520a-b 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk v [416-508] 66c-67c; [534-563] 68a-b 14 Plutarch:
Numa  Pompilius, 55a-b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 8b-12b; bk ii, 40a44b
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 511b-513a;
514b-52Ia;  529a532a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  854a-b; 873a-876a;
911b-928a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 26-27 171b-172a 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  23b-25d; bk vi 106a-121a,c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36,  165c-166b  31 Descartes: Discourse, part v,
54d-56a passim 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [702-734] 150b151b; bk IV
[996-1004] 174a; bk v [577-579] 187b-188a; bk vii
[216-337] 221b-224b: bk
viii
[15-38] 232b-233a;
[66-168] 233b-235b;
bk  IX  [99-118]  249b-250a;  bk  x [668-678] 289a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  165a  /  Pensees,  72,  181a  /  Vacuum,  368b-369a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  i,  prop  (i(i, corol XXII 127b-128b; bk hi, prop 18-21
288b-294b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  58  424a-b  36 Swift:
Gidliver,  part  hi, 98a-b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 819 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiii, 563b; epilogue II, 695d-696d 9^. The
fixed  stars:  the  precession  of the equinoxes Old Testament: Genesis,
1:14-18    /   Psalms,   136:7-9—   (D)   Psalms,   135:7-9   Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  43:9-10—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  43 :9-i i 7 Plato:
Timaeus,  451d-452a  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii, ch 7-12 380c384c /
Meteorology,  bk  i, ch 8 [345^1-9] 451c-d 11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckpner,
520a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 67d-68a; [585-591]
68d  14 Plutarch: Lysander, 358d-359c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 7a-8b;
bk  hi,  77ab;  bk  vii-vih  223a-269a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 517b-520b; bk ii, 585b-621b; bk hi, 622a-652b
esp 622a-646a

[165b]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  107  882a 887a; 887b16 Khi'i.er: Epitome, bk iv,
888a;  918a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 70, A I, REP 5
362c-364b  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  29c;  bk  II, 69d-70a 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  107c-116a;  117c121a,c  30  Bacon:  Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 165c166b; aph 48, 185c-d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk hi [481-483] 146a; BK IV [641-676] 166b-167a; bk vii [346-352]
224b;  BK  viii  [15-38]  232b-233a;  bk x [651667] 288b-289a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk i, prop 66, corol xx-xxi 126b-127b; bk hi, prop 21 294b;
LEMMA  i-PROP  39  329a-333a  / Optics, bk i, 419a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part hi, 102a 9/. The comets and meteors 8 Aristotle: Meteorology, bk i,
ch  4  447d448d;  ch  6-8  449b-452d 14 Plutarch: Lysander, 358d-359c 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  856b  21 Da^t^e: Divine Comedy, paradise, xv
[13-24]  128c  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 30 159c-d; aph 35,
163a-b; aph 36, 166a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [535-537] 105a;
[j^2-y^6] 109b; bk
ii [706-711] 126b; bk iv
[555-560] 164b; bk XII [632-644] 333a
33  Pascal:  Vacuum, 358a 34 Newton: Prificiples, bk hi, lemma 4-PROP 42
333a-368b;  general schol, 369a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b; 102b
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 68c-69a; 615a-b
[074-81]
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 340d341a,c 10. The influence of the
heavenly  bodies upon terrestrial phenomena 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
79c  7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  518b  /  Statesman,  586c589c  8 Aristotle:
Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  9  [279^22-30]  370c;  BK  II,  ch  3  377c-378a /
Meteorology, bk I, CH 2 445b-d / Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 6
[1072*9-18] 602a
10  Hippocrates:  Airs, Waters, Places, par 1-7 9a-12a passim; par lo-ii
13b-14b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  A  I, rep I
104c-105c; q 19, a 6, ans 113c-114d; Q 65, A 4, rep 3 342b-343c; q 67, a
3  351b352a;  g  82, a 4, ans 434c-435c; q 86, a 4, rep 2-3 463d-464d; q
103,  a  5,  rep i 531b532b; q no, a i, rep 2-3 564c-565d; q 115, AA 3-6
588c-592d; q 116, a i, ans 592d593d

[166a]
(10. T^e influence of the heavenly bodies upon tei-restrial phenomena. )
20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q  76,  A I, REP 2
939d-941a;  q  77,  a  i,  ans  943a'944d;  q  86,  a 2, ans and rep 1-2
993c994d;  Q  91,  A  I,  rep  i  1016b-1017c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, ii
[112148] 109a-b; vii [121-141] 116b-c; viii [97-114]
118a; X [1-27] 120b-c; xiii [52-78] 126a-b 22 Chaucer: Miller's Tale
[3187-3212]
212b213a; [3513-3533] 218a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruely bk ii,
72c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc III [85-101] 109a 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone, bk i, 14a 32 Milton: Arcades [61-73] 26b / Paradise
Lost,  BK III [606-612] 148b; BK IV [660-688] 166b167b; BK VIII [85-106]
234a-b;  bk  x  [641-719]  288b-290a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 18 174b-175a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 98a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 10a.
The  influence  of  the heavenly bodies on living matter: generation and
corruption  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  98a  /  Theaetetus,  518b 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2 [194^13] 271a / Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [279^22-30]
370c;  bk  ii,  ch 3 377c-378a / Generation and Corruption, bk II, CH 10
437d-439c   /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  5  [1071^12-17]  600c;  CH  6
[1072*9-18] 602a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 5
[680*30-35] 210d / Generation of Animals, bk
I,  CH  2  [716*15-20]  256b;  bk  ii,  ch  3 [736^30737*5] 277c-d; ch 4
[738*9-25]  278d-279a; bk IV, CH 2 [767*2-9] 308b; ch 10 [777^15-778*10]
319d-320a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[76-81]
62a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 25, A 2, REP 2 144c-145b; q
70,  a  i,  rep  4  362c364b;  A  3,  REP  3 365b-367a; q 71, a i, rep i
367a-368b; q 82, a 4, ans 434c-435c; q 86, A 4, REP 2-3 463d-464d; q 91,
a  2,  rep  2  485b-486b;  q  92,  a i, ans 488d-489d; q 105, A I, REP I
538d-539c; q 115, a 3 588c-589c; a 5, REP I 590d-591c; q 118, a i, rep 3
600a-601c  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 60, a i, ans
49d-50c;  part  hi  suppl,  q 76, a i, rep 2 939d-941a; q 84, a 2, rep 3
984c-985d;  q  86,  A  2,  ans  and  rep 1-2 993c-994d; q 91, A I, rep i
1016b-1017c; a 2, ans and rep 1,4 1017c-1020c; a 3, rep 2 1020d-1022c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121141]
116b-c; x
[7-21]
120b-c; xiii
[52-78]
126a-b  22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,343-347]  356b  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  v,  105a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 416a; 427bd;
428c-429a

[166b]
108 THE GREAT IDEAS lOato 11 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 340b 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph ii, 140d-141a; aph 12, 141d; aph 35,
162b-c  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv [634-688] 166a167b; BK VIII
[66-178]  233b-236a  esp  [90-97]  234a;  bk ix [99-113] 249b 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 18 174b-175a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 256c 10^. The influence
of the heavenly bodies on the tides 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 53d-54b
16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 919b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
105,  A 6, REP I 543b-544a; q iio, a 3, rep i 566d567b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii, q 2, A 3, ans 392d-393c 22 Chaucer: Franklin's
Tale  [11,355-388]  356b357a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 47a-b; bk vi,
113a  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 164b'165c; aph 45, 176b;
aph  46,  178c  31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55c 33 Pascal: Pensees,
817,  330b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 66, corol xviii-xix 126a-b;
bk  hi,  prop  24  296a-299b;  prop  36-37  324a-328b 35 Berkeley: Human
Kfiowledge,  sect  104 433a-b 11. The influence of the stars and planets
upon  the character and actions of men Old Testament: Isaiah, 47:13— (D)
Isaias,^y:i^  /Jeremiah,  10:2  (D)  Jeremias,  10:2  Apocrypha: Baruch,
6:60-69—  (D)  OT,  Baruch^ 6:60-68 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 65b; bk
vii,  223b-c;  bk ix, 289d-290a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk vii,
552a-c 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 20b-c / Nicias, 435b-d / Dion, 789b-790a 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, 9a-b; 9d; bk iv, 79b; bk VI, 91a-d / Histories,
bk  i,  195b-c;  bk  v, 295c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi 42a-50a /
Third  Ennead,  tr i, ch 2 78d-79b; ch 5-6 80a-81b; tr ii, ch 10 88a-b /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr IV, CH 30-45 174b-183a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
iv,  par 4-6 20a-d; bk vii, par 8-10 45d-47a / City ofGod, bk hi, CH 15,
176d-177a;  bk v, ch 1-7 207d-212c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 21-23
647a-648d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  70, A 2, REP I
364b-365a;  q 86, a 4, rep 2-3 463d464d; Q 96, A 3, ans 512a-c; q 115, a
4  589d590c; A 5, REP I 590d-591c; q 116, a i, ans 592d-593d; part i-ii,
q 9, a 5 660d-662a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[67-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, xvi [52-84] 77b-d; para-

[167a]
12 to 13 Chapter 5: ASTRONOMY 109 DisE, IV
[49-63] 111b;
vrii
[1-12]
116d;
[91148] 117d-118c; XIII [52-78] 126a-b; xxii [112123] 140d
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2438-2482] 200a-b / Tale of Man of Law
[4610-4623]
237b;
[4715-4735] 239b 240a /
Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [6187-6202]  266a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantugruel,  bk  i, 66b-67d; bk ii, 69b,d-70d; bk hi, 136c-137c; 176a-b;
bk  iv,  267c-d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 18d-20d; 213d-215a; 246d-247c 26
Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii
[139-141] 570d
27  Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i [113-125] 30d-31a / Othello, act v,
sc ii [105-111] 240b / King Lear, act i, sc ii
[112-166]
249a-c;  act IV, sc HI [34-37] 272a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk hi, 73a 29
Cervantes:   Do;2  Quixote,  part  i,  94c;  part  II,  222c  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 14b-c; 54c55a 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[125-140]
4b-5a / Arcades [61-73] 26b / Comus [93-144] 35b-36b / Paradise Lost, bk
i [594-599] 106b; bk viii
[511-514] 243b; BK X [657-661] 288b
33 Pascal: Pensees, iji, 203b-204a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98a-b 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 194b-195a; 332a334b;407b-408b 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[4947-4976]
122b123a;   [6667-6670]  163b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,
340d341a,c  12.  The  worship  of  the  earth,  sun, moon, and stars Old
Testament:  Genesis,  37:9-10  /  Deuteronomy,  4:19;  17:3  / // Kings,
23:4-5,11—   (D)  IV  Kings,  23:4-5,11  /Jeremiah,  8:1-2;  10:2—  (£>)
Jeremias,  8:1-2;  10:2  / Eze\iel, S:i6—(D) Ezechiel, 8:16 / Zephaniah,
1:4-5—  (D)  Sophonias,  1:4-5 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 13:1-9— (D)
OT,  Boo}{ of Wisdom, 13:1-9 / Baruch, 6:6069— (D) OT, Baruch, 6:60-68 5
Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-340]  134a  5  Euripides: Orestes [1625-1693]
410b-d 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[563-626] 495c-496b
/  Peace  [406-416] 530d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 31a-b; 48c; bk VII,
226c  7  Plato:  Apology,  204d-205a  / Latvs, bk vii, 728b-730d; bk xh,
797b-798b  8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 [i074^r14] 604d-605a 9
Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 2
[716^15-20] 256b
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [581-660] 22b-23b; bk v [396-411]
66b; [821-836] 71d72a I

[167b]
14  Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 220d-221b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xv, 176a
16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b1085b  17 Plotinus: Fourth
E?2nead, tr iv, ch 24-26 170b-171d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  ii,  A  3,  REP  I 49a-c; q 67, a 4, ans 352a-354a; Q 115, a 3, REP I
588c-589c  21  Dante:  Divi?ie  Comedy,  paradise, iv [49 63] 111b; VIII
[i-i2]116d 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2209-2482]
196b200b  / Franklin's Tale [11,339-393] 356b-357a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
246d-247c  27  Shakespeare:  Antony afid Cleopatra, act iv, sc IX [5-18]
340c-d  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 94 431b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  59c-60a;  81d;  93bd; 346d-347a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
226a-b; 227c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 238d239a;252a-c 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[7900-7950]
192b193b;
[8034-8043]
195b;
[8078-8081]
196b;
[8285-8302] 202a
13. The history of astronomy 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[442-461]
44c-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49d-50a; 65b; 79c 7 P1.AT0: Phaedrus,
138c-d  /  Apology,  204d'205a  I  Statesman, 586c-589c / Laivs, bk vii,
728b730d; bk xii, 797b-798b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [270^12-26]
361d-362a; ch 10 370d-371d; bk ii, ch 1-2 375b,d-377c; ch 12
[292^6-9]
383c;  ch  13  384d-387d  /  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  6  449b450b; CH 8
451b-452d; bk ii, ch i [354*^27-32] 460b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982^11-17]
500d;  BK  XII,  ch 8 603b-605a 11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckpner , 520a-b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk v [720-730] 70c 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
20b-c  /  Numa Pompilius, 55a-b / Solon, 74a / Pericles, 138d / Aemilius
Paulus,  220d-221b  /  Lysander,  358d-359c / Nicias, 435b-d 16 Ptolemy:
Almagest, bk hi, 77a-83a; bk iv, 109a-110b; bk vii, 223a-232b passim; bk
ix,  272a-b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 508a 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  861b-863a;  888b891b;  907b-910a;  929a-933a
passim; 955a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-6 27c28c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a  i,  rep 2 175d-178a 22 Chaucer:
Miller's   Tale   [3187-3212]  212b  213a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel, bk ii, 69d-70a

[168a]
CWSS-KEFEKENCES

[168b]
110  THE  GREAT  IDEAS . 13 /,^ T*/ y. ^ X 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge^
sect  ^8  (13.  The  history  of  astronomy.) 424a.b; sect 104 433a.b 25
Montaigne:  E/^^?^^, 257d-258b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div
9,  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk vi, 107c-d; 117c-d; 454c-d 118d-119c 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 227a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 24d /
No41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 68c-69a; 226b; vum Organum, bk i, aph So
120a-b;  aph  89 299b-c; 664d [n 55-56] 124a-d; bk ii, aph 36, 165c-167b
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d
[fn
2]; 175b Ifn i] / 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[284-291] 99b;
Practical  Reason,  36lh-c  BK V [261-263] 181a; bk viii [66-168] 233b46
Hegel:  PMo^o^^jy  o///iV/ory, part i, 219a-b; 235b / Areopagitica, 400a
251a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 165a / Vacuum, 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk viii, 340d358a; 368b-369a 341a,c; bk xiii, 563b; epilogue ii,
694d-696d The consideration of mathematical physics, see Mathematics 5b;
Mechanics  3; Physics lb, 3; Science 5c. Other treatments of observation
and  measurement  in natural science, see Experience 5-5C; Mechanics 2a;
Physics  3,  4a, 4d; Quantity 6-6c\ Science 5a-5b; Sense 5. The logic of
hypotheses  and  their verification in scientific method, see Hypothesis
4b-4d;   Physics   4b;   Principle  30(2)  ;  Science  5e.  The  general
consideration  of scientific method, see Logic 4b; Reasoning 6c; Science
5-5^; The distinction between formal and efficient causes, see Cause la;
and  for  the  role of causes and causal explanation in natural science,
see  Cause  5b;  Nature 3c; Physics 2b; Science 4c. The consideration of
certain mathematical forms used in astronomy, see Quantity 3b(i)- 3b(2),
3e(2).  Other  discussions  of  celestial and terrestrial mechanics, see
Mechanics 4a, 5f-5f(2), 6c. The theory of gravitation and the problem of
action-at-a-distance,  see  Mechanics 6d(i)- 6d(2); Space 2c. The issues
concerning  matter  and  soul  or  intellect in relation to the heavenly
bodies, see Angel 2a; Matter ib; Soul la; World 6a. Other discussions of
the  measurement of time, see Quantity 5b; Time 4. The interpretation of
celestial  phenomena in divination and augury, see Language 10; Prophecy
3b;  Sign  and  Symbol 5b. Criticisms of astrology, see Religion 6a. The
cosmological  and  theological  implications of astronomy, see Angel 2a;
Change i3~i4;

[169a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Ptolemy. Tetrahiblos Aquinas. Sunjma Contra Gentiles, bk hi,
ch  84-87  .  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius,  q 5 Dante. Coni'ivio {The
Banquet),  second  treatise, CH 3-4 Chaucer. A Treatise on the Astrolabe
Copernicus.  Commentariolus  .  Letter Against Werner Kepler. Mysteriiim
Cosmographicum  .  De Motibus Stellae Martis . Harmonices Mundi, bk i-iv
Galileo. The Sidereal Messenger . Dialogo dei massimi sistemi Descartes.
The  Principles  of  Philosophy, part hi, 5-47, 103-120, 126-157 HoBBES.
Concerning Body, part iv, ch 26 Kant. Cosmogony A. Smith. The History of
Astronomy II. Aristarchus. On the Sizes and Distances ofthe Sun and Moon
Epicurus.  Letter  to  Pythocles  .  Letter  to  Herodotus Ibn Ezra. The
Beginning of Wisdom Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed, part ii, CH
8-12,  24 R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part iv Rheticus. Narratio Prima Suarez.
Disputationes   Metaphysicae,   xiii   (10-13),   XV   (3)   Fontenelle.
Conversations   on   the  Plurality  of  Worlds  Voltaire.  "Astrology,"
"Astronomy,"   in   A   Philosophical   Dictionary  Lagrange.  Mecanique
analytique

[169b]
Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  111 Laplace. The System of the World . Mecanique
celeste  {Celestial  Mechanics)  Gauss.  Inaugural  Lecture on Astronomy
Whevvell.  Astronomy  and  General  Physics Considered with Reference to
Natural  Theology  CoMTE.  The  Positive  Philosophy, bk ii A. Humboldt.
Cosmos  Herschel.  Familiar  Lectures on Scientific Subjects, 11 Frazer.
The  Golden  Bough,  part  iv,  bk  hi, ch 7-9; part V, note (Pliades in
Primitive Calendars) G. H. Darwin. The Evolution of the Satellites . The
Tides  and  Kindred  Phenomena  in the Solar System Santayana. Reason in
Society,  ch  4  Dreyer.  History of the Planetary Systems PoiNCARE. The
Value of Science, part ii, ch 6 . Science and Method, bk hi, ch 3; bk iv
Kapteyn.  Recent  Researches  in the Structure of the Universe Duhem. Le
systeme  du  monde  Arrhenius. The Destinies of the Stars T. Chamberlin.
The  Origin  of  the  Earth  E. Huntington. Earth and Sun Dingle. Modern
Astrophysics  Shapley. Starlight Eddington. The Internal Constitution of
the  Stars  .  Stars  and Atoms Jeans. Problems of Cosmogony and Stellar
Dynamics  .  Astronomy and Cosmogony Tolman. Relativity, Thermodynamics,
and Cosmology H. N. Russell. The Solar System and Its Origin Abetti. The
Sun:  Its  Phenomena  and  Physical  Features  Hubble.  The Realm of the
Nebulae  Gamow.  The  Birth  and  Death  of  the  Sun  B. Russell. Human
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part i, ch 2

[170a]
{.[ INTRODUCTION TRUTH, goodness, and beauty form a triad of terms which
have  been  discussed  together  throughout  the  tradition  of  western
thought.  They  have  been  called  "transcendental"  on the ground that
everything which is is in some measure or manner subject to denomination
as  true  or  false, good or evil, beautiful or ugly. But they have also
been assigned to special spheres of being or subject matter— the true to
thought  and  logic,  the  good  to  action and morals, the beautiful to
enjoyment  and  aesthetics. They have been called "the three fundamental
values"  with  the  implication  that  the  worth  of  anything  can  be
exhaustively judged by reference to these three standards—and no others.
But other terms, such as pleasure or utility, have been proposed, either
as  additional  values  or  as  significant  variants  of  the so-called
fundamental  three;  or  even sometimes as more fundamental. Pleasure or
utility,  for  example,  has been held by men like Spinoza or Mill to be
the  ultimate  criterion  of  beauty  or  goodness. Truth, goodness, and
beauty,  singly  and  together,  have  been  the  focus  of  the age-old
controversy  concerning the absolute and the relative, the objective and
the  subjective,  the  universal and the individual. At certain times it
has  been  thought  that  the  distinction of true from false, good from
evil, beautiful from ugly, has its basis and warranty in the very nature
of  things,  and that a man's judgment of these m.atters is measured for
its  soundness or accuracy by its conformity to fact. At other times the
opposite  position  has been dominant. One meaning of the ancient saying
that  man is the measure of all things applies particularly to the true,
good,  and  beautiful.  Man  measures truth, goodness, and beauty by the
effect  things  have upon him, according to what they seem to him to be.
What

[170b]
Chapter  6:  BEAUTY seems good to one man may seem evil to another. What
seems  ugly or false may also seem beautiful or true to different men or
to  the  same man at different times. Yet it is not altogether true that
these  three  terms  have always suffered the same fortunes. For Spinoza
goodness  and  beauty  are  subjective,  but  not truth. Because he "has
persuaded  him.self  that all things which exist are made for him," man,
Spinoza  says,  judges  that  to be "of the greatest importance which is
most useful to him, and he must esteem that to be of surpassing worth by
which  he  is most beneficially affected." The notions of good and evil,
beauty and ugliness, do not conform to anything in the nature of things.
"The  ignorant," says Spinoza, nevertheless, "call the nature of a thing
good,  evil,  sound, putrid, or corrupt just as they are affected by it.
For  example, if the motion by which the nerves are affected by means of
objects  represented  to  the  eye conduces to wellbeing, the objects by
which  it  is  caused  are  called  beautiful',  while  those exciting a
contrary  motion are called deforfned.'' Beauty has been most frequently
regarded  as  subjective,  or  relative  to the individual judgment. The
familiar   maxim,   de   gustibus  non  disputandum,  has  its  original
application  in  the  sphere  of  beauty rather than truth and goodness.
"Truth  is  disputable,"  Hume  writes,  "not taste . . . No man reasons
concerning  another's  beauty;  but frequently concerning the justice or
injustice of his actions." Thus even when it was supposed that judgments
of  the  true  and  the  good  could  have  a  certain  absoluteness  or
universality—or  at  least  be  considered  as something about which men
might  reach  agreement  through argument—opinions about beauty were set
apart  as useless to dispute. Beauty being simply a matter of individual
taste, it 112

[171a]
could  afford  no  basis for argument or reasoning — no objective ground
for  settling  differences of opinion. From the ancient skeptics down to
our  own  dav, men have noted the great variety of traits, often sharply
opposed,  which  have  been  considered beautiful at different times and
places.  "We  fancy  its forms," Montaigne says of beauty, "according to
our  appetite  and  liking  . . . Indians paint it black and tawny, with
great  swollen  lips, big flat noses, and load the cartilage betwixt the
nostrils  with great rings of gold to make it hang down to the mouth ...
In Peru, the greatest ears are the most beautiful, and they stretch them
out  as  far as they can by art . . . There are, elsewhere, nations that
take  great  care  to  blacken  their teeth, and hate to see them white;
elsewhere,  people that paint them red . . . The Italians fashion beauty
gross  and massive; the Spaniards, gaunt and slender; among us one makes
it  white,  another  brown;  one  soft  and delicate, another strong and
vigorous  .... Just as the preference in beauty is given by Plato to the
spherical figure, the Epicureans give it to the pyramidal or the square,
and  cannot swallow a god in the form of a ball." Like Montaigne, Darwin
gives  an extensive account of the things men have found beautiful, many
of  them  so various and contradictory that it would seem there could be
no  objective  basis  for judgments of beauty. If any consensus is found
am.uig  individuals  about  what  is  beautiful or ugly, the skeptics or
relativists usually explain it by reference to the prevalence of certain
prejudices,  or  customary  standards, which in turn vary with different
tribes and cultures, and at different timxs and places. Beginning in the
sphere  of beauty, subjectivism or relativism spreads first to judgments
of  good  and  evil,  and  then  to statements about truth, never in the
opposite  direction.  It becomes complete when, as so frequently happens
in  our  own  time,  what  is  good or true is held to be just as much a
matter  of  private taste or customary opinion as what is beautiful. The
problem  of the objectivity or subjectivity of beauty can, of course, be
separated  from  similar problems with regard to truth and goodness, but
any  attempt  to  solve it will necessarily both draw on and bear on the
discussion

[171b]
Chapter  6: BEAUTY U3 of these related problems. The degree to which the
three  problems must be considered interdependently is determined by the
extent  to  which  each  of  the three terms requires the context of the
other  two  for its definition and analBeauty is, perhaps, not definable
in  any  strict  sense of definition. But there have been, nevertheless,
many  attempts to state, with the brevity of definition, what beauty is.
Usually  notions of goodness, or correlative notions of desire and love,
enter  into  the  statement.  Aquinas,  for  example, declares that "the
beautiful is the same as the good, and they differ in aspect only. . . .
The  notion  of good is that which calms the desire, while the notion of
the  beautiful  is that which calms the desire, by being seen or known."
This,  according  to  Aquinas,  implies  that "beauty adds to goodness a
relation  to the cognitive faculty; so that ^oo^ means that which simply
pleases  the  appetite,  while  the  beautiful  is something pleasant to
apprehend."  Because  of  its  relation  to the cognitive power, Aquinas
defines  the  beautiful as "that which pleases upon being seen" {id quod
visum  placet). Hence, he continues, "beauty consists in due proportion,
for  the  senses  delight  in things duly proportioned . . . because the
sense  too  is  a  sort  of  reason,  as  is every cognitive power." The
pleasure  or delight involved in the perception of beauty belongs to the
order  of  knowing  rather  than  to  desire  or  action.  The  knowing,
furthermore, seems to be different from that which is proper to science,
for it is concerned with the individual thing rather than with universal
natures,  and  it  occurs intuitively or contemplatively, rather than by
judgment  and  reasoning.  There  is  a  mode  of  truth peculiar to the
beautiful,  as  well  as a special kind of goodness. Fully to understand
what  Aquinas  is  saying about beauty we are required to understand his
theory  of  goodness  and truth. But enough is immediately clear to give
meaning  to  Eric  Gill's  advice to those who are concerned with making
things  beautiful: "Look after goodness and truth," he says, "and beauty
will take care of herself." To define beauty in terms of pleasure would

[172a]
114:  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  seem to make it relative to the individual, for
what  gives pleasure—even contemplative pleasure— to one man, may not to
another.  It  should be noted, however, that the pleasure in question is
attributed  to the object as its cause. It may be asked, therefore, what
in   the  object  is  the  cause  of  the  peculiar  satisfaction  which
constitutes  the  experience  of  beauty?  Can  the  same object just as
readily  arouse  displeasure  in  another  individual,  and a consequent
judgment  .f^  Are  these  opposite  reactions  enof ugliness tirely the
result  of  the  way  an individual feels ? Aquinas appears to meet this
difficulty  by  specifying  certain  objective  elements  of  beauty, or
"conditions,"  as  he calls them. "Beauty includes three conditions," he
writes: ''integrity or perfection, since those things which are impaired
are  by  that  very  fact  ugly;  due proportion or harmony; and lastly,
brightness  or  clarity, whence things are called beautiful which have a
bright color." Quite apart from individual reactions, objects may differ
in  the  degree  to  which they possess such properties traits which are
capable  of  pleasing  or displeasing their beholder. This does not mean
that  the  individual  reaction  is  invariably  in  accordance with the
objective  characteristics of the thing beheld. Men differ in the degree
to  which  they possess good perception—and sound critical judgment even
as  objects  differ  in the degree to which they possess the elements of
beauty.  Once  again  in  the  controversy concerning the objectivity or
subjectivity  of  beauty,  there seems to be a middle ground between the
two  extreme  positions,  which  insists  upon a beauty intrinsic to the
object  but  does  not  deny  the relevance of differences in individual
sensibility.  William  James would seem to be indicating such a position
when,  in  his  discussion of aesthetic principles, he declares: "We are
once  and  for all so made that when certain impressions come before our
mind,  one  of  them  will  seem  to call for or repel the others as its
companions."  As  an example, he cites the fact that "a note sounds good
with  its third and fifth," Such an aesthetic judgment certainly depends
upon  individual  sensibility, and, James adds, "to a certain extent the
principle of habit will explain
[it]." But he also points out that "to explain all
aesthetic judgements in this way would be ab-

[172b]
surd;  for it is notorious how seldom natural experiences come up to our
aesthetic  demands."  To  the  extent  that aesthetic judgments "express
inner harmonies and discords between objects of thought," the beautiful,
according  to  James,  has  a certain objectivity; and good taste can be
conceived  as  the capacity to be pleased by objects which should elicit
that   reaction.  Kant's  theory  of  the  beautiful,  to  take  another
conception, must also be understood in the general context of his theory
of  knowledge,  and  his  analysis  of such terms as good, pleasure, and
desire.  His definition, like that of Aquinas, calls an object beautiful
if  it  satisfies the observer in a very special way—not merely pleasing
his  senses, or satisfying his desires, in the ways in which things good
as  means  or  ends  fit  a  man's interests or purposes. The beautiful,
according  to Kant, "pleases i?nmediately . . . apart from all interest^
The  pleasure that results from its contemplation "may be said to be the
one  and only disinterested ?indfree delight; for, with it, no interest,
whether  of sense or reason, extorts approval." The aesthetic experience
is  for  Kant  also  unique  in  that  its  judgment  "is represented as
universal,  i.e.  valid  for  every  man,"  yet  at  the same time it is
"incognizable  by  means of any universal concept." In other words, "all
judgements  of  taste are singular judgements"; they are without concept
in the sense that they do not apply to a class of objects. Nevertheless,
they have a certain universality and are not merely the formulation of a
private  judgment.  When  "we call the object beautiful," Kant says, "we
believe  ourselves  to be speaking with a universal voice, and lay claim
to  the  concurrence of every one, whereas no private sensation would be
decisive  except  for the observer alone and his liking." In saying that
aesthetic judgments have subjective, not objective, universality, and in
holding  that  the  beautiful is the object of a necessary satisfaction,
Kant  also  seems  to  take  the  middle  position  which recognizes the
subjectivity  of  the  aesthetic judgment without denying that beauty is
somehow  an intrinsic property of objects. With regard to its subjective
character, Kant cites Hume to the effect that

[173a]
**although  critics  are  able to reason more plausibly than cooks, they
must  still  share  the  same  fete."  The  universal  character  of the
aesthetic  judgment,  however, keeps it from being completely subjective
and Kant goes to some length to refute the notion that in matters of the
beautilul  one  can seek refuge in the adage that "every one has his own
taste."  The fact that the aesthetic judgment requires universal assent,
even  though  the  universal  rule  on  which  it  is  based  cannot  be
formulated,  does  not, of course, preclude the failure of the object to
win  such  assent from many individuals. Not all men have good taste or,
having    it,    have   it   to   the   same   degree.   The   foregoing
considerations—selective  rather  than  exhaustive—show  the  connection
between  definitions of beauty and the problem of aesthetic training. In
the  traditional  discussion  of  the  ends  of  education, there is the
problem  of  how  to  cultivate  good taste— the ability to discriminate
critically  between  the  beautiful  and the ugly. If beauty is entirely
subjective,  entirely  a  matter of individual feeling, then, except for
conformity  to  standards  set  by the customs of the time and place, no
criteria  would  seem  to  be  available  for  measuring  the  taste  of
individuals.   If   beauty  is  simply  objective—something  immediately
apparent  to observation as are the simple sensible qualities—no special
training  would  seem  to be needed for sharpening our perception of it.
The  genuineness  of  the  educational  problem  in the sphere of beauty
seems,  therefore, to depend upon a theory of the beautiful which avoids
both extremes, and which permits the educator to aim at a development of
individual sensibilities in accordance with objective criteria of taste.
The  foregoing considerations also provide background for the problem of
beauty  in  nature  and  in art. As indicated in the chapter on Art, the
consideration  of  art in recent times tends to become restricted to the
theory  of  the fine arts. So too the consideration of beauty has become
more  and more an analysis of excellence in poetry, music, painting, and
sculpture. In consequence, the meaning of the word "aes-

[173b]
Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 115 thetic" has progressively narrowed, until now it
refers  almost  exclusively  to  the  appreciation of works of fine art,
where  before it connoted any experience of the beautiful, in the things
of  nature as well as in the works of man. The question is raised, then,
whether  natural beauty, or the perception of beauty in nature, involves
the same elements and causes as beauty in art. Is the beauty of a flower
or  of a flowering field determined by the same factors as the beauty of
a  still  life or a landscape painting.? The affirmative answer seems to
be  assumed  in  a large part of the tradition. In his discussion of the
beautiful in the Poetics, Aristotle explicitly applies the same standard
to  both  nature  and  art.  "To  be  beautiful,"  he  writes, "a living
creature,  and  every  whole  made  up of parts, must not only present a
certain  order  in  its  arrangement  of parts, but also be of a certain
magnitude."  Aristotle's  notion  that  art  imitates nature indicates a
further  relation  between  the  beautiful  in  art  and  nature. Unity,
proportion,  and  clarity would then be elements common to beauty in its
every  occurrence,  though these elements may be embodied differently in
things which have a difference in their mode of being, as do natural and
artificial With regard to the beauty of nature and of art, Kant tends to
take  the opposite position. He points out that "the mind cannot reflect
on  the  beauty  of nature without at the same time finding its interest
engaged."  Apart  from  any  question  of use that might be involved, he
concludes  that  the  "interest"  aroused  by the beautiful in nature is
"akin  to the moral," particularly from the fact that "nature ... in her
beautiful  products  displays  herself  as  art, not as a mere matter of
chance,  but,  as  it  were,  designedly,  according  to  a law-directed
arrangement."  The  fact that natural things and works of art stand in a
different  relation  to  purpose  or  interest  is for Kant an immediate
indication  that  their  beauty  is  different.  Their susceptibility to
disinterested  enjoyment  is  not  the  same.  Yet  for Kant, as for his
predecessors,  nature provides the model or archetype which art follows,
and  he  even  speaks  of  art  as an "imitation" of nature. The Kantian
discussion of nature and art moves into another dimension when it con-

[174a]
116 THE GREAT IDEAS siders the distinction between the beautiful and the
subUme.  We  must  look for the sublime, Kant says, "not ... in works of
art . . . nor yet in things of nature, that in their very concept import
a  definite end, e.g. animals of a recognized natural order, but in rude
nature  merely  as  involving  magnitude." In company with Lx)nginus and
Edmund  Burke,  Kant  characterizes  the  sublime  by  reference  to the
limitations   of  human  powers.  Whereas  the  beautiful  "consists  in
limitation,"  the sublime "immediately involves, or else by its presence
provokes, a representation of limitlessness," which "may appear, indeed,
in point of form to contravene the ends of our power of judgement, to be
ill-adapted  to  our  faculty of presentation, and to be, as it were, an
outrage  on  the  imagination."  Made  aware of his own weakness, man is
dwarfed  by  nature's  magnificence,  but at that very moment he is also
elevated  by  realizing  his ability to appreciate that which is so much
greater  than himself. This dual mood signalizes man's experience of the
sublime. Unlike the enjoyment of beauty, it is neither disinterested nor
devoid  of  moral  tone.  Truth is usually connected with perception and
thought, the good with desire and action. Both have been related to love
and,  in different ways, to pleasure and pain. All these terms naturally
occur  in  the  traditional  discussion  of  beauty,  partly  by  way of
definition,  but  also partly in the course of considering the faculties
engaged  in the experience of beauty. Basic here is the question whether
beauty  is  an object of love or desire. The meaning of any answer will,
of course, vary with different conceptions of desire and love. Desire is
sometimes  thought  of as fundamentally acquisitive, directed toward the
appropriation  of  a  good;  whereas  love,  on the contrary, aims at no
personal  aggrandizement  but  rather,  with complete generosity, wishes
only  the well-being of the beloved. In this context, beauty seems to be
more  closely  associated  with  a  good  that is loved than with a good
desired.  Love,  moreover, is more akin to knowledge than is desire. The
act of contemplation is sometimes understood as a union with the ob-

[174b]
ject  through both knowledge and love. Here again the context of meaning
favors  the  alignment  of beauty with love, at least for theories which
make beauty primarily an object of contemplation. In Plato and Plotinus,
and  on another level in the theologians, the two considerations—of love
and  beauty—fuse  together inseparably. It is the "privilege of beauty,"
Plato  thinks,  to  offer man the readiest access to the world of ideas.
According  to  the  myth  in  the  Phaedrus, the contemplation of beauty
enables   the   soul   to  "grow  wings."  This  experience,  ultimately
intellectual  in  its aim, is described by Plato as identical with love.
The  observer  of beauty "is amazed when he sees anyone having a godlike
face  or  form, which is the expression of divine beauty; and at first a
shudder  runs  through  him, and again the old awe steals over him; then
looking upon the face of his beloved as of a god, he reverences him, and
if  he  were  not  afraid  of being thought a downright madman, he would
sacrifice to his beloved as to the image of a god." When the soul bathes
herself "in the waters of beauty, her constraint is loosened, and she is
refreshed,  and  has  no  more  pangs and pains." This state of the soul
enraptured  by  beauty,  Plato  goes on to say, "is by men called love."
Sharply  opposed  to  Plato's  intellectualization  of  beauty  is  that
conception   which   connects   it  with  sensual  pleasure  and  sexual
attraction.  W^hen  Darwin, for instance, considers the sense of beauty,
he  confines his attention almost entirely to the colors and sounds used
as  "attractions  of the opposite sex." Freud, likewise, while admitting
that  "psycho-analysis  has  less  to  say  about beauty than about most
things," claims that "its derivation from the realms of sexual sensation
. . . seems certain." Such considerations may not remove beauty from the
sphere  of  love, but, as the chapter on Love makes clear, love has many
meanings,  and  is  of  many  sorts.  The  beautiful  which  is sexually
attractive  is  the  object  of  a  love  which is almost identical with
desire—sometimes  with  lust—and  certainly involves animal impulses and
bodily  pleasures.  "The  taste  for  the beautiful," writes Darwin, "at
least  as  far as female beauty is concerned, is not of a special nature
in the human mind."

[175a]
Chapter  6:  On  the  other  hand,  Darwin  attributes  to  man alone an
aesthetic faculty for the appreciation of beauty apart from love or sex.
No  other animal, he thinks, is "capable of atlmiring such scenes as the
heavens at night, a beautiful landscape, or refined music; but such high
tastes  are acquired through culture and depend on complex associations;
they are not enjoyed by barbarians or by uneducated persons." For Freud,
however,  the appreciation of such beauties remains ultimately sexual in
motivation, no matter how sublimated in effect. "The love of beauty," he
says,  "is  the  perfect  example  of  a  feeling with an inhibited aim.
'Beauty'  and  'attraction'  are first of all the attributes of a sexual
object."  The theme of beauty's relation to desire and love is connected
with  another basic theme the relation of beauty to sense and intellect,
or  to  the  realms  of  perception  and  thought.  The  two discussions
naturally run parallel. The main question here concerns the existence of
beauty  in the order of purely intelligible objects, and its relation to
the sensible beauty of material things. Plotinus, holding that beauty of
every kind comes from a "form" or "reason," traces the "beauty v/hich is
in  bodies," as well as that "which is in the soul" to its source in the
"eternal  intelligence."  This  "intelligible  beauty"  lies outside the
range  of desire even as it is beyond the reach of senseperception. Only
the  admiration  or  the  adoration  of  love  is  proper  to  it. These
distinctions  in  types  of beauty— natural and artificial, sensible and
intelligible,  even,  perhaps, material and spiritual—indicate the scope
of  the  discussion,  though not all writers on beauty deal with all its
manifestations.  Primarily  concerned  with  other subjects, many of the
great  books make only an indirect contribution to the theory of beauty:
the  moral  treatises which consider the spiritual beauty of a noble man
or  of  a  virtuous  character;  the  cosmologies of the philosophers or
scientists  which  find  beauty  in  the  structure  of  the  world —the
intelligible,  not  sensible,  order  of  the universe; the mathematical
works  which  exhibit,  and  sometimes enunciate, an awareness of formal
beauty in the necessary connection

[175b]
BEAUTY 117 of ideas; the great poems which crystaUizc beauty in a scene,
in  a  face,  in a deed; and, above all, the writings of the theologians
which do not try to do more than suggest the ineffable splendor of God's
infinite beauty, a beauty fused with truth and goodness, all absolute in
the  one absolute perfection of the divine being. "The Divine Goodness,"
observes Dante, "which from Itself spurns all envy, burning in Itself so
sparkles that It displays the eternal beauties." Some of the great books
consider  the  various  kinds  of  beauty,  not  so  much with a view to
classifying  their  variety, as in order to set forth the concordance of
the  grades  of  beauty with the grades of being, and with the levels of
love and knowledge. The ladder of love in Plato's Symposium describes an
ascent from lower to higher forms of beauty. "He who has been instructed
thus  far  in  the things of love," Diotima tells Socrates, "and who has
learned  to see beauty in due order and succession, when he comes toward
the  end will suddenly perceive a nature of wondrous beauty . . . beauty
absolute,  separate,  simple,  and everlasting, which without diminution
and without increase, or any change, is imparted to the ever-growing and
perishing  beauties  of  all  other things. He who from these, ascending
under the influence of true love, begins to perceive that beauty, is not
far  from  the  end."  The order of ascent, according to Diotima, begins
"with  the  beauties  of  earth  and mounts upwards for the sake of that
other  beauty,"  going  from  one fair form to "all fair forms, and from
fair  forms  to fair practises, and from fair practises to fair notions,
until  from  fair notions" we come to "the notion of absolute beauty and
at last know what the essence of beauty is. This, my dear Socrates," she
concludes,  "is  the life above all others which man should live, in the
contemplation  of  beauty  absolute." For Plotinus the degrees of beauty
correspond  to  degrees  of  emancipation from matter. "The more it goes
towards  matter  . . . the feebler beauty becomes." A thing is ugly only
because,  "not  dominated  by a form and reason, the matter has not been
completely  informed  by  the  idea."  If  a  thing  could be completely
"without reason and form," it would be "abso-

[176a]
118  THE GREAT IDEAS la. The beautiful and the good: beauty as a kind of
fitness  or order ic. The elements of beauty: unity, proportion, clarity
2. Beauty in nature and in art 3. Beauty in relation to desire and love,
as  object  or  cause  6. The role of the beautiful in education ya. The
beauty  of God yb. The beauty of the universe yc. Beauty in the order of
ideas

[176b]
lute  ugliness."  But whatever exists possesses the type of supernatural
knowledge  promised  form  and reason to some extent and has some to the
souls  of  the  blessed—  the  beatific  wV/ow in share of the effulgent
beauty of the One, even which God is beheld intuitively, not known as it
has  some  share  through  emanation  in  its discursively, and in which
knowledge  united  overflowing  being—  the grades of beauty, as of with
love is the principle of the soul's union being, signifying the remotion
of  each  thing  with  God.  from  its  ultimate  source.  An analogy is
obviously  implied.  In this life Even separated from a continuous scale
of  and  on  the  natural level, every experience of beauty, the extreme
terms—  the beauty of God beauty—in nature or art, in sensible things or
and  the  beauty  of  the  least  of  finite  things  in ideas—occasions
something  li\e an act of have similitude for a theologian like Aquinas.
vision,  a  moment  of  contemplation,  of  enjoyThe  word  visum in his
definition  of  the beautiment detached from desire or action, and clear
ful (id quod visum placet, "that which pleases without the articulations
of  analysis  or  the  upon  being  seen")  is  the word used to signify
demonstrations  of  reason. OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. The general theory
of the beautiful 119 lb. Beauty and truth: the beautiful as an object of
contemplation  120  id.  The  distinction  between the beautiful and the
sublime  121 4. Beauty and ugliness in relation to pleasure and pain 122
5.  Judgments  of  beauty: the objective and the subjective in aesthetic
judgments or judgments of taste 7. Intelligible beauty 123 yd. Beauty in
the moral order 124

[177a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. Forexample, in53 jAMEs:Pi)'£:Ao/o^^, 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof thepage,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of the page. For exam pie, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  m  the  lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References  :  The  references are to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (Z))  U  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface.  The  general  theory  of the
beautiful  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  81a-b  / Cratylus, 101c102a; 113c-d /
Phaedrus,  126b-d  /  Symposium,  167a-d  / Phaedo, 242c-243a / Gorgias,
266d267a / Republic, bk v, 370d-373c; bk vi, 385c / Parmenides, 490b-c /
Laws, bk ii, 654a-662a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch i
[1013*
20-24] 533b; bk xii, ch 7
[1072^23-^4]
602b-c 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 7
[1450^23-1451^15]
685b-c  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2 259d260a; bk iv, sect 20
265a-b  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 2 lOd; tr VI 21a-26a /
Second  Ennead, tr ix, ch 17 76b77a / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 12, 234a-c;
TR  VIII, CH i-TR IX, ch 2 239b-247b / Sixth Ennead^ tr ii, ch i8, 278a;
tr  hi,  ch  ii,  287b-c; tr vii, ch 22 332d-333b; ch 31-33 336d-338b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii, par 12 llc-d; bk IV, par 20 24b-c; par
24-27  25b-26a;  bk X, par 53 84d-85a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 5, A 4, rep I 25d-26c; q 91, a 3, rep 3 486b-487d; part i-ii, q 27,
A I, rep 3 737b-d

[177b]
Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 119 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A
2,  rep  I  2b-4a;  part  ii-ii, q 180, a 2, rep 3 608c-609c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part i, appendix, 371b-372d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 32-33 176a-b 42
Kant  -.Judgement,  461a-549d esp 479c-d, 483d, 491c, 493b-495a,c; 550a;
560b-c;  564d-565b  44  BoswEi.!.:  Johnson,  194b  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  95a-d 52 Dostoevsky: BrothersKaramazov, bk hi, 54a-b 53 James:
Psychology,   865a-b;   886b-888a   54   Freud:   Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  775ac;  779b-d la. The beautiful and the good: beauty as a
kind  of  fitness or order 7 Plato: Lysis, 21b-c / Symposium, 162d-163a;
164c-d  /  Gorgias,  266d-267a  /  Republic,  bk  III,  333b-334b; bk v,
357d-358a / Timaeus, 474d-475a / Statesman, 594a-c / Philebus, 637d-638a
/ Laws, bk ii, 654a-655b; 660a662a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 3
[118^20-24]
165d  / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246*10-^19] 329c330a / Metaphysics, bk i,
ch 3
[984^8-22]
502d; BK V, CH i [1013*20-24] 533b; bk xii, CH 7
[1072*23-^4]
602b-c;
[1072^30-1073*2]
603a; bk xin, ch 3 [1078*31-^6] 609d-610a

[178a]
(1. The general theory of the beautiful, la. The beautiful and the good:
beauty  as  a kind of fitness or order. ^ 9 Aristotle: Tarts of Animals,
bk i, ch 5
[645^4-26] 168d-169a
/ Ethics, bk iv, ch 2
[i 122^34-1 i23''*33l 369a-370b passim / Politics,
BK VII, CH 4 [1326*30-35] 530c / Poetics, ch 7
[i45o''23-i45 1^*15] 685b-c
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch i 175a177c 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  ii,  sect i 256b,d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 47a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  868b  17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi 21a-26a/ Eifth Ennead, tr v,
ch 12, 234a-c; tr viii 239b-246c / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 22 332d-333b
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 12 Uc-d; bk IV, par 20 24b-c; par
24-27  25b-26a;  bk  VII,  par  23  50b-c  / City ofGod, bk xxii, ch 24,
610c-611b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, A 4, REP I 25d-26c;
q  91, a 3 486b-487d; q 96, a 3, REP 3 512a-c; part i-ii, q 27, a i, rep
3 737b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 2, ans and rep
i 2b-4a; a 4, ans 5a-6a; q 50, a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q 54, a i, ans 22d-23d;
part ii-ii, q 180, a 2, rep 3 608c609c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 62a
42   Kant:   Judgement,   476a-482b;  486d-489a;  521b-523c;  540d-542a;
544c-545b;  546d'548c;  550a; 557c-558b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  266a268b; 280b-281b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov^ bk vi,
153b-d  53  James: Psychology, 755a; 865b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  779b-d lb. Beauty and truth: the beautiful as an object of
contemplation   7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-d  /  Phaedrus,  124c-129d  /
Symposium,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk  v,  370d373c;  BK  VI, 383d-388a /
Theaetetus,  525c-d  /  Philebus,  630d-631d  / Laws, bk ii, 660a'661b 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bkxii, ch 7 [1072*23- ^4] 602b-c-; BK XIII, ch 3
[1078*32-^6] 609d610a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 20 265a-b 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  1-2 lOa-d; tr vi 21a-26a / Fifth
Ennead,  tr  viii  239b246c / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 31-33 336d338b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c  19  Aquinas  : Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 5, a 4, REP I 25d-26c; q 39, a 8, ans 210a-213a;
part i-ii, q 27, A I, REP 3 737b-d; a 2, ans 737d-738c

[178b]
120  THE  GREAT IDEAS lb to 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q
180,  A  2, REP 3 608c-609c; part hi suppl, Q 94, A I, REP 2 1040d-1041b
27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets, xiv 588b; liv 594c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i,  184b-d 35 Hume: Human Understandifig, sect i, div 5, 452d'453a
42  Kant:  Judgement, 476a-479d esp 479a- d; 484d-485b; 496d; 501d-502a;
518a-d;  521b523c;525a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part ii,
266a267a;  278a-c; part iv, 346d-347a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  vi, 153b-d 53 James: Psychology, 865b-866a; 886b-888a 54 Freud : New
Introductory   Lectures,   880b  Ic.  The  elements  of  beauty;  unity,
proportion,  clarity 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 333b-334b; bk iv, 342 b-c
/  Timaeus,  448a-c;  474d-475a / Sophist, 561 b-d / Statesman, 594a-c /
Philebus,  630d631d;  637c-638a  /  Laws,  bk ii, 660a-661b 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  vii, ch 3 [246*10-^19] 329c-330a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[984''8-22]  502d; bk xiii, ch 3 [1078*39-^5] 610a 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch 5
[645*4-26]
168d-169a / Ethics, bk ii, ch 6
[1106^6-14]
352a; bk iv, ch 2
[1122*341123*33] 369a-370b passim; ch 3
[1123^4-7]
370b / Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281*^10-15]
479b-c; ch 13 [1284^3-12] 482c-d; bk v, ch 9
[1309^23-30] 512a; bk vii, ck 4 [1326*30-35]
530c   /   Poetics,   ch   7  [1450^23-1451*15]  685b-c  11  NicoMACHus:
Arithm.etic,  bk  i,  814a;  820a; 826d-827a; bk h, 839d-840b 16 Kepler:
Harmonies  ofthe  World,  1079b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch 1-2
21a22b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr vii, ch 22, 333b; tr IX, ch I 353d-354b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 20 24b-c / City of God, bk ii, ch 21,
161b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  22,  334b;  bk  xvh,  ch 14, 464d; bk xxii, ch 19,
604d-605a; ch 24, 610c-611b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, A
4,  REP  I  25d-26c;  q  39,  a 8, ans 2i0a-213a; Q 91, A 3 486b-487d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 2, rep i 2b-4a; q 54, a i,
ans  22d-23d; PART ii-ii, q 180, A 2, rep 3 608c-609c 29 Cervantes : Don
Quixote, part i, 184b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 44c-d 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  28  176a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xii, SECT 5,
148b  42  Kant:  Judgement,  471b-473a; 485c-491c; 493c-495a,c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 185c-d; part I, 219b-c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  277a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 301d-302a 53 James: Psychology,
186b; 755a

[179a]
1^/0  3  Chapter 6: BEAUTY 121 Id. The distinction between the beautiful
and the sublime 42 Kant: Judgement, 473a; 480a-482b; 488a489a; 495a-539d
csp 495a-496d, 499b-c, 501d-502a, 502d-512a P 2. Beauty in nature and in
art  7  Plato:  Sytuposimn,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk iiIII, 320c-334b /
Timaeus,  447a-448c  /  Sophist,  561b-d / Statesman, 594a-c / Philebus,
630d631d  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk vii, ch 3 [246*10-^19] 329c-330a /
Metaphysics, bk xiii, ch 3
[1078^:51-^6] 609d-610a
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[645*4-26] 168d-169a /
Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281^10-15] 479b-c; bk viii, ch 5 [1340*24-29]
545d  /  Poetics,  ch  7  685b-c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2
259d260a;  bk  iv,  sect 20 265a-b 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr vin, ch
1-3  239b241a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 39, A 8, ANs
210a-213a;  q 91, a 3 486b-487d 20 Aquixas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  49,  A 2, REP I 2b-4a; q 50, a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q 54, A I, ANS 22d-23d
22  Chaucer:  Physician's  7'^/^  [11,941-972]  366b367a  25  Montaigne:
Essays,  93b-d;  230b-231c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [291-297] 181b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  29  176a; 32 176a-b; 134 196a 42 Kant: Judgement,
473a-d;  488a-489a;  494cI 496c; 501d-502a;521b-524bcsp523c-d; 525a528c;
544c-546d esp 546a-c; 557a-558b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
219b-c;  254b-d;  part ii, 264a-268b 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude [134-157]
4a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 276b-277b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
94c-95c;  235c-d  / Descent of Man, 576b-577d 53 James: Psychology, 186b
3.  Beauty  in  relation  to  desire  and  love,  as object or cause Old
Testament:  Genesis,  3:6; 6:1-2; 12:11-20; 26:7-11; 29:15-31; 39:6-20 /
Deuteronomy,  21:10-13  / I Samuel, 16:7— (D) I Kings, 16:7 / II Samuel,
11;  13:1-19—  (D)  //  Kings, 11; 13:1-19 / Esther, 2:15-17 / Proverbs,
6:24-26 / Song of Solomon— (D) Canticle of Canticles / Isaiah, 53:2— (D)
Isaias,  53:2  Apocrypha:  Judith,  11:20-23;  12:16-20; 16:7-9— (D) or,
Judith, 11:18-21; 12:16-20; 16:8-11 / Ecclesiasticus, 9:8; 25:21; 36:22—
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 9:8-9; 25:28; 36:24 / Susanna— (D) OT, Daniel,
13 4 Homer: Iliad, bk hi [121-160] 20b-c; bk xiv
[153-351] 99d-101d
5 Euripides: Helen
[1-67]
298a-d;
[229-305]
300b-d

[179b]
b 5 \i<isn)PHASiis: Ecclcsiazusae [611-634] 622ab;[877-iiri] 625b 628a 6
Hkrodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2d-3d; bk v, 168d-169a; bk vi, 196d 197b 7
Plato:  Charmidcs,  lb-2a  /  Phaedrus,  120a-c;  \2e>hl29d/  Symposium,
159d-160c;  161b-167d  /  Republic,  bk hi, 333b-334b/ Timaeus, ^SSa-c I
Laws,  BK  V, 687b; bk viii, 735c 736c; 738a-c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk xii, ch 7
[i072''^23-^4] 602b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[1141II 70] 59a12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
ii,  ch  22,  169b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [657-722] 121a-123a; bk IV
[1-30]  167a-b;  bk viii [369-393] 259a-b 17 Plotinus: First Enfiead, tr
hi,  ch  12  lOa-d;  TR VI 21a-26a / Third Ennead, tr v, ch i lOOclOlc /
Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 12 234a-d; tr VIII, CH 9, 244b-c / Sixth Flnnead,
tr  vii,  ch 22 332d-333b; ch 30-34 336b-338d 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  iv,  par  15  23a-b; par 20 24b-c; par 24-27 25b-26a; bk vii, par 23
50b-c;  BK X, par 8-38 73b-81a; par 51-53 84b-85a / City of God, bk xii,
ch  6,  346a-b;  BK XXII, ch 24, 610c-611b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 5, a 4, rep i 25d-26c; part i-ii, q 27, a i, rep 3 737b-d; a
2,  ans  737d-738c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 180, A 2,
rep  3  608c-609c;  part  hi, q 6, a i, REP 3 740b-741b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  hell,  v  [73-142]  7d8b;  purgatory,  xxvii  94c-96a; xxx-xxxi
99b-102b; paradise, xxvii
[88-96]
148b;  XXX  [1-33]  151d-152a  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii,
stanza 48-50 27b-28a / Physician's Tale 366a-371a esp
[12,055-191] 368a-370b
25   Montaigne:   Essays,   84b-85a;  230b-231c;  310d-312a;  398c-399d;
432d-434c;  513a-514a  26  Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act iv, sc
III
[299-332] 271c-d
/ Rofneo and Juliet, ACT I, sc I [214-244] 287d-288a; sc v [43-55] 292b;
ACT  11,  sc  11 [1-32] 294b-c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
ii, sc II
[61-92] 114b-c / Antony and Cleopatra^
ACT  II,  sc  II [196-250] 320d-321b / Sonnets, xx 589b; XXIV 589d-590a;
liv  594c;  cxxx 606a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 381d-382a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  371d  32 Milton: Comus [667-823]
48a-52a / Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-560] 243a-244a / Samson
Agonistes  [1003-1007]  361b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  15b-c;  17b-c;
50d-51a;  130b-c;331b-332a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-346a; 347b-c 42
Y^a^t:   Judgement,  476a-483d  44  Boswell:/o,^«j-o«,  485a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part i, 220b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[6377-6565]
156a160a esp [6483-6500] 158b; [8516-8523] 207b;
[9192-9355] 223b-227a

[180a]
(3.  Beauty  in  relation  to  desire  and love, as object or cause.) 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  95c  /  Descent  of  Man,  301c;  366b-c;
481c-482b;  571b-576b passim 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 4a; 5d-6b;
49a-b;  bk  ii,  80d-81a;  bk  hi,  113a-115a; 120c-123a; 141b-d; bk vi,
235a-238a;  bk  viii,  316d-317d;  bk  xi,  497d-498b;  530c-d;  bk XII,
541b-542b;  epilogue  i, 659a; 660b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk hi, 53d-54b 53 James: Psychology, 865b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  775b-c  4. Beauty and ugliness in relation to pleasure and
pain  7  Plato:  Gorgias,  266d-267a / Philebus, 630d631d / Laws, bk ii,
654a-656c; bk vii, 720c-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 7
[146^21-32]
200a-b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[645^4-26] 168d-169a /
Ethics, bk hi, ch 10
[1118*1-16]
364c / Politics, bk viii, ch 3
[1337^27-1338*29] 543a-c; ch 5
[1340*24-29]
545d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6 [1362^5-9] 603b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk
hi,  sect  2  259d260a 17 Plotinus : First Ennead, tr vi, ch 1-7 21a-25a
passim / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 12, 234a-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
x, par 51-53 84b-85a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 4, REP
I  25d-26c;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  3 486b487d; PART i-ii, Q II, A I, REP 2
666b,d-667a; Q 27, A I, REP 3 737b-d; q 32, a 8, ans 764c765b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  62a-c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 184b-d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 371d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 32 176a-b 42
Kai^t:  Judgement,  471d-473a;  476a-495a,c  esp  488a-489a;  502d-503d;
516d-518d;  527b-528c  esp  527d-528a;  537a-539d  46  Hegel: Philosophy
ofHistory, part i, 220b-c; part ii, 267b-268b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[8697-88 ii]
211b214a; [11,288-303] 274b-275a ^ 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 95a-d /
Descent  of Man, 301d-302a; 568d-571b passim; 577b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  iv,  190d-192b  53  James:  Psychology,  157a; 755a-757b esp
755a-b;   886b   54   Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643c  /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  775b  5.  Judgments of beauty: the
objective  and  the  subjective  in  aesthetic judgments or judgments of
taste  7 Plato: Ion 142a-148a,c / Symposium, 167a-d / Gorgias, 261a-c /.
Republic, bk hi, 333b-334b

[180b]
122  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4/0  6  /  Statesman,  593d-595a  / Laws, bk ii,
654a656b;  660a-662a;  bk  hi,  675c-676b;  bk  vii, 720c-d 9 Aristotle:
Po/;>/^^,  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [1281*43-^15] 479b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk iv
[11411170] 59a-b
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,   bk  hi,  ch  i  175a-177c  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk hi, sect 2 259d260a; bk iv, sect 20 265a-b 17 Plotinus:
First Ennead, tr vi, ch 2-3 21d23a / Sixth En?iead, tr hi, ch ii, 287b-c
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk iv, par 20 24b-c; BK VII, par 23 50b-c /
City  ofGod, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  5, A 4, rep I 25d-26c; part i-ii, q 27, a i, rep 3 737b-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  180,  A 2, REP 3 608c-609c; part hi
suppl,  q 94, A I, REP 2 1040d-1041b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xi  [79120]  69c-70a;  xxvi  [91-126] 93d-94b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,   bk  iv,  273d-274a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  230b-231c  26
Shakespeare:  Merchant  of Venice, act v, sc I [98-110] 431d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix, 371b-372d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 32-33 176a-b;
105  193a;  114  194b; 381 238b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xh, SECT 5 148a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xh, div 132, 509c-d
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23d
[fn
i]  /Judgement,  471b-473a; 476a-495a,c; 513b-516b; 516d517c; 524d-525a;
540a-546d  44  BoswELi.:  Johnson,  202b; 362b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro, 185c-d; PART II, 264b-268c; 280b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  95a-d  / Descent of Man, 301c-302a; 462d-463a; 569c; 571c-577d
esp 575d, 577b-c; 595c-596a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv, 191b-192b;
bkviii, 318a-320b 53 James: Psychology, 755b-757b; 886b-888a The role of
the  beautiful in education 7 Plato: Symposium, 167a-d / Gorgias, 261a-c
/  Republic,  bk  ii-ih, 320c-334b esp bk hi, 333b-334b; bk viii, 409d /
Laws,  bk  ii  653a663d;  BK  hi, 675c-676b; bk vii, 720c-d 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  3  542d-543d; CH 5-7 544c-548a,c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch ii, 242a-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch
1-2  lOa-d;  tr  VI  21a-26a  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch 2 246d-247b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par 23 50b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 381
238b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24a

[181a]
b     ^tolc     ,41     Gibbon:     Decline     and     Fall,     300a42
KANT:/z/^^d>;77<f;;/,462b-d;485b-491c;493a-b;    513d-514b;   521b-523c;
528b-c;  548c-549d;  , 586d-587a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
185c-d;  PART  II,  267a-268b;  part iv, 346d-347a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,   302a-b;   595c1  596a  53  James:  Psychology,  288a;  757a-b  7.
Intelligible  beauty  la. The beauty of God Old Testament: Psalms, 27:4;
90:17;  93;  97:6—  (D)  Psalms,  26:4;  89:17; 92; 96:6 / Isaiah, 28:5;
33:15-17—  (D)  Isaias, 28:5; 33:15-17 / Zechariah, 9:17— (D) Zacharias,
9:17  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  13:1-5— (D) OT, Bool{ of Wisdom,
13:1-5 7 Plato: Symposium, 167a-d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
602a603b;  BK  XIV,  ch  4  [1091*29-1092*9]  624a-d 17 Plotinus : First
Efinead, tr vi, ch 6-9 24a-26a / Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch i-tr ix, ch 2
239b-247b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 30-36 336b-339d 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 4 2a; bk II, par 12 llc-d; bk hi, par 10, 15b; bk
iv,  par  29  26b;  bk vii, par 23 50b-c; bk x, par 8-38 73b-81a; par 53
84d-85a;  bk xi, par 6 90c-d/ City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c; bk XI,
ch  4,  324b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 39, A 8, ANS
210a-213a; part i-ii, q 3, aa 4-5 625a-627a; a 8 628d-629c; Q 4, a i esp
rep  2  629d-630b  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii [64-66] 115d;
xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d  31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 88d-89a 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk hi [372-389] 143b144a 7b. The beauty of the universe
Old  Testament: Psalms, 8; 19:1-6; 104; 136:1-9 — (D) Psalms, 8; 18:1-7;
i°3'  i35-i~9  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solofnon, 13:1-9— (£>) OT, Bool^ of
Wisdom,  13:1-9  /  Ecclesiasticus, 16:26-27; 43—(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
16:2627;  43 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-448c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i,
ch 3 [984^8-22] 502d; BK XII, CH 7
[1072^30-1073*2]
603a; CH 10 [1075*12-24] 605d-606a; bk xiv, ch 4
[1091*29-1092*9] 624a-d
9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[645*4-26] 168d-169a
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 839d-840b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi,  sect  2 259d260a; bk vi, sect 36-38 277c-d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk
i,  5a  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i,
526a-529a

[181b]
Chapter 6: BEAUTY 123 16 Kki'li-k: Epitome, bk iv, 853b 887a passim, csp
863b-872b  / Harmonies of the World, 1023b-1085b csp 1049b-1050a, 1071b,
1077b1080b  17  Plotlnus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix, ch 17 76b77a / Third
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  t,  83d-84c; en 10-14 88a-89d / Fifth hlnnead, 1 r
viii, ch 8-9 243c-244c; ch 12-13 245c-246c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
vii, par 16-2^ 48c-50c; bk x, par 8-10 73b-74a / City ofGod, bk V, ch II
216c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  6 268d-269c; BK X, CH 14 307c-308a; bk xi, ch 4,
324a-b;  CH  18 331d-332a; ch 22-23 333d-335c; bk xii, CH 4-5 344b-345b;
bk  xxii,  ch  24  609a-612a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, cii 4 625b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 19, A 9, REP 2 116d-117d; q 23, a
8,  rep 2 140a141a; Q 66, A I 343d-345c; q 74, a 3, rep 3 375a-377a,c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi suppl, Q 91 1016a-1025b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, x
[1-36]
120b-c;  XXVIII  148d-150b  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk v, 104b-105d 28
Harvey: On Animal Generation, 491d-492a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
36-APPENDix 369b-372d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[548-568]
229a-b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol,  369b-370a 35
Berkeley: Human Knotvledge, sect 109 434b; SECT 146 442a-b; sect 151-154
443b444b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187c-188c
/  Judgement, 544c-546d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 153b-d
7c.  Beauty in the order of ideas Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 7:24-29;
8:1-2— (D) OT, Boo\^ of Wisdom, 7:24-20; 8:1-2 7 Plato: Cratylus, 113c-d
/  Phaedrus,  126b-d  / Symposium, 167a-d / Gorgias, 266d / Republic, bk
hi,   333b-334b;   bk  v,  370d-373c;  bk  VI,  383d-388a  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk xih, ch 3
[1078*31-^6] 609d-610a
17  Plotinus : First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-2 lOa-d / Fifth Ennead, tr viii
239b-246c; tr ix, ch 2, 246d; CH 11 250c-251a / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, CH
22  332d-333b; ch 30-33, 336d-338b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
12  llc-d/  City  of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  611a  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  180, A 2, REP 3 608c-609c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxvii 94c-96a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, xiv
[67-139] 127c-128b; xxx [1-33] 151d-152a
29 Cervantes: Do« Quixote, part ii, 381d-382a

[182a]
(7.  Intelligible  beauty. Ic. Beauty in the order of ideas.) 33 Pascal:
Pensees,   33   176b  42  Kant:  Judgement,  508b-c;  553b-c  53  James:
Psychology,  755a;  757a-758a  7d.  Beauty  in  the moral order 7 Plato:
Charmides,  lb-2a / Symposium, 164b167b / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-334b
esp  bk  III,  333b-334b;  bk  v, 357d'358a / Theaetetus, 513a-b; 535c /
Philebus, 637c-638a / Laws, bk II, 654a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch
6 351c-352d; bk IV, CH 2 368d-370b; ch 3
[1123^4-7] 370b /
Politics, bk III, CH II [1281^10-15] 479b-c; ch 13
[i284''3-i2] 482c-d; bk v, ch 9 [1309^181310^2] 511d-512b; bk vii, ch 4 [1326*30-35]
530c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch i 175a177c; BK IV. CH II,
242a-d  14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 47a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch
1-2  lOa-d;  TR  VI  21a-26a passim / Second Ennead, tr ix, CH 17, 76c /
Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 2 246d247b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
12  llc-d / City of God, bk ii, ch 21, 161 b-c; bk xvii, ch 14, 464d; BK
XXII, ch 19, 605b CWSS-KEFEKENCES beauty of God and of the universe, see
God 4h; World 6d. feLV

[182b]
m  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 7d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 93, a 8,
REP  3  499b-500c;  q  96,  a 3, rep 3 512a-c; part i-ii, q 27, A 2, ANS
737d-738c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A I, CONTRARY
307d-309d; part ii-ii, Q 180, A 2, REP 3 608c-609c; part hi suppl, Q 82,
A  I, REP 5 968a-970c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxvii 94c-96a;
xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, xiv
[67-139] 127c-128b; xxvii [88-96] 148b; xxx
[1-33] 151d-152a
25  Moktaign-e:  Essays, 84b-85a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act
hi, sc II [73-107] 420d-421a 27 Shakespeare: Twelfth Night, act i, sc ii
[47-51] 2b / Hamlet, act hi, sc
i
[103-116]
48a  /  Sonnets,  liv  594c; lxvi-lxx 596b-597a; xciii-xcvi 600b-601a 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii, 381d382a 32 Milton: Comus [417-475]
42b-44a  42  Kant:  Judgement,  488b-489a; 508b-c; 521b523c;546d-548c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 266a267a; 276a-d; 278a-c; 280b-c;
part iv, 346d347a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 543b-544b; epilogue
I,  670c  53 James: Psychology, 755a; 757a For: Other discussions of the
relation  of  beauty  to goodness and truth, see Good and Evil ic; Truth
ic; and for the relation of grades of beauty to degrees of perfection in
being, see Being 3a. Unity, order, and proportion as elements of beauty,
see  Relation  5c.  The  consideration of beauty as an object of love or
desire,  see Desire 2b; Love id. The theory of the aesthetic judgment or
the  judgment  of  taste,  see Sense 6; and for the controversy over the
objectivity  and universality of such judgments, see Custom 9a; Relation
6c\  Universal  and Particular 7c. The problem of cultivating good taste
and  critical judgment in the field of the fine arts, see Art 7b; Poetry
8a-8b. The context of the comparison of beauty in nature and in art, see
Art  2a-3;  Nature 2a, 5d; Pleasure and Pain 40(1). Consideration of the
kind  of  knowledge which is involved in the apprehension of beauty, see
Knowledge  63(2), 6c(i). Another discussion of sensible and intelligible
beauty, see Sense 6; and for the intelligible

[183a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  F.  Bacon.  "Of  Beauty,"  "Of Deformity," in Essays HoBBES.
Concerning  Body,  part ii, ch io Berkeley. Alciphron, iii A. Smith. The
Theory of Moral Sentiments, part IV Hegel. The Philosophy of Fine Art C.
R. Darwin. The Different Forms of Floiuers on Plants of the Same Species
II.  LoNGiNUS. On the Sublime Ebreo. The Philosophy of Love, dialogue hi
Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  ofMen, Manners, Opinions, Times Leibnitz.
Monadology, par 1-9 Hutcheson. An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas
of  Beauty and Virtue Burke. A Philosophical Enquiry into tJie Origin of
Our  Ideas ofthe Sublime and Beautiful, part i-iv Voltaire. "Beautiful,"
"Taste,"   in   A  Philosophical  Dictionary  T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the
Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,  VIII Schiller. Letteis upon the Esthetic
Education  of  Man  Jean  Paul.  Vorschule  der  Asthetil^  D.  Stewart.
Philosophical Essays, part ii ^':

[183b]
Chapter  6:  BEAUTY  125 Cousin. Lectures on the True, the Beautiful and
the Good Hazlitt. On Taste Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol
III,  SUP,  CH  33 Stendhal. On Love Chalmers. On the Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness  of  God  Kierkegaard.  Either/ Or, part ii A. Humboldt. Cosmos
LoTZE.  Microcosmos,  bk  vtii,  ch  3  Emerson.  "Love," in Essays, i .
"Beauty,"  in  The  Conduct  of  Life Ruskin. Sesame and Lilies \'^eron.
Aesthetics  Lipps. Asthetil^ Santayana. The Sense of Beauty, part i-iv .
Reason  in  Art,  ch  id PoiNCARE. Science and Method, bk i, ch 3 Croce.
Aesthetic  as  Science of Expression . The Essence of Esthetics Carritt.
The  Theory  of  Beauty BosANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 22-24 . Three
Lectures on Aesthetic, i, in Whitehead. Process and Reality, part hi, ch
2(2),  3(3o)> 5(73) BiRKHOFF. Aesthetic Measure Gill. Beauty Loo\s After
Herself Mauron. Aesthetics and Psychology

[184a]
INTRODUCTION  THE words "is'* and "(is) not" are probably the words most
frequently  used  by  anyone.  They  are  unavoidable, by implication at
least,  in  every  statement. They have, in addition, a greater range of
meaning than any other words. Their manifold significance seems to be of
a  very  special  kind,  for  whatever is said not to be in one sense of
being  can  always  be said to be in another of its senses. Children and
practiced  liars  know  this.  Playing on the meanings of being, or with
"is"  and "not," they move smoothly from fact to fiction, imagination to
reality,   or   truth   to   falsehood.   Despite  the  obviousness  and
commonplaceness  of  the questions which arise with any consideration of
the  meanings  of "is," the study of being is a highly technical inquiry
which  only  philosophers  have  pursued  at  length. Berkeley gives one
reason  why  they  cannot  avoid  this  task.  "Nothing  seems  of  more
importance,"  he says, "towards erecting a firm system of sound and real
knowledge  .  . . than to lay the beginning in a distinct explication of
what is meant by thing, reality^ existence; for in vain shall we dispute
concerning  the  real  existence  of things, or pretend to any knowledge
thereof,  so  long  as we have not fixed the meaning of those words." In
the  whole  field  of  learning,  philosophy is distinguished from other
disciplines—from  history, the sciences, and mathematics— by its concern
with  the problem of being. It alone asks about the nature of existence,
the  modes  and  properties  of  being, the difference between being and
becoming, appearance and reality, the possible and the actual, being and
nonbeing.  Not  all philosophers ask these questions; nor do all who ask
such questions approach or formulate them in the same way. Nevertheless,
the attempt to answer them is a task peculiar to

[184b]
Chapter  j.  BEING  philosophy.  Though it often leads to subtleties, it
also  keeps  the  philosopher in deepest touch with common sense and the
speculative  wonder  of  all  men. As A TECHNICAL couccpt in philosophy,
being  has been called both the richest and the emptiest of all terms in
the  vocabulary  of  thought.  Both  remarks  testify  to the same fact,
namely,  that  it  is  the  highest  abstraction,  the most universal of
predicates,  and the most pervasive subject of discussion. William James
is  in  that long line of philosophers which began with the early Greeks
when  he  points  out that "in the strict and ultimate sense of the word
'existence,'  everything  which  can be thought of at all exists as some
sort of object, whether mythical object, individual thinker's object, or
object  in outer space and for intelligence at large." Even things which
do  not  really exist have being insofar as they are objects of thought—
things  remembered which once existed, things conceivable which have the
possibility  of being, things imaginary which have being at least in the
mind  that  thinks  them.  This  leads  to  a paradox which the ancients
delighted  in pondering, that even nothing is something, even non- being
has  being,  for before we can say "non-being is not" we must be able to
say  "non-being  is." Nothingis at least an object of thought. Any other
word  than  "being" will tend to classify things. The application of any
other  name will divide the world into things of the sort denominated as
distinct  from  everything else. "Chair," for example, divides the world
into  things which are chairs and all other objects; but "being" divides
something or anything from nothing and, as we have seen, even applies to
nothing. "All other names," Aquinas writes, "are 126

[185a]
;  j  Chapter  either  less universal, or, if convertible with it, , add
something  above it at least in idea; hence in a certain way they inform
and   determine  it."  The  concepts  which  such  words  express  have,
therefore,  a  restricted  universality. They , apply to all things of a
certain l^ind, but not to all things, things of every kind or type. With
the exception of a few terms inseparably associated with 'being' (or, as
Aquinas says, convertible with it), only being is common to all kinds of
things. When every other trait peculiar to a thing is removed, its being
remains—  the  fact  that  it  is  in  some  sense.  If  we start with a
particular  of  any  sort, classifying it progressively according to the
characteristics  which  it  shares with more and more things, we come at
last  to  being.  According  to  this method of abstraction, which Hegel
follows  in  his  Science  ofLogic,  'being'  is  the  emptiest of terms
precisely  because it is the commonest. It signifies the very least that
can  be  thought  of  anything.  On  this  view,  if  all we are told of
something  is  that  it  is—  that  it  has being —we learn as little as
possible  about the thing. We have to be told that a thing is a material
or  a  spiritual being, a real or an imaginary being, a hving or a human
being,  in  order  to  apprehend  a  determinate nature. Abstracted from
everything  else,  'being'  has only the positive meaning . of excluding
'non-being.'  There is an opposite procedure by which the term being has
the  maximal rather than the minimal significance. Since whatever else a
thing  is, it is a being, its being lies at the very heart of its nature
and  underlies  all its other properties. Being is indeterminate only in
the  i  sense that it takes on every sort of determina- : tion. Wherever
being  is  found  by  thought,  it is understood as a determined mode of
being.  To conceive being in this way, we do not remove every difference
or  determination,  but  on  the  contrary,  embrace  all, since all are
differences  or determinations of being. Aquinas, for example, conceives
"being  taken  simply  as including all perfections of being" and in the
Judaeo-Christian  tradition,  'being'  without qualification is taken as
the  most  prop-  ^ er name for God. When Moses asked God His \ name, he
received  as  answer: "I AM THAT I AM . . . Thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." Used

[185b]
7:  BEING  127  in this sense, 'being' becomes the richest of terms— the
one  which  has the greatest amplitude of meaning. Both ways of thinking
about  being  arc  relevant  to  the  problem of the relations among the
various  meanings  of  'being.'  Both are also related to the problem of
whether  being is one or many— the problem first raised by the Eleatics,
exhaustively  explored  in  Plato's  Parmenides,  and  recurrent  in the
thought of Plotinus, Spinoza, and Hegel. The two problems are connected.
If  everything  that is exists only as a part of being as a whole, or if
the  unity  of  being  requires everything to be the same in being, then
whatever  diversities  there  are do not multiply the meanings of being.
Although  he  speaks  of  substance rather than of being, Spinoza argues
that "there cannot be any substance excepting God, and consequently none
other  can  be conceived." From this it follows that "whatever is, is in
God,  and  nothing  can  be  or  be conceived without God." Since "there
cannot  be  two or more substances of the same nature or attribute," and
since  God is defined as a "substance consisting of infinite attributes,
each one of which expresses eternal and infinite essence," it is absurd,
in  Spinoza's  opinion,  to think of any other substance. "If there were
any  substance besides God, it would have to be explained," he says, "by
some  attribute  of  God, and thus two substances would exist possessing
the  same  attribute,"  which  is  impossible.  Spinoza's  definition of
substance,  attribute,  and  mode  or affection, combined with his axiom
that  "everything  which is, is either in itself or in another," enables
him  to embrace whatever multiplicity or diversity he finds in the world
as  aspects of one being. Everything which is not substance, existing in
and  of itself, exists in that one substance as an infinite attribute or
a  finite  mode.  "The  thing  extended {reni extensam) and the thinking
thing  {rem  cogitantem),''  he writes, "are either attributes of God or
affections  of  the attributes of God." If, on the contrary, there is no
unitary  whole  of being, but only a plurality of beings which are alike
in  being  and  yet  are  diverse  in  being  from one another, then our
conception of being

[186a]
128  THE  GREAT  IDEAS must involve a system of meanings, a stem of many
branches.  Descartes,  for  example,  distinguishes  between an infinite
being, whose essence involves its existence, and finite beings, which do
not  necessarily  exist  of them.selves but must be caused to exist. The
infinite  being which is God causes, but does not contain within itself,
other  finite substances; and among finite things, Descartes holds, "two
substances  are  said to be really distinct, when each of them can exist
apart  from  the  other."  In  addition to God— "that substance which we
understand  to  be  supremely  perfect"—Descartes  defines  two kinds of
finite  substance. "That substance in which thought immediately resides,
I  call  Mind,"  he  writes; and "that substance, which is the immediate
subject  of  extension  in  space,  and of the accidents that presuppose
extension,  e.g.,  figure, situation, movement in space, etc., is called
Body."  All  these substances, and even their accidents, have being, but
not being of the same kind or to the same degree. "There are," according
to  Descartes, "diverse degrees of reality, or (the quality of being an)
entity.  For  substance  has  more  reality  than  accident or mode; and
infinite  substance  has  more  than  finite  substance."  Its  being is
independent,  theirs dependent. The issue between Spinoza and Descartes—
single  substance  or many— is only one of the ways in which the problem
of  the  unity  or  diversity  of  being presents itself. Both Plato and
Aristotle,  for  example,  affirm a multiplicity of separate existences,
but  though both are, in this sense, pluralists, being seems to have one
meaning  for Plato, many for Aristotle. According to Plato's distinction
between  being  and  becoming,  only the immutable essences, the eternal
ideas,  are  beings, and though they are many in number, they all belong
to  one realm and possess the same type of being. But for Aristotle, not
only do perishable as well as imperishable substances exist; not only is
there  sensible and mutable as well as immaterial and eternal being; but
the being which substances possess is not the same as that of accidents;
essential  is  not  the same as accidental being; potential being is not
the  same as being actual; and to be is not the same as to be conceived,
that is, to exist in reality is not the same as to exist in mind.

[186b]
a Again and again Aristotle insists that "there are many senses in which
a  thing is said to be . . . Some things are said to be because they are
substances,  others  because  they  are  affections of substance, others
because  they  are  in  process  towards  substance,  or destructions or
privations  or  qualities  of  substance, or productive or generative of
substance, or of things which are relative to substance, or negations of
one  of  these things or of substance itself. It is for this reason," he
continues,  "that  we say even of non-being that it is non-being" ; and,
in  another  place,  he adds that "besides all these there is that which
'is'  potentially  or actually." All these senses of being, according to
Aristotle,  "refer  to  one  starting point," namely, substance, or that
which has being in and of itself. "That which is primarily, i.e., not in
a  qualified  sense," he writes, "must be a substance." But when he also
says  that  "that which 'is' primarily is the 'what' which indicates the
substance  of  a  thing," he seems to be using the words "substance" and
"essence'*  interchangeably.  This,  in turn, seems to be related to the
fact that, although Aristotle distinguishes between actual and potential
being,   and  between  necessary  or  incorruptible  and  contingent  or
corruptible  beings,  he,  like  Plato and unlike Aquinas, Descartes, or
Spinoza,  does not consider whether the essence and existence of a being
are  identical  or  separate.  It  may  be held that this distinction is
implied,  since  a  contingent  being is one which is able not to exist,
whereas  a  necessary  being  cannot  not  exist. A contingent being is,
therefore, one whose essence can be divorced from existence; a necessary
being, one which must be precisely because its essence is identical with
its  existence.  But  the  explicit  recognition  of  a real distinction
between  essence  and  existence  seems  to  be  reserved  for the later
theologians  and  philosophers  who  conceive  of  an infinite being, as
Aristotle  does  not.  The  infinity  of  a  being  lies not only in its
possession  of  all  perfections,  but  even  more  fundamentally in its
requiring  no  cause outside itself for its own existence. "That thing,"
says Aquinas, "whose being differs from its essence, must have its being
caused  by  another.  . . . That which has being, but is not being, is a
being by participation." Where Aristotle makes sub-

[187a]
stance  the  primary  type of being, and the "starting-point" of all its
other  meanings,  Aquinas  makes the infinite being of God, \ whose very
essence it is to be, the source of ' all finite and participated beings,
in  which  there  is a composition of existence and essence, or "of that
whereby  they  are and that which they are'' Since "being itself is that
whereby  a  thing  is,"  being belongs to God primarily and to all other
things  according  to  modes of derivation or participation. God and his
creatures  can  be  called  "beings" but, Aquinas points out, not in the
identically  same  sense,  nor  yet  with  utter diversity of meaning. A
similarity—   a  samenessin-diversity  or  analogy—obtains  between  the
unqualified  being  of God and the being of all other things, which have
being  subject  to  various  qualifications  or  limitations.  All other
questions  about  being  are  affected  by  the  solution of these basic
problems  concerning  the  unity  of  being, the kinds of being, and the
order  of  the  various kinds. If they are solved in one way—in favor of
unity—  certain questions are not even raised, for they are genuine only
on  the  basis  of  the  other  solution  which finds being diverse. The
discussion, in the I chapters on Same and Other, and on Sign AND Symbol,
of  sameness,  diversity,  and  analogy  is,  therefore, relevant to the
problem of how things are at once alike and unlike in being. The Greeks,
notably  Plato  and  Aristotle,  began  the  inquiry  about  being. They
realized  that  after  all  other  questions  are  answered, there still
remains  the  question, What does it mean to say of any thing that it is
or  is  not ? After we understand what it means for a thing to be a man,
or  to  be  alive, or to be a body, we must still consider what it means
for  that  thing  simply to be in any way at all; or to be in one sense,
and  not  to  be  in  another. The discussion of being, in itself and in
relation  to  unity  and  truth,  rest  and  motion,  runs  through many
dialogues  of  Plato.  It  is central in the Sophist and Parmenides. The
same  terms and problems appear in Aristotle's scientific treatise which
makes being its distinctive subject matter, and which he sometimes calls
"first philosophy" and sometimes "theology." It belongs to this science,
he declares, "to consider

[187b]
Chapter  7:  BEING 29 being qua being—both what it is and the properties
which  belong  to  it  qua  being."  As  pointed  out  in the chapter on
Metaphysics,  it  is an historical accident that this inquiry concerning
being came to be called "metaphysics." That is the name which, according
to legend, the ancient editors gave to a collection of writings in which
Aristotle  pursued  this  inquiry.  Since  they  came after the books on
physics,   they  were  called  "metaphysics"  on  the  supposition  that
.\ristotle  intended  the  discussion of being to follow his treatise on
change  and motion. If one were to invent a word to describe the science
of  being, it would be "ontology," not "metaphysics" or even "theology."
Yet  "metaphysics"  has remained the traditionally accepted name for the
inquiry  or science which goes beyond physics—or all of natural science—
in  that  it asks about the very existence of things, and their modes of
being.   The   traditional  connection  of  metaphysics  with  theology,
discussed in the chapters on Theology and Metaphysics, seems to have its
origin  in  the  fact  that  Aristotle's treatise on being passes from a
consideration  of  sensible and mutable substances to the problem of the
existence of immaterial beings, and to the conception of a divine being,
purely  actual, absolutely immutable. In a science intended to treat "of
that  which is primarily, and to which all the other categories of being
are  referred, namely, substance," Aristotle says, "we must first sketch
the  nature  of  substance."  Hence  he  begins  with what he calls "the
generally  recognized substances. These are the sensible substances." He
postpones  until  later  his  critical  discussion of "the Ideas and the
objects of mathematics, for some say these are substances in addition to
the  sensible  substances";  yet  he  directs  his  whole inquiry to the
ultimate  question  "whether  there  are or are not any besides sensible
substances."  His  attempt  to  answer this question in the twelfth book
makes  it the theological part of his Metaphysics. Though their order of
discussion  is  different,  the metaphysicians of the 17th century, like
Descartes,  Spinoza,  and  Leibnitz,  deal  with many, if not all, major
points in the analysis of being which the Greek philosophers initi-

[188a]
130  THE GREAT IDEAS ated and the mediaeval theologians developed. Later
philosophers,  whose  main  concern  is  with the origin and validity of
human  knowledge, come to the traditional metaphysical questions through
an analysis, not of substance or essence, existence or power, but of our
/^^^i of substance and power. This transformation of the ancient problem
of  being is stated by Berkeley in almost epigrammatic form. Considering
"what  is  meant  by  the  term  exist^ he argues from the experience of
sensible  things  that  "their  esseispercipi,  nor  is it possible they
should  have  any  existence,  out of the minds or thinking things which
perceive  them."  Locke,  too,  although he does not identify being with
perception,  makes  the  same  shift  on the ground that "the first step
towards  satisfying  several  inquiries  the  mind of man was apt to run
into,  was  to  make a survey of our own understandings, examine our own
powers,  and see to what things they were adapted." Once the problems of
being  are  viewed  first  in  terms  of the mind, the questions for the
philosopher become primarily those of the relation of our definitions to
real and nominal essences, the conditions of our knowledge of existence,
and the identification of the real and ideal with perceptible matters of
fact  and  intelligible  relations  between  ideas.  For  Kant the basic
distinction   is   between  the  sensible  and  supra-sensible,  or  the
phenomenal  and  noumenal,  realms of being. From another point of view,
Kant  considers  the  being  of  things  in  themselves apart from human
experience and the being of natural things or, what is the same for him,
the  things  of  experience.  The  former  are unconditioned, the latter
conditioned,  by  the knowing mind which is formative or constitutive of
experience. "The sole aim of pure reason," Kant writes, "is the absolute
totality  of the synthesis on the side of the conditions ... in order to
preposit  the  whole  series of conditions, and thus present them to the
understanding  a  priori^  Having  obtained  these  "conditions," we can
ascend  through  them  "until  we  reach the unconditioned, that is, the
principles."  It  is  with  these ideas of pure reason that metaphysics,
according to Kant, properly deals. Instead oi being, its object consists
in "three grand ideas: God,

[188b]
Freedom,  and  Immortality,  and  it  aims  at  showing  that the second
conception,  conjoined  with  the  first,  must  lead  to the third as a
necessary  conclusion."  Hegel, on the other hand, does not approach the
problem  of being or reality through a critique of knowledge. For Hegel,
as   for   Plotinus  before  him,  the  heart  of  metaphysics  lies  in
understanding  that "nothing is actual except the Idea" or the Absolute,
"and the great thing is to apprehend in the show of the temporal and the
transient,  the  substance  which  is immanent, and the eternal which is
present."  Plotinus  calls  the absolute, not the Idea, but the All-one,
yet  he  tries to show that the One is the principle, the light, and the
life  of all things, just as Hegel reduces everything to a manifestation
of the underlying reality of the Absolute Idea. Despite all such changes
in  terminology,  despite radical differences in philosophical principle
or   conclusion,  and  regardless  of  the  attitude  taken  toward  the
possibility  of  metaphysics as a science, the central question which is
faced  by  anyone  who  goes beyond physics, or natural philosophy, is a
question  about  being  or  existence.  It  may  or  may  not  be  asked
explicitly,  but it is always present by implication. The question about
God,  for  example,  or  free  will  or  immortality,  is first of all a
question  about  whether  such things exist, and how they exist. Do they
have  reality  or  are  they  only  fictions  of  the  mind ? Similarly,
questions  about  the  infinite,  the absolute, or the unconditioned are
questions  about that primary reality apart from whose existence nothing
else  could  be  or  be  conceived, and which therefore has an existence
different  from  the  things dependent on it for their being. Here again
the  first  question  is  whether such a reality exists. Enough has been
said  to  indicate  why this discussion cannot consider all topics which
have  some  connection  with  the  theory  of being. To try to make this
Introduction adequate even for the topics outlined here, under which th(
references  to the great books are assembled, would be to make it almost
co-extensive  in scope with the sum of many other Introductions— all, in
fact,   which  open  chapters  dealing  with  metaphysical  concepts  or
problems. It is to be expected, of course, that the special

[189a]
problems of the existence of God, of an immor- . tal soul, and of a free
will  should be treated in the chapters on God, Immortality, and Will. I
But  it may not be realized that such chapters as Cause, Eternity, Form,
Infinity,  Idea,  I  Matter,  One  and Many, Same and Other, ^ Relation,
Universal and Particular— all these and still others cited in the Cross-
References  below—  include topics which would have to be discussed here
if  we  were  to  try  to  cover all relevant considerations. Reasons of
economy  and  intelligibility  dictate the opposite course. Limiting the
scope  of  this  Introduction to a few principal points in the theory of
being,  we  can  also  exhibit,  through the relation of this chapter to
others,  the  interconnection  of  the great ideas. The various modes of
being   (such   as   essence  and  existence,  substance  and  accident,
potentiality  and  actuality,  the  real  and  the  ideal) and the basic
correlatives  of  being (such as unity, goodness, truth) are, therefore,
left  for  fuller  treatment  in  other contexts. But two topics deserve
further  attention  here.  One  is  the  distinction  between  being and
becoming,  the  other  the  relation  of being to knowledge. The fact of
change  or motion—of coming to be and passing away— is so evident to the
senses  that  it  has  never been denied, at least not as an experienced
phenomenon.  But  it  has  been  regarded  as  irrational and unreal, an
illusion  perpetrated  by  the  senses. Galen, for instance, charges the
Sophists with "allowing that bread in turning into blood becomes changed
as  regards  sight,  taste,  and  touch,"  but denying that "this change
occurs  in  reality."  They  explain  it  away,  he says, as "tricks and
illusions  of our senses . . . which are affected now in one way, now in
another, whereas the underlying substance does not admit of any of these
changes."  The  familiar  paradoxes  of  Zeno  are  reductio ad absurdum
arguments   to   show   that   motion  is  unthinkable,  full  of  self-
contradiction.  The way of truth, according to Parmenides, Zeno's master
in  the  Eleatic school, lies in the insight that whatever is always was
and  will  be, that nothing comes into being out of non-being, or passes
out of being into nothingness. The doctrine of Parmenides provoked many

[189b]
Chapter 7: BEING 131 criticisms. Yet his opponents tried to preserve the
reality  of  cliange, without having to accord it the fullness of being.
The  Greek  atomists, for example, think that change cannot be explained
except  in  terms  oi permanent beings— in fact eternal ones. Lucretius,
who  expounds  their  views,  remarks  that  in  any  change  "something
unchangeable must remain over, that all things be not utterly reduced to
nothing;  for  whenever  a thing changes and quits its proper limits, at
once  this  change  of state is the death of that which was before." The
"something  unchangeable"  is  thought  to  be  the atom, the absolutely
indivisible,  and  hence  imperishable,  unit of matter. Change does not
touch  the  being  of  the  atoms, "but only breaks up the union amongst
them,  and  then joins anew the different elements with others; and thus
it comes to pass that all things change"— that is, all things composite,
not the simple bodies of solid singleness —"when the clashings, motions,
arrangement,  position,  and  shapes  of  matter  change  about."  In  a
conversation  with  Cratylus,  who  favors  the  Heraclitean theory of a
universal  flux,  Socrates  asks, "How can that be a real thing which is
never in the same state?" How "can we reasonably say, Cratylus," he goes
on,  "that there is any knowledge at all, if everything is in a state of
transition  and there is nothing abiding"? When he gets Glaucon to admit
in  the  Republic  that  "being  is  the  sphere  or  subject  matter of
knowledge,  and  knowing is to know the nature of being," Socrates leads
him  to  see  the  correlation  of  being,  not-being, and becoming with
knowledge,  ignorance,  and  opinion.  "If  opinion  and  knowledge  are
distinct  faculties  then  the sphere of knowledge and opinion cannot be
the same ... If being is the subject matter of knowledge, something else
must  be the subject matter of opinion," It cannot be not-being, for "of
not-being  ignorance was assumed to be the necessary correlative." Since
"opinion  is  not concerned either with being or with not-being" because
it  is  obviously intermediate between knowledge and ignorance, Socrates
concludes that "if anything appeared to be of a sort which is and is not
at  the  same  time,  that sort of thing would appear also to lie in the
interval   between   pure   being  and  absolute  not-being,"  and  "the
corresponding

[190a]
132 THE GREAT IDEAS faculty is neither knowledge nor ignorance, but will
be  found  in  the  interval  between them." This "intermediate flux" or
sphere  of  becoming,  this  "region  of the many and the variable," can
yield  only  opinion.  Being, the realm of the "absolute and eternal and
immutable  [Ideas],"  is the only object that one "may be said to know."
Aristotle  would  seem to agree with Plato that change "partakes equally
of  the  nature  of  being  and  not-being, and cannot rightly be termed
either,   pure  and  simple."  He  points  out  that  his  predecessors,
particularly  the  Eleatics,  held change to be impossible, because they
believed  that  "what comes to be must do so either from what is or from
what  is  not,  both of which are impossible." It is impossible, so they
argued,  since  "what  is cannot come to be (because it is already), and
from  what is not nothing could have come to be." Aristotle concedes the
cogency  of  this  argument  on  one  condition,  namely, that the terms
'being' and 'not-being' are taken "without qualification." But his whole
point  is  that  they need not be taken without qualification and should
not  be,  if we wish to explain change rather than make a mystery of it.
The  qualification Aristotle introduces rests on the distinction between
two  modes  of  being  — the potentiality and actuality correlative with
matter  and  form.  This  makes  it possible for him to maintain that "a
thing  may  come  to  be  from what is not ... in a qualified sense." He
illustrates  his meaning by the example of the bronze, which from a mere
lump  of  metal  comes to be a statue under the hands of the artist. The
bronze,  he  says, was "potentially a statue," and the change whereby it
came  to  be  actually  a statue is the process between potentiality and
actuality.  While  the  change  is  going  on,  the  bronze  is  neither
completely potential nor fully actual in respect of being a statue. Like
Plato,  Aristotle  recognizes that there is "something indefinite" about
change.  "The reason," he explains, "is that it cannot be classed simply
as  a  potentiality or as an actuality—a thing that is merely capable of
having  a certain size is not undergoing change, nor yet a thing that is
actually  of  a  certain  size."  Change  is  "a  sort of actuality, but
incomplete . . . hard to grasp, but not incapable of existing."

[190b]
If  to exist is to be completely actual, then changing things and change
itself  do not fully exist. They exist only to the extent that they have
actuality.  Yet potentiahty, no less than actuality, is a mode of being.
That  potentiality  —power or capacity—belongs to being seems also to be
affirmed  by  the  Eleatic  Stranger in Plato's Sophist. "Anything which
possesses  any  sort  of  power  to affect another, or to be affected by
another,"  he  says,  "if only for a single moment, however trifling the
cause  and however slight the effect, has real existence ... I hold," he
adds,  "that  the  definition of being is simply power." The basic issue
concerning  being  and  becoming,  and  the  issue concerning eternal as
opposed  to mutable existence, recur again and again in the tradition of
western   thought.   They   are  involved  in  the  distinction  between
corruptible  and  incorruptible  substances  (which is in turn connected
with  the division of substances into corporeal and spiritual), and with
the  nature  of  God as the only purely actual, or truly eternal, being.
They  are  implicit in Spinoza's distinction between natura naturans and
natura  natw  rata,  and  in  his distinction between God's knowledge of
things under the aspect of eternity and man's temporal view of the world
in  process.  They  are  relevant  to Hegel's Absolute Idea which, while
remaining  fixed, progressively reveals itself in the ever-changing face
of  nature  and  history.  In  our  own  day  these issues engage Dewey,
Santayana,  and  Whitehead  in  controversy,  as  yesterday they engaged
Bradley,  William James, and Bergson. As ALREADY NOTED, Plato's division
of  reahty  into  the  realms of being and becoming has a bearing on his
analysis   of  knowledge  and  opinion.  The  division  relates  to  the
distinction  between  the intelligible and the sensible, and between the
opposed  qualities  of  certainty  and  probability,  or  necessity  and
contingency,  in  our  judgments  about things. The distinctions between
essence  and  existence  and  between  substance  and  accident separate
aspects  or modes of being which function differently as objects for the
knowing  mind.  Aristotle,  for  example,  holds  that  "there can be no
scientific  treatment  of  the  accidental  .  . . for the accidental is
practically a mere name.

[191a]
' And," he adds, "Plato was in a sense not wrong in ranking sophistic as
dealing  with that which is not. For the arguments of the sophists deal,
we  may  say,  above  all,  with the accidental." That the accidental is
"akin  to  non-being,"  Aristotle  thinks  may  be seen in the fact that
"things which are in another sense come into being and pass out of being
by  a  process, but things which are accidentally do not." But though he
rejects  the accidental as an object of science, he does not, like Plato
or  Plotinus,  exclude the whole realm of sensible, changing things from
the  sphere  of  scientific  knowledge.  For  him,  both metaphysics and
physics  treat  of  sensible  substances,  the  one with regard to their
mutable  Beings  the  other  with  regard  to their being mutable— their
becoming  or  changing.  For  Plotinus,  on  the  other  hand, "the true
sciences  have  an intelligible object and contain no notion of anything
sensible."  They  are  directed, not "to variable things, suffering from
all  sorts  of  changes, divided in space, to which the name of becoming
and  not being belongs," but to the "eternal being which is not divided,
existing  always in the same way, which is not born and does not perish,
and has neither space, place, nor situation . . . but rests immovable in
itself." > According to another view, represented by Locke, substance is
as  such  unknowable,  whether  it  be  body  or spirit. We use the word
"substance" to name the "support of such qualities, which are capable of
producing  simple  ideas  in  us;  which  qualities  are commonly called
accidents."  The  sensible  accidents are all that we truly know and "we
give  the general name substance" to "the supposed, but unknown, support
of  those  qualities we find existing." Some of these sensible accidents
are  what  Locke calls "primary qualities"— the powers or potentialities
by  which  things  affect  one  another  and also our senses. But to the
extent  that  our senses fail to discover "the bulk, texture, and figure
of  the  minute  parts  of  bodies,  on  which  their  constitutions and
differences  depend,  we  are  fain  to  1  make  use of their secondary
qualities,  as  the  i characteristical notes and marks whereby to frame
ideas  of them in our mind." Nevertheless, powers—which are qualities or
accidents, not substances—seem to be, for Locke, the

[191b]
Chapter  7:  BEING  133  ultimate  reality  we  can know. "The secondary
sensible  qualities,"  he  writes,  "are  nothing  but the powers" which
corporeal  substances have "to produce several ideas in us by our sense,
which  ideas"—  unlike  the  primary  qualities  "are  not in the things
themselves,  otherwise  than  as  anything  is  in  its  cause."  Hobbes
exemplifies  still  another  view. "A man can have no thought," he says,
"representing  anything not subject to sense." Hobbes does not object to
calling  bodies  "substances,"  but  thinks  that  when  we speak of "an
incorporeal  body,  or  (which is all one) an incorporeal substance," we
talk  nonsense;  "for none of these things ever have, or can be incident
to  sense;  but  are  absurd  speeches,  taken  upon credit (without any
signification  at  all)  from  deceived  Philosophers,  and deceived, or
deceiving,  Schoolmen."  He  enumerates  other absurdities, such as "the
giving  of  names  of  bodies  to accidents, or of accidents to bodies,"
e.g.^  by  those  who  say  that  "extension  is body." Criticism of the
fallacy  of  reification—  the  fallacy  first pointed out by Ockham and
criticized  so  repeatedly  in  contemporary  semantics—also  appears in
Hobbes'  warning  against  making  substances  out  of  abstractions  or
universals  "by  giving  the  names  of  bodies  to  names or speeches."
Whenever a theory of knowledge is concerned with how we know reality, as
opposed  to  mere appearances, it considers the manner in which existing
beings  can  be  known—  by perception, intuition, or demonstration; and
with  respect  to demonstration, it attempts to formulate the conditions
of  valid  reasoning about matters of fact or real existence. But it has
seldom been supposed that reality exhausts the objects of our thought or
knowledge.  We can conceive possibilities not realized in this world. We
can  imagine  things  which  do  not  exist  in  nature.  The meaning of
reality—of  real  as  opposed  to  purely  conceptual or ideal being— is
derived  from the notion of thinghood, of having being outside the mind,
not  merely  in  it. In traditional controversies about the existence of
ideas  or of universals, the objects of mathematics, or relations— it is
not  the  being  of  such things which is questioned, but their reality,
their existence outside the mind. If, for example,

[192a]
134  THE  GREAT IDEAS ideas exist apart from minds, the minds of men and
God,   they   have  real,  not  ideal,  existence.  If  the  objects  of
mathematics,  such  as  numbers  and  figures,  have  existence  only as
figments of the mind, they are ideal beings. The judgment of the reality
of  a  thing,  James  thinks,  involves  "a  state  of consciousness sui
generis'^  about  which  not  much  can  be said "in the way of internal
analysis."  The  focus  of  this problem in modern times is indicated by
James'  phrasing  of the question, "Under what circumstances do we think
things real?" And James gives a typically modern answer to the question.
He  begins  by  saying  that "any object which remains uncontradicted is
ipso  facto  believed  and  posited as absolute reality." He admits that
"for  most men . . . the 'things of sense' . . . are the absolutely real
world's  nucleus. Other things," James writes, "may be real for this man
or  that—  things  of  science,  abstract moral relations, things of the
Christian  theology,  or  what  not. But even for the special man, these
things are usually real with a less real reality than that of the things
of sense." But his basic conviction is that "our own reality, that sense
of  our  own  life  which we at every moment possess, is the ultimate of
ultimates  for  our belief. 'As sure as I exist!'— this is our uttermost
warrant  for  the  being  of  all  other  things.  As Descartes made the
indubitable  reality  of  the cogito go bail for the reality of all that
the  cogito involved, so all of us, feeling our own present reality with
absolutely  coercive  force, ascribe an all but equal degree of reality,
first to whatever things we lay hold on with a sense of of is and is not
2.  Being  and the one and the many 2a. Infinite being and the plurality
of finite beings 2b. The unity of a being 3. Being and good 3^. Being as
the object of love and desire

[192b]
fi  personal  need,  and second, to whatever farther things continuously
belong  with  these." The self or ego is the ultimate criterion of being
or   reality.   "The  world  of  living  realities  as  contrasted  with
unrealities,"  James writes, "is thus anchored in the Ego. . . . That is
the  hook from which the rest dangles, the absolute support. And as from
a  painted hook it has been said that one can only hang a painted chain,
so  conversely  from a real hook only a real chain can properly be hung.
Whatever things have intimate and continuous connection with my life are
things  of  whose  reality  I  cannot  doubt.  Whatever  things  fail to
establish this connection are things which are practically no better for
me than if they existed not at all." James would be the first to concede
to any critic of his position, that its truth and good sense depend upon
noting  that  word  "practically,"  for  it  is "the world of 'practical
realities'  "  with  which  he  professes  to  be  concerned.  We can in
conclusion  observe  one  obvious  measure of the importance of being in
philosophical  thought.  The  major  isms  by  which  the  historians of
philosophy  have  tried to classify its doctrines represent affirmations
or  denials  with  respect to being or the modes of being. They are such
antitheses  as  realism  and  idealism;  materialism  and  spiritualism;
monism, dualism, and pluralism; even atheism and theism. Undoubtedly, no
great  philosopher  can  be  so  simply  boxed. Yet the opposing isms do
indicate  the  great  speculative  issues  which no mind can avoid if it
pursues  the  truth  or  seeks the ultimate principles of good and evil.
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 1. Diverse conceptions of being and non-being: being
as a term or concept; the meanings 136 I 138 139

[193a]
4.  Being  and  truth 139 4a. Being as the pervasive object of mind, and
the  formal object of the first philoso4^. Being as the measure of truth
in  judgments  of  the mind: clarity and distinctness as criteria of the
reality  of  an  idea  5. Being and becoming: the reality of change; the
nature  of  mutable being 6. The cause of existence 141 7. The divisions
or  modes  of  being  142  ']a.  The  distinction  between  essence  and
existence:  existence  as  the act of being ']b. The distinction between
substance  and  attribute,  accident  or  modification:  independent and
dependent  being  (2)  Corporeal and spiritual substances, composite and
simple substances: the kinds of substance in relation to matter and form
(4)  Extension  and  thought as dependent substances or as attributes of
infinite  substance  (5) Substance as subject to change and to different
kinds  of  change:  the role of (6) The nature and kinds of accidents or
modifications  7c.  The  distinction between potentiality and actuality:
possible  and  actual  being  146  (i)  The  order  of  potentiality and
actuality  (2)  Types  of  potency  and  degrees  of  actuality 7(^. The
distinction  between  real and ideal being, or between natural being and
being  in  mind (2) The being of ideas, universals, rights (4) The being
of relations 7^. The distinction between appearance and reality, between
the  sensible  and  suprasensible,  between  the phenomenal and noumenal
orders  8.  Being  and  knowledge  8^. Being and becoming in relation to
sense:  perception and imagination 8^. Being and becoming in relation to
intellect: abstraction and intuition 151 8c. Essence or substance as the
object  of definition: real and nominal essences %d. The role of essence
in  demonstration:  the  use  of essence, property, and accident 8^. The
accidental  in  relation  to  science  and  definition 8/! Judgments and
demonstrations of existence: their sources and validity

[193b]
Chapter?: BEING 135 PACF. accidents or modifications 145

[194a]
136 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage cited. 1. Diverse
conceptions  of  being  and  non-being:  being as a term or concept; the
meanings  of is and is not 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 370d-373c / Timaeus,
447b-d;  455c-458b / Parmenides 486a-511d / Theaetetus, 517d-518b; 520b;
521d-522a  /  Sophist,  561d-563b  esp  562a-563a; 565a-566b; 567a-569a;
571d-573b passim 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 3
[16^19-26]
25d-26a; ch 13 [23*18-26] 35b-c / Prior Analytics, bk I, CH 36
[48*40-^9] 66d
/ Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 7 [92^13] 126c / Topics, bk IV, ch I
[121*14-26] 169a-b;
[121^1-8]
169c; ch 6
[127*26-40]
176d-177a; bk vi, ch 7
[146*21-32] 200a-b
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 5
[166^37-167*7] 229d; ch 7
[169*22-24]
232d;  CH  25 [180*32-38] 248c / Physics, bk i, CH 2 [185*20-^4] 260a-b;
ch 3 [186*23-187*10] 261b-262a; ch 5 [188*18-23] 263c; bk hi, ch 6
[206*13-34] 284b-d; bk
v, ch i
[225*20-29]
305b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch 3 413c-416c passim /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3-10 501c-511d passim; bk hi, ch 3
[998^14-28]
517b-c; bk iv, ch 2 [1003*33-^10] 522b; ch 5
[1009*22-38] 528d; BK V, ch 7 537c-538b; bk
VII, CH I 550b,d-551a; ch 4
[1030*17-^14]
552d-553b; bk ix, ch 10
[1051*34-^2] 577c;

[194b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets, are given in cerBible References : The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. BK
XI,  CH 2 [1060*36-^10] 588c; ch 3 [1060^31] 1061*10] 589a-b; bk xii, ch
2
[1069^15-34598d-599a; ch 4 [1070V8] 599d-600a / Soul,
BK  II,  CH  I [412^6-9] 642c 17 Plotinus : First Ennead, tr viii, ch 3,
28a-b  /  Third  Ennead,  tr vi, ch 6-7 109d-lllc; tr VII, CH 6 122a-d /
Fifth  Ennead,  tr i, ch 4 209d-210c; tr ii, ch i 214c-215a; tr vi, ch 6
237b-d / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 7-8 272a273c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  vii, par 1-2 43b44a / City ofGod, bk viii, ch ii, 272c; bk xii, CH 2
343c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, qq 2-13 10c-75b passim, esp q 3, a 4, rep i 16d-17c,
Q  II, A I 46d-47d, Q 13, A 5, ANS and rep i 66b-67d, A 10, ANS 72c-73c;
q  14,  a  9,  ans  83b-d;  q  16,  a  3,  rep 2 96b-d; q 22, a 4, rep 3
131c-132b;  q  29,  a i, rep 4 162a-163b; qq 44-45 238a-250a; q 48, a 2,
rep  2 260c-261b; Q 54, A 2, ANS 285d-286c; q 104 534c-538c; Q 105, A 5,
ANS  542a-543b;  part  i-ii, q 2, a 5 esp REP 2-3 618d-619c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61,  A  I,  rep i 54d-55c 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, part iv, 269d-270c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 292d-294a

[195a]
Itolb  Chapter  7:  BEING 137 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv 51b-54b /
Meditations,  iv,  89c-d  / Objections and Replies, 139b-c; 214d-215a 31
Si'inoza:  Ethics, part i, prop ii, demonst, 358d; scHOL, 359a; part ii,
prop 40, schol i 387b-388a 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, ^32h 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk hi, ch vii, sect I 283a-b 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  2-3  413b-d; sect 17 416a-b; sect 45-46 421b-c;
SECT  48  422a;  sect  81 428c-d; sect 88-91 430a-431a; sect 139 440d 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  43d-44a;  52a-b;  107b108a,c;  133c; 177b-187a esp
179c-182b,  185c187a; 197b-198a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
367d-368a  /  Judgement, 603b-c •46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
156d157b;  part  i,  224a-b;  233b-235a;  237d-238d; 251d-252d; part iv,
322a-b   .  53  James:  Psychology,  636a-661b  esp  639a-640a,  641a-b,
643a-645b;  871b-872a  2.  Being  and  the  one  and  the  many 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  in,  333  b-d;  bk  v,  370a373c  esp  372d-373c; bk vii,
392b-394b;  bk  x, 427c-429c/ Parmenides ^^oa-Slld / Theaetetus, 537a'c;
544d-547c  esp  547a  /  Sophist,  564d574c  /  Statesman,  594d-595a  /
Philebus,  610d617d  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch 2-3 259b-262a /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 7 [988^34-^5] 506c; bk III, CH I
[996^1-8]
514c; CH 4
[1001^4-^25]
519d-520c; bk vii, ch 16 [1040^16-27] 564d; BK X, CH 2 580b-d; bk xi, ch
2  [1060^36-^19]  588c-d;  bk  xiv,  ch 2 [io88'^28-i09o'^2] 621b622c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 14, 120d-121a 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; bk iv, sect 29 266a; sect 40 267a-b; bk v, sect 30
273a;  bk vi, sect 36-45 277c-278c; bk vii, sect 9 280b-c; sect 19 281a;
bk ix, sect 8-9 292b-d; bk x, sect 6-7 297a-c; bk xii, SECT 30 310a-b 17
Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr i, ch 4 79d-80a; TR II, CH 1-2 82c-83d; tr
viii, ch 8-10 132d136a; tr ix, ch 3 137b-138a,c / Eifth Ennead, tr i, ch
4-9  209d-213c;  tr  ii,  ch i 214c-215a; TR III, ch 11-12 222b-223c; ch
15-16  224c226a;  tr iv 226d-228b; tr vi, ch 6 237b-d / Sixth Ennead, tr
ii  268d-280d;  tr  iv,  ch  ii  302c-d;  TR  V,  ch i 305c-306a; ch 5-8
307a308c;  TR  VI,  ch  5-6  312c-313d;  ch  8-16 314a319d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  iv, par 15-17 23a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 3, A 3, ans 16a-d; q ii 46d-50b; q 30, a 3 169b170c; Q 93, A 9, ans
500c-501c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, u
[112123] 109a
31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 123c-d

[195b]
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 2 355a; def 6 355b; PROP 5-16 356b-362a
35 Locke: Human Understandirig, bk hi, ch hi, SECT 19 259c-260a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  43d-44a;  49c-51d esp 51c-d; 99a-101b; 107b-c; 173b-177b;
193a200c  46  Hecel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 218c; 224a-b; 232d;
237d-238a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 608a-b 2a. Infinite being
and the plurality of finite beings 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 8
[i9i^24-''i2]
267a-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5
[986*^18987^]504d-505a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk iv, sect 29 266a; SECT 40 267a-b; bk xii,
sect  30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 1-2 82c83d; TR vii,
ch  6  122a-d;  tr  viii, ch 8-10 132d-136a / Fourth Ennead, tr ix, ch 2
205c206a;  ch  5  206d-207a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-7 209d-212c; tr
hi,  ch  11-12  222b-223c;  CH  15-16  224c-226a;  tr  iv  226d-228b  18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  20-21 49d-50a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  3,  ans 16a-d; a 7, rep 2 19a-c; qq 7-8
31a-38c; q II, AA 3-4 49a-50b; q 13, a ii 73c-74b; qq 44-45 238a-250a; q
47 256a-259a; q 50, a i, ans and rep 3 269b-270a; q 90, a i 480d481d; QQ
103-105  528a-545b  31  Descartes:  Meditatio?7s,  in,  84a-h;  86a-88d/
Objections  and  Replies,  121d-122c; 123c-d; 139b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i  355a-372d esp def 2 355a, DEF 6 355b, prop 7-16 356c-362a, prop
21-25  364a-365b,  prop  28  365c-366a,  prop  29, SCHOL 366b-c, prop 30
366c-d;  part  ii,  prop  45, SCHOL 390b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 121 195a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  130b-133c  / Judgement, 550a-551a,c; 564c-565d esp
565c-d;  566c-d;  580c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part i, 22
7d228a; 234d-235a 2b. The unity of a being 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[1^3-9] 5c / Topics, bk IV, CH I
[121*14-19]
169a;
[121^4-8]
169c; CH 6 [127*26-40] 176d-177a; bk vi, ch 4
[141*26-^2]
194c-d  /  Sophistical Refutations, CH 7 [169*32-36] 233a / Metaphysics,
bk  iv,  ch  2  [1003^23-34] 522d; bk v, ch 6 536a-537c; ch 9 [1018*3-9]
538d;  bk  viii,  ch  6  569d-570d;  BK  X,  CH  1-2  578b,d-580d;  ch 3
[1054*33-35] 581a; bk xii, ch 10
[1075^34-37] 606d; bk
XIII, ch 2 [1077*20-23] 608c / Soul, bk ii, ch i
[412^6-9] 642c
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  vii,  definitions,  i  127a  11  NicoMACHUs:
Arithmetic, bk 11, 840a-b

[196a]
d  (2.  Being  and  the  one and the many. 2b. The unity of a being.) 17
Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i 139c140c / Sixth Ennead, tr vi, ch
ii-i6  315d319d;  TR IX, CH 1-2 353d-355a 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part i, q 6, A 3, REP I 29c-30b; q ii, aa 1-4 46d-50b passim; q 39, a 3,
ans  204c-205c; q 76 385c399b passim; q 103, a 3, ans 530a-c; part i-ii,
Q  12,  A  3,  REP  2-3 670d-671b; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  A  I, ANS and REP 2 710a-711c; a 9
719d720c;  Q  17 806d-809d; q 19, a i, rep 4 816a818b; PART III suppL, q
83,  a  3,  rep  4  978c980d  3  1  Des CARTES : Objections and Replies,
153b-154a  213d-214a;  224d-225d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 12-13
359b-d;  PART  II,  DEF  7 373c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xiii,  SECT  26  154b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  i  165c-d;  ch xxiii, SECT 1-6
204a-205c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  37-cH  XXIV,  SECT  3  213d-214d; ch xxvii
218d-228c;  bk hi, ch vi, sect 2-5 268c-269d; SECT 10 271b; SECT 49 282c
35  Berkei^ey:  Human  Knowledge, SECT i 413a-b; SECT 12 415b-c; sect 99
432b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  120c-129c  esp  121a-124d,  12 6a-128b /
Judgement,    566c53    James:   Psychology,   104a-107b   esp   104a-b;
215b-216a;406b   3.  Being  and  good  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1  New
Testament:  /  Timothy,  4:4 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124c-125b / Republic, bk
vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus, 447b-448b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 5
[143*9-12]
196c;  CH  6  [145*19-27] 198d-199a; ch 8 [146^9147*11] 200c-201a; ch 12
[149^31-39] 204b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch id
[336^28-30] 438d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[988*8-16]
506a-b; ch 7
[988^6-16]
506c-d; CH 9
[992*29-34]
510c;  BK XII, CH 7 602a603b; CH 10 [1075*11-24] 605d-606a; bk xiv, CH 4
[io9i*29]-cH 5 [1092*17] 624a-625a 9 Aristotle: Generation ofAnimals, bk
ii, ch i
[731^26-29] 272a / Ethics, bk i, ch 6 [1096*2329] 341c
17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b; tr VII, CH I, 26c; tr viii, ch
3-12  28a-34a  /  Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 15-16 224c-226a; tr IX, CH 10,
250c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch i 305c-306a; tr vii, ch 24-26 333d-334d;
ch 28 335b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10 15b-d; par 12 16b;
bk  iv, par 24 25b-c; bk v, par 20 32d-33a; bk vii, par 3-7 44a-45d; par
16-23  48c-50c  /  City  ofGod,  bk  xi,  ch  22,333d-334a; BK xii, ch 3
343d-344b

[196b]
; 138 THE GREAT IDEAS 3 to 3a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3,
a  2, ANS 15c-16a; qq 4-6 20c-30d; q 13, a ii, rep 2 73c-74b; q 21, a i,
rep  4  124b-125b; q 22, A I, ANS 127d-128d; q 25, a 6, ans 149a-150a; Q
48, AA 1-3 259b-262a; q 73, a i 370a-371a; A 3, REP 3 371d-372c; q 74, a
3,  rep  3  375a377a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a 5 618d-619c; q 18, AA 1-4
694a-696d  esp a i, ans and rep i 694a-d, A 2, ANS 694d-695c; q 29, a 5,
ans  747c-748b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 54, A 3, rep 2
24c-25b; q 55, a 4, rep 1-2 28c-29d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix
369b-372d;  PART  II,  DEF  6 373c; PART IV, DEF 1-2 424a 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 278b-c / Practical Reason, 307b-c 3</. The
hierarchy  of  being:  grades  of  reality, degrees of intelligibility 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-126a  /  Symposium,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk v,
370c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c;  bk  ix,  422c-425b  esp 423b-424d /
Timaeus,  447a-455c / Philebus, 637c-639a,c 8 Aristotle: Interpretation,
ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c  /  Topics, bk vi, ch 4 [141*26-142*22] 194c-195c / Heavens, bk i,
ch 2 359d-360d; bk II, CH 12 383b-384c; bk iv, ch 3 [310^32311*3] 402b-c
/  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  I,  CH  3  413c-416c;  bk ii, ch 10
[336^25-34] 438d / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12
[389^23390*17] 493d-494b / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 7
[988*34-^5]
506c; ch 8
[989^21-990*8]
507d-508a; ch 9 508c-511c; bk II, CH I
[993^19-31] 512a-b; bk
iv, ch 4
[1008^32-1009*5] 528b; BK IX, ch 9 [1051*422] 577a-b; bk
xii, ch 5
[1071*30-36] 601a;
CH  7 602a-603b; ch 10 605d-606d; bk xiii, ch 2 [1077*14-^14] 608b-609a;
bk xiv, ch 4
[io9i*29]-CH
5
[1092*17] 624a-625a
/  Soul, BK III, CH 4 [429*29-^4] 661c-d 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals,
bk i, ch 5
[644^20-645*5] 168c-d/ Generation ofAnimals,
BK II, CH I [731^^24-33] 272a-b / Ethics, bk i, ch 6 [1096*17-23] 341b-c
13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-751] 230b-231a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  vii,  ch 1-2 26a-d; TR VIII, CH 3-10 28a-33a; ch 12 33d-34a / Second
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  11-12 46b-c; ch 16-18 48b-50a; tr ix, ch 3 67b-c /
Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 1-2 82c-83d; tr viii, ch 8-10 132d-136a / Fourth
Ennead, tr viii, ch 6 203d-204b / Fifth Ennead, tr ii, ch i 214c215a; tr
hi,  ch  11-12  222b-223c;  tr  iv 226d228b / Sixth Ennead, tr vi, ch 18
320c-321b; TR VII, CH 28-29 335b-336b 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk viii,
ch  ii,  272c;  BK  XI,  CH  16  331a-c;  ch  22, 334b-c; bk xii, CH 2-5
343c-345b;  bk  xiv,  ch  13,  387d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 8
626c-627a;  en 32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i,
REP 2 lOd-lld; A 3, ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans

[197a]
Ibto^  Chapter 7: BEING 139 14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c-16a; a 7, rep 2 19a-c;
QQ 4-6 20c-30d passim; g 11, a 4 49d-50b; Q 16, A 6, REi' I 98b-d; q 18,
a  3  106b  107c; Q 19, A 8 116a-d; q 22, a 4, ans 131c-132b; q 23, A 5,
REP  3  135d-137d;  q 25, a 6, ans and REP 1,3 149a-150a; q 36, a 2, ans
192a-194c; Q 42, A I, REP 1-2 224b-225d; q 44, a i, ans 238b-239a; q 47,
a  2  257b-258c;  q 48, a 2, ANS and REP 3 260c-261b; q 50, a i, ans and
REP  I  269b-270a;  a 2, rep i 270a-272a; a 3, ANS 272a-273b; q 57, a i,
ans  295a-d;  q  65,  A  2,  ANS  and  REP 3 340b-341b; q 70, a 3, rep 2
365b-367a;  q  75,  a  7 384d-385c; q 76, a 3, ANS 391a-393a; a 4, rep 3
393a-394c;  q  77,  A  2  401b-d;  A  4,  REP I 403a-d; q 79, a 9, rep 3
422b-423d;  q  82,  a 3, ans 433c-434c; q 93, a 3 493d-494c; q 106, a 4,
ans  548b-549a; I Q 108, A 4 555b-d; q 118, a 2, rep 2 601cL. 603b; PART
i-ii, Q I, A 4, REP I 612a-613a; q V 2, A 5, REP 2 618d-619c; a 8, rep i
621c-622b;  Q  3,  A  7,  ANS  628a-d;  q  18, aa 1-4 694a696d passim 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 52, A I, ANS 15d-18a; q 71, a 3,
rep  i  107c-108b;  Q  85,  A  4  181b-d; PART ii-ii, Q 23, a 3, rep 3 !
485a-d; part hi, q 7, a 9, ans 751d-752c; part III suppL, Q 74, A I, REP
3 925c-926c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-142] 107b-d; II
[i 12-148] 109a-b; vii [64-75] 115d-
•. 116a;
[121-148]
116b-c; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b;  XXVIII  [64-72]  149b-c;  xxix  [13-36]  150b-c , 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  iv,  52d  /  Meditations,  III, 84a-b / Objections and
Replies, llld-112a; 121d-122c; axiom vi 132a; 139b-c; 211b-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  372c-d; part IV, pref 422b,d-424a; part v,
prop  40,  demonst462c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [468-490] 185b186a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 2 178c; ch xxiii,
sect  28  211b-d;  sect 36 213c-d; BK HI, CH VI, sect 11-12 271b272b; BK
IV,  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b-371a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 206d-207c /
Judgement^  556b-558b; 566d-567a 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part i,
224a-d;  233b-235a;  237d-238d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 217c 53
James:  Psychology,  639a-645b  esp 641b-644a 3^. Being as the object of
love  and  desire  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124c-126a / Symposium^ 165b-167d /
Republic,  bk  v-vi,  369c-375b;  bk  VI,  376d;  bk  ix,  422c-425b esp
423b-424d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192^16-24]
268b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3 [984''8]-cH 4
[985^8] 502d-503c; ch 7 [988^5-16] 506c-d;
BK XII, CH 7 602a-603b; ch 10 605d-606d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 7
[1167^341168^18]
421b-c; ch 9
[1170^14-^19]
423d424b

[197b]
17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch 7 24c-25a / Fifth Ennead, tr viii,
cm 9, 244b-c; tr ix, ch i 246c-d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  5 625d-626a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5 23b-28b; q 16,
a 4, ans and rep 1-2 97a-c; Q 19, A I, ans 108d-109c; q 20, a 2, ans and
REP 4 121b-122a; q 48, a i, ans and rep 4 259b-260c; part i-ii, q i, a 8
615a-c;  q  2,  A  5,  ans  and rep 3 618d-619c; q 8, a i, ans and REP 3
655b-656a;  q 22, a 2, ans 721c722c; Q 27, A 3 738c-739c; q 29, a i, rep
i  745a-c;  a 5 747c-748b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-142]
107b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 73a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi,  prop 4-9 398d399c; prop 12-13 400b-d; part iv, prop 19-22 429d-430c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part i, 224a225b; 233d-234b 4. Being
and  truth  7 Plato: Euthydefnus, 71c-74a / Cratylus, 86a; 113b-114a,c /
Phaedrus,  124c-126c  /  Republic,  BK  vi,386b-388a;  bk ix,423b-424a /
Timaeus,  447a-d  /  Parmenides,  508d  / Theaetetus, 534d536a; 537a-c /
Sophist,  561d-577b  / Philebus, 634b-635b / Seventh Letter, 809c-810c 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 3
[16^19-26]
25d-26a / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 36 [48*40- ^9] 66d / Metaphysics, bk
ii, ch i 511b, d512b; BK V, CH 7
[1017^31-34] 538a; ch 29
[1024^16-26] 546c-d; bk vi, ch 4 550a, c; bk
IX,  CH 10 577c-578a,c 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr viii, ch 8 132d133c
/  Fifth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 5, 218b; tr v, ch 1-2 228b-229d; tr vi, ch 6
237b-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 10 15b-d; bk V, par 5
28b-c;  bk  vii, par 16-23 48c-50c / City of God, bk xi, ch 10, 328c-d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 3, a 4, REP 2 16d-17c; q 14, a 9, rep i 83b-d; q 16 94b-100d;
q 17, a i lOOd-lOld; a 4, rep 1-2 103c-104b; q 18, a 4, rep 3 107d-108c;
q  44,  A  I, ans 238b-239a; q 79, a 9, rep 3 422b-423d; q 119, a i, ans
604c-607b;  part  I-II, q 3, A 7, ANS 628a-d; q 22, a 2, ans 721c722c; q
29, A 5, ans 747c-748b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[124126] 112a; xxxiii [49-54] 156d
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv  51b-54b  / Objections and Replies,
124c-125b;  axiom x 132b; 226d; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom
6 355d; part II, prop 10, scHOL 376d-377a; prop 20-21 382d-383a; prop 32
385c;  prop  43  388c-389b;  prop 44, coROL 2 and demonst 390a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk iv, ch v, SECT 8 330d

[198a]
(4.  Being and truth.) 42 Kant: Fttre Reason, 36a-37b; 91d-93b; 102c103a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par 23 17d; PART in, par 280
94d-95a  / Philosophy of History, intro, 156d-157b; part i, 237d-238a 53
James:  Psychology, 141a-b; 636a; 852a 4a. Being as the pervasive object
of  mind, and the formal object of the first philosophy, metaphysics, or
dialectic  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 125a-b / Republic, bk v, 368c-373c; bk vi-
vii,   383d-398c   /  Parmenides,  486a-491c  esp  489a-c;  507c-509a  /
Theaetetus,  535b-536a  /  Sophist,  561d-574c  esp  571a-c  / Philebus,
633a-635a esp 634b-635a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk vi, ch 12
[149^3-23]
203d'204a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [992'''i8993^10] 511a-c; bk ii, ch i
[993^19-31]  512a-b;  bk  IV  522a-532d;  bk  vi,  ch  i-bk  vii,  ch  i
547b,d-551a;  bk  xi,  ch 3-6 589a-592b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi
10a-12b  /  Fifth  ''-'_  Ennead,  tr  i, ch 4 209d-210c; tr v, ch 1-2 '
228b-229d;  tr  ix, ch ii 250c-251a ';19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q i, a i, REP 1-2 3b-4a; q 3, a 4, rep i 16d-17c; q 5, A 2 24b-25a; q
ii,  a 2, rep 4 47d-48d; q 14, A 9, rep I 83b-d; q 16, aa 3-4 96b-97c; q
79,  A  7,  ANS  420d-421c;  a  9,  rep  3  422b-423d;  Q 82, A 4, rep I
434c-435c;  q 87, a 3, rep i 467b-468a; part i-ii, q 3, a 7, ans 628a'd;
Q  9,  A  I,  ans and rep 3 657d-658d; q 10, a i, '^' REP 3 662d-663d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94,  A 2, ANS 221d-223a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part iv, 269b-270c 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
40a-48d  esp  40a-41b,  43a-c, 43d-45a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
53b-d  /  Objections and Replies, 261a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
44,  corol  2 and DEMONST 390a 35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
vii, SECT 7 132d ^42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c; 119a-c; 120b
[fn
i]  / Judganent, 551a-552c; 603d-607c esp 606d-607c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  pref,  6a- 7a; part III, par 360 113d'114a,c / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  156d-157b;  part i, 234b-c; 245d-246c Ab. Being as the
measure  of  truth in judgments of the mind: clarity and distinctness as
criteria  of  the reality of an idea *• 7 Plato: EuthydemMS, 71c-74a esp
72b-c  /  '^  Cratylus,  85a-89b / Parmenides, 507c-509a esp 508d-509a /
Sophist,  558c-d;  575a-577b  8  Aristotle:  Categories, ch 5 [4^10-^12]
8b-9a; ch 10 [12^6-15] 17d-18a; ch 12 [14^10-21] 20b

[198b]
140 THE GREAT IDEAS 4a to 5 / Interpretation, ch 3
[16^19-26]
25d-26a  /  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 2 [53^11-26] 72d-73a / Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 19
[81^17-24]
lllc-d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b  / Metaphysics, BK IV, CH 3-8
524b-532d; bk v, ch 7
[1017^31-34] 538a; ch 29 [1024^22-39] 546c547a; bk vi, ch 4 550a,c; bk ix, ch 10 577c578a,c; bk xi, ch 4-6 589d-592b
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, REP 2 16d-17c; Q 14, A
8,  rep 3 82c-83b; q 16, AA 1-2 94b-96b; q 16, a 8-q 17, a i 99d-101d; q
21,  a  2,  ans  125c-d;  part i-ii, q 2, A 3, ANS 617b-618a 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 154 108b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  56b  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv 51b-54b / Meditations, i-iv,
75a-89b; iv-v, 92d-96a; vi, 98c-d / Objections and Replies, 108a-115a,c;
121b-122c;  124c-125b;  126b-127c;  def  iii-iv  130b;  postulate iv-vii
131a-c;  axiom  vi 132a; axiom x 132b; prop ii-iii 132c-133a; 237c-238b;
257d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, def 4 373b; prop 32 385c; prop 43
388c-389b  35  Locke  :  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch hi, sect 24-25
120a-d; Bfe 11, ch viii, sect 1-6 133b-134a; ch xiii, sect ii 150d-151b;
sect  25-26  154a-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect 5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; SECT 32
212c-d; ch xxxii 243c248b passim, esp sect 19 247a-b; bk hi, ch VI, SECT
46-47  281d-282b;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  7-9  330b-331a;  ch  x, sect 7
350d-351a;  ch x, sect 19-CH XI, sect I 354a-c; ch xi, sect i2 357c-d 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 36b-c; 85d-88a; 179c182b / Pref Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics,  367d-368a  /  Judgement,  603d-604b  53  James: Psychology,
141a'142a;  636a;  638a641a;  879b-882a esp 881a-b , Being and becoming:
the  reality  of  change; the nature of mutable being 7 Plato: Cratylus,
94c-d;   99b-104b;   113c-114a,c  J  Phaedrus,  124c-126c  /  Symposium,
165c-166b;  167a-d  /  Phaedo,  231b-232b;  247b-248c / Republic, bk ii,
322d-323a;  bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk  vi-vii, 383d-398c; bk viii, 403a-b /
Timaeus  442a-477a,c  esp  447a-d,  455c-458b  /  Parmenides  A^Qa-Slld/
Theaetetus,  517d-534b  /  Sophist,  561d-574c  /  Statesman,  587a-b  /
Philebus,  610d-617d;  631d-635a esp 634b-635a / Laws, BK x, 760a-765c 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i  259a-268d  esp  ch  8  267a-d;  bk ii, ch i
268b,d-270a;  bk  hi,  ch 1-3 278a-280c; ch 6 [206^18-^16] 284c-285a; bk
IV,  CH II [219^23-31] 299c-d; bk vi, ch 6 319c-321a / Heavens, bk i, ch
3 360d-362a; CH 9
[277^29-278^9] 369a-d;
bk iv, ch 3
[310^22-311^12] 402b-c; ch 4 [311^29-33] 403c
/  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3  413c416c;  bk II, CH 9-M
436d-441a,c / Meta-

[199a]
15 to 6 Chapter 7: BEING 141 physics, BK I, CH 3-10 501c-511d passim; bk
II, CH 2 512b-513b; bk hi, ch i [996"2-4] 514c; CH 2
[996*18-^26] 514d-515b; en 4 [loooV
1001*2]  518d-519d;  bk  iv,  ch  5  528c-530c;  CH  7  [1011^23-1012*9]
531c-532a; cii 8
[ioi2*»
22-33]  532d; BK V, cii 4 534d-535c; bk vii, CH 7-9 555a-558a; bk ix, ch
3
[1047*10-29]
572b-c; ch 6
[1048*^18-34]
574a-c; cii 8
[1049^29-1050*3] 575c-d; ch
10  [1051^26-30]  578a;  bk  x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch 6 590d592b; CH 9
593d-594d;  ch 11-12 596a-598a,c; BK XII 598a-606d esp ch 2-3 598c-599d,
ch 6-8 601b-605a Aristotle: Generation ofAnimals, bk v, ch i 9
[778*29-^] 320a-d
Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2 167b- .10 168c; CH 5 169b-c; bk ii,
ch  3,  186d  NicoMACHus:  Arithmetic, bk i, 811b-d Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i [146-328] 2d-5a; bk ii
[294-307]
18d-19a;
[749-754]
24c;  [1002-1022]  27d-28a AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 17, 259c11
12  12 d; bk IV, SECT 36 266d; sect 42-43 267b; sect 46 267c; bk v, sect
23  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk  vii, sect 18 281a; sect 49-50
282d-283a;  bk  viii,  sect 6 285d-286a; bk ix, SECT 19 293b; sect 35-36
294d-295a;  bk  x,  SECT  7  297b-c Kepler: Harmonies ofthe World, 1051b
Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr i, ch 3-4 36b37b; TR IV, CH 6 51d-52a; tr v
57d-60c  passim  fl6 17 / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 1-2 82c-83d; tr vi, CH
7-19  110d-119a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii, ch 12-13 245c-246c / Sixth
Ennead, tr i, ch 17-22 261c-264c; ch 25-30 265b-268c; tr hi 281a297b esp
ch  1-8  281a-285d,  ch  21-27  293a297a;  tr  v, ch 2 306a-b Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi, par 10 15b-d; 18 bk IV, par 15-19 23a-24b; bk vii,
par  1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk xii, par 3-6
99d-100c  esp  par  6,  100c;  par  8,  101b;  par  15 102b-c; par 24-26
104c-105b;  par  28 105c-d; bk xih, par 48 124a / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch 9 627a; bk ii, ch 38 654b-c Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q
2,  a  3, ANs 12c-14a; q 4, a i, rep i 20d-21b; q 9, a i, ANS 38c-39c; q
10, a 4, rep 3 43b-44b; a 5, ans 44b-45c; q 26, a i, rep 2 150b-c; q 29,
a  r, rep 4 162a-163b; q 65, a 4 342b-343c; Q 86, A 3 463b-d; part i-ii,
q 10, a i, rep 2 662d-663d Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q no, A
2,  rep  3 349a-d; part hi, q 62, a 4, REP 2 861a-862a; part hi suppl, q
91,  a  3, REP 2 1020d-1022c Chaucer: A^m^/i/VT^/e [2987-3040] 209a-210a
Mo^tkig^-e:  Essays,  292a-294b  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv, 52d /
Objec19  20  22  25 /31 tions and Replies, 212a Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
def 2 355a; part ii, PROP 31 385b-c 31

[199b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  iv,  sect 8 260d-261a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 89 430bc; sect 102 432d-433a; sect 141
441a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 15a-b; 27a-33d esp 27a, 28b-c, 31d-32a;
43a-b; 74b-76c; 82a 83b; 91d-93c; 95a-d; 138b-139b
[thesis];
141b,d145c;  200c-204c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 178a179d;
186d-190b   51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  608a-b  53  James:
Psychology,  882a-884b  passim  6. The cause of existence Old Testament:
Genesis,  1-2;  7:1-5  /  Nehemiahy 9:6— (D) // Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 26:7;
38:1-42:2  /  Psalms,  8 esp 8:3-6; 19:1; 89:11-12; 102:25; 136:5-9— (D)
Psalms,  8  esp  8:4-6;  18:2; 88:12-13; 101:26; iT,'2)''5-9 / Jeremiah,
31:35— {D) Jeremias, 31 :35 / Amos, 5:8 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 18:1—
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1 New Testament: Acts, 14:15; ly '.22-7,2—
{D)  Acts,  14:14;  17:22-32  /  Romans,  11:36  / Colossians, 1:16-17 /
Hebrews, 1:10 / Revelation, ^\ii— {D) Apocalypse, 4:11 7 Plato: Timaeus,
447b-448a  /  Laws, bk x, 760a-765d esp 763d-764a 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  122b,d-123c; ch 7 [92^18-25] 126d; ch 8-12
127a-131b  /  Metaphysics,  bk i, ch 7 [988^5-16] 506c-d; CH 9 [991^1-9]
509c-d; ch 10 511c-d; bk II, CH I
[993^27-31] 512a-b; bk
v, ch 8
[1017^10-17] 538b; bk vii, ch 17 565a-566a,c;
bk xii, ch 6-7 601b-603b / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[415^11-14] 645d
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*4-9] 162b
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14,  120d121a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 10 3b-c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, A 3, ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a 4,
ans  16d-17c;  a  5,  REP 2 17c-18b; Q 5, A 2, REP 1-2 24b-25a; q 8, A I
34d-35c; a 2, ans 35c-36b; a 3, ans and REP I 36b-37c; a 4, ans 37c-38c;
q 9, a 2, ANS 39c-40d; q 14, a 8 82c-83b; qq 44-46 238a-255d; q 57, a 2,
ans  and rep 2 295d297a; q 61, a i 314d-315b; q 65 339a-343c; q 75, A 6,
rep  2  383c-384c;  q 104 534c-538c; Q 105, A 3, ANS 540c-541b; a 5, ans
542a543b;  part  i-ii,  q  18,  a  4,  ans  696b-d  28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,   443b-c   31   Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  55d-56a  /
Meditations,  iii, 87c-d / Objections and Replies, AXIOM IX 132b; 213b-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, def i 355a; prop 17, scHOL 362c-363c; prop
24-29 365a-366c; PROP 33 367b-369a; part ii, prop 6-7 374d375c; prop 10,
schol 376d-377a; prop 45, SCHOL 390b

[200a]
142  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (6.  The cause of existence^ 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a; bk viz 217a-231a esp
[162-169] 220b,
[601-640] 230a-231a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, SECT 12 165b-c; ch xxvi,
sect  1-2, 217a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 2-4 413b-414a; sect
25-33  417d'419a;  sect 36 419c-d; SECT 45-46 421b-c; sect 48 422a; sect
88-91  430a-431a;  sect  146-150  442a443b 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  viii,  div 74, 484a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 140b,d-145c; 177b-179b /
Practical  Reason,  334b-337a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
245d246c  7. The divisions or modes of being la. The distinction between
essence  and  existence:  existence  as  the act of being Old Testament:
Exodus,  3:14 8 Aristotle : Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 3 [1047 ^30- ^2] 572c
17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 6 122a'd / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch
13, 234d-235a 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xi, ch 10, 328c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 3, A 4 16d-17c; A 5, ANs and rep i 17c-18b;
a  6,  ANS 18c-19a; a 7, ans and rep i 19a-c; q 4, A I, rep 3 20d-21b; a
2, ans and rep 3 21b22b; a 3, REP 3 22b-23b; Q 6, a 3 29c-30b; Q 7, a I,
ANS  and rep 3 31a-d; a 2, ans and REP I 31d-32c; q 8, a i, ans 34d-35c;
q 9, a 2, ANS 39c-40d; q 10, a 2, ans 41d-42c; q 11, a 4, ans 49d-50b; q
12,  a  2, ans and rep 3 51c-52c; A 4, ans and rep 3 53b-54c; q 13, All,
ans  73c-74b;  q 25, a i, rep 2 143d-144c; Q 29, A I, REP 4 162a-163b; q
34,  a  i,  rep  2  185b-187b;  q  39,  a  2, rep 3 203b-204c; q 44, A I
238b-239a;  q 50, a 2, rep 3 270a-272a; Q 54, A I, ANS and REP 2 285a-d;
a  2,  rep  2  285d-286c; a 3, ans and rep 2 286c-287b; Q 75, A 5, rep 4
382a-383b;  q  88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; part i-ii, q 3, a 7, ans 628a-d
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv, 52d-53a / Meditations, v 93a-96a /
Objections   and  Replies,nOa-n2a;  112d-113b;  126b-127c;  postulate  V
131b-c; axiom i 131d; axiom x-prop i 132b-c; 158b-162a passim; 217d-218a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 8 355c; axiom 7 355d; PROP 7 356c; prop
8, schol 2 356d357d; PROP 11 358b-359b; prop 17, schol, 363 b-c; prop 20
363d-364a;  prop 24-25 365ab; PROP 34 369a; part ii, def 2 373b; axiom i
373c  ;  PART  III,  prop  7  399a;  part iv, def 3 424a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  v, SECT 1-6 263d-265a; bk iv, ch ix, sect i
349a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 179c-182b; 191d-192b

[200b]
7  to7h  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 280 94d-95a /
Philosophy  of History, intro, 165ab; 178c-d; part i, 233d-234b 53 James
:  Psychology,  640b  [fn i]; 644b lb. The distinction between substance
and attribute, accident or modification: independent and dependent being
8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[1*20-^9]
5b-c; CH 5 6a-9a; ch 7
[8^12-^24] 13a-d /
Topics,  bk V, CH 4 [i33'^i5-i34*4] 184d-185b / Sophistical Refutations,
CH 7 [169*33-36] 233a; ch 22
[178^37-179*10]
246c / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i85*2o]-CH 3 [187*10] 260a-262a/ Metaphysics,
BK I, CH 9
[990^22-991*2] 509a; [992^18-24]
511a; BK IV, CH 4
[1007*20-^18] 526c-527a;
BK V, CH 7
[1017*23-31]
537d-538a; ch ii
[1019*1-14]
540a; bk vii, ch 3
[1029*7-26]
551c-d; CH 4-6 552b-555a; bk viii, ch 3
[1043^18-24] 568a-b; ch 4 [1044*^8-20] 569b;
BK  IX, CH I [1045^28-32] 570b; ch 7 [1049*19- ^i] 574d-575a; bk x, ch 2
580b-d; bk xii, ch I [1069*18-25] 598a; ch 4-5 599d-601a; ch 7
[1072^4-13] 602c-d
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648b35]-CH 3 [649^22] 173b-174b
12AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  xii,  sect  30, 310a 17 Plotinus : Fourth
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 6 203d204b / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 3 253a-b; ch 5,
254c-d; ch 15 260c-d; ch 25 265b-d; tr ii, CH 14-15 276c-277b; tr hi, ch
3  282a-c; ch 6 284a-c; ch 8, 285b-c 19 Aquinas: Sumfna Theologica, part
i, q 3, a 6 18c-19a; q 6, a 3, ans 29c-30b; qj, at., ans 31d'32c; q 9, a
2  39c-40d;  q  ii, a i, rep 1-2 46d-47d; a 2, rep i 47d-48d; a 4, rep 2
49d-50b; q 29, a i, ans and rep 3 162a-163b; Q 39, A 3, ANS 204c-205c; q
40, a i, rep i 213b-214b; a 2, rep 4 214b-215b; q 44, a 2, ANS and REP I
239b-240a; q 45, a 4 244d-245c; q 54, A I 285a-d; a 3 286c-287b; q 67, a
3  351b-352a;  q 76, a 4 393a-394c; a 6 396a-d; q 77, A I 399c-401b; a 6
404c-405c;  q 85, a 5, REP 3 457d-458d; q 90, a 2, ans 481d-482c; q 115,
a  I,  ANS  and  rep  5  585d-587c; part i-ii, q 7, A I, ANS and rep 2-3
651d-652c;  a  4,  rep 3 654b-655a; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c; Q 18, A 3,
REP  3  695d-696b;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  i  745c-746b  20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 49, a 2, ANS and rep 3 2b-4a; q 50, a 2 7c-8a;
q  52, A I, ANS 15d-18a; q 53, a 2, rep 3 21a-d; Q 66, A 4, ANS 78c-79b;
part  ii-ii,  q  23, a 3, rep 3 485a-d; part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a711c;
PART  III  SUPPL, Q 70, A I, ANS 893d895d; Q 79, A I, REP 4 951b-953b; q
83,  a  3, ANS 978c-980d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 66, 114d115a
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part i, 41d; part iv, 52d / Meditations, iii
81d-89a passim, esp

[201a]
mi)  to  7b{2)  87b-88c  / Objections afid Replies, def v 130b-c; DEF IX
130d:  135b-136b; 136c; 139b-c; 153d; 162d-165d; 170d; 211b-c; 228c-229c
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, def 3-5 355b; axiom 1-2 355c-d; prop 1-9
355d-357d; prop 10, SCHOL 358a-b; prop 19 363c-d; prop 20, COROL 2 364a;
prop 21-23 364a-365a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SECT 19
117c-d; BK II, CH XII, SECT 3-6 147d148c; CH xiii, SECT 17-20 152a-d; ch
xxiii 204a-214b esp sect 1-15 204a-208d;cH xxxii, sect 24 247c-d; bk hi,
ch  ix,  sect  12-13  287d-288d  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 1-7
413a-414c;  sect  25-33  417d-419a  passim;  sect  49  422b;  sect 73-78
427b-428b;  sect  88-91  430a-431a; sect ior-102 432c-433a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  33a-d;  74b-  76c; 130b133c esp 131c-d; 140b,d-143a / Practical
Reason, 310d-311d / Judgement, 529c-530a; 550a-551a.c; 566b-d; 580c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, additions, 26 121a-b; 39 122d / Philosophy
ofHistory,  intro,  160c-161a;  part  i,  211a-c  53 ]AMES -.Psychology,
572a-b E7^(l) The conceptions of substance 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
6a-9a; ch 7
[8*12-^24]
13a-d  /  Metaphysics, bk v, ch 8 538b-c; bk vii-viii 550b,d-570d; bk x,
ch 2 580b-d; bk xii, ch i 598a-c; bk xiii, ch 2
[io77'*i4-^ii] 608b-609a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b 17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead,  tr i, ch 2-3 252c253b; ch 10 257b-258b; ch 25 265b-d; tr hi, CH
2-10  281c-286d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, A 5, REP 1-2
17c-18b;  a  6 18C'19a; q ii, a 3, ANS 49a-c; q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; qq
29-43  161d-237a,c passim, esp q 29, a 2 163b-164b; Q 45, a 4 244d-245c;
qq  75-76 378a-399b passim; q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; part i-ii, Q 17,
a  4,  ans 688d-689c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 4, A I,
ans  and  rep  i  402a-403d; part hi, qq 1-3 701b,d-730b; q 17 806d-809d
passim;  part hi suppL, Q 83 974d-983b passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
hi,  172b  30 Bacon: Nofum Organum, bk ii, aph 37 168d169c 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies,  def  vvinl30b-d;153c-155c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part i, def 3,6 355b; prop 1-9 355d-357d; prop 11-14 358b-360a; prop 15,
SCHOL  360b-361d;  prop  19 363c-d; part II, prop 10 376c-377a 35 Locke:
Pluman Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SECT 19 117c-d; bk ii, ch xii, sect 6
148b-c;  CH  XIII,  SECT  17-20 152a-d; ch xxiii 204a214b; CH xxxi, sect
6-13  240d-243b; ch xxxii, SECT 24 247c-d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 21 273c-d;
sect 42 280b-c; ch ix, sect 11-17

[201b]
Chapter 7: BEING 143 287d-290a; bk iv, chvi, sect 4-16 331d-336d passim,
esp  sect  ii  334b  335b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 6-7 414b-c;
sect  26-27  418a-b;  sect 73 427b-c; SECT 88-91 430a-431a; sect 135-136
440a-b;  SECT  139  440d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15b-c; 63a; 63d-64a;
69c-72c;74b-76c;81b-83b;86c-87b;91d-93b;  95a-d;  lOOd-lOlb;  121a-128b;
131c-d;  137a140c;  162b-163a;  lS6h'd / Judgement, 565b-d; 566d-567a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  in,  par 146 55c-d / Philosophy of
History,   intro,   156d157b;   PART  I,  211a-c;  227d-228a  53  James:
Psychology,   221b;  223a  7^(2)  Corporeal  and  spiritual  substances,
composite  and  simple substances: the kinds of substance in relation to
matter  and form 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 7 265b-267a; BK II, CH I
268b,d-270a; bk iv, ch 2 288b289a / Heavens, bk i, ch 9
[277^26-278^9]
369a-d;  bk iv, ch 4 [312*12-17] 403d / Generation and Corruption, bk i,
ch  3  413c-416c / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk
III, ch i [995^13-18] 514a; [995^3139] 514b;
[996*13-15]
514c; ch 2
[997*34998*19] 516a-d; ch 4 [999*24-^23] 518a-c; ch
5  520c-521b;  ch  6 [1002^11-32] 521b-d; bk v, CH 8 538b-c; bk vii-viii
550b,d-570d; bk xi, CH I
[1059*33-^14] 587b-c; ch 2 [1060*3-27]
588a-b;  [1060^23-29]  588d-589a; bk xii-xiv 598a-626d / Soul, bk ii, ch
1-2  642a-644c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch ii, 240d241a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv, sect 21 265bc; bk vii, sect 23 281b; bk
viii,  sect  ii 286b; BK XII, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Second Enneady
tr iv, ch 2-4 50b-51a; ch 6 51d-52a; tr v, ch 2 58b-d / Third Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  7-19 110d-119a / Fourth Ennead, tr viii, ch 6 203d-204b / Fifth
Ennead,  tr  i, ch 2 208c-209b; tr ix, ch 3 247b-d / Sixth Ennead, tr i,
ch  27-28  266c267c; tr hi, ch 2-10 281c-286d; tr v, ch 5-8 307a-308c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  1-2 43b44a; par 7 45a-d; par 16
48c-49a; par 20 49d; par 26 51c-d; bk xii, par 5-6 lOOa-c; par 8 lOla-b;
par  16  102d-103a;  par  18-22 103a104b; par 24-26 104c-105b; par 28-30
105c106c;  par  38-40  108d-110a; bk xiii, par 48 124a / City of God, bk
xi, ch 10 327d-328d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3 14a-20c; q
6, a 3, rep i 29c-30b; q 7, a i, ans 31a-d; q 8, a i, rep 2 34d-35c; a 2
35c-36b;  Q 9, A 2, rep 3 39c-40d; q 11, a 4, rep 3 49d' 50b; Q 14, a 2,
rep 1,3 76d-77d; q 18, a 4, rep 3 107d-108c; q 29, a i, rep 4 162a-163b;
A  2, REP 3,5 163b-164b; q 40, a i, rep i 213b214b; Q 45, A 4 244d-245c;
q 50 269a-275a;

[202a]
144  {lb.  The  distinction between substance and attribute, accident or
modification:  independent  and  dependent  being.  lb{2)  Corporeal and
spiritual  substances,  composite  and  simple  substances: the kinds of
substance in relation to matter andform.) Q 70, A 3, REP 2 365b-367a; qq
75-76 378a399b; Q 77, A I, ANS and rep 2-3,6 399c-401b; Q 85, A 5, REP 3
457d-458d; q 86, a 3 463b-d; Q 88, A 2, REP 4 471c-472c; q 104, a i, ans
and  REP  I  534c-536c;  q  115,  a i 585d-587c; a 3, REP 2 588c-589c 20
Aquinas : Su7nma Theologica, part i-ii, q 52, A I, ANS 15d-18a; part ii-
ii,  q  24,  a  ii,  ans  498b-499c;  part  hi,  q 2, a i, ans and rep 2
710a-711c; part hi suppl, q 69, a i, ans and rep 2 885c-886c; q 79, a 2,
rep  2  953b-955c;  Q  92, A I, ans 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c; XXIX [13-36] 150b-c
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 172a-177c; part IV, 258b-261a; 269d-271b
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17b-d / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 37
168d-169c  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 51d-52a / Meditations, vi
96b-103d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  DEF vi-viii 130c-d; 153c-155c 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15 360a-361d; part ii, prop 1-2 373d-374a;
prop  6 374d375a; prop 7, schol 375b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xhi,  SECT i6-i8 151d-152c; ch xv, sect ii 165a-b; CH XXI, sect
2-4  178c-179c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b;  sect  15-37 208c-214b; ch
xxvii,sect 2 219b-c; BK III, ch x, sect 15 295a-c; bk iv, ch III, sect 6
313c-315b;  ch x, sect 9-19 351b-354c passim; ch xvi, sect 12, 370c-371a
35   Berkeley:   Human  Knotuledge,  sect  1-29  413a-418c;  sect  35-38
419c-420a;  sect  47-50  421c-422c;  sect  67-81  426b-428d;  sect 86-91
429c-431a  passim;  sect  133-142  439c-441c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, lOOd-
lOlb;  121a-128b;  186b-d;  203d-204c  /  Judgement,  557c-558b; 565b-d;
566d-567a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b; 160c-161a;
165a-b;  part  i,  227d-228a  53  James:  Psychology,  118b-119b passim;
220b226a  esp 221a-223a 7^(3) Corruptible and incorruptible substances 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 1-3 359a-362a; ch 9
[279*12-^4] 370b-d; bk
i, ch io-bk ii, ch i 370d-376a; bk hi, ch 6 396a-c / Metaphysics, .'/aBK
hi, ch 2
[996*21-28] 514d; bk
iv, ch 5 c* "(1009*36-39] 528d; bk v, ch 5
[1015^9-16]
536a; bk ix, ch 8
[io5o''5]-ch
9
[1051*21]
576b-577b; bk x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch 6 (1063*10-17] 591b; BK XII, CH
I
[1069*30-^2]
598b-c; ch 2
[1069^24-27] 598d-599a; ch 3
;r.r. [1070*20-27] 599c; ch 6-8 601b-605a; ch 10

[202b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 7b{3>) to 7b{^)
[1075^13-14] 606b / Soul, BK II, ch 2 [413^2429] 643d-644a
9   Aristotle:   Motion  ofAnimals,  ch  4  [699^12700*5]  234d-235a  12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk i [215-250] 3d-4b; [483-634] 7a-8d 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk i, 5a-6a; bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  929b-930b  17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead, tr i, ch 1-4 35a37b; CH 8
39c-d;  tr  iv, ch 6 51d-52a / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 10-12 198d-200a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 9, a 2 39c-40d; q 10, a 2, rep
1-2  41d-42c; a 3, ans and REP I 42c-43b; aa 5-6 44b-46d; q 18, a 3, REP
3  106b-107c;  q 22, a 2, ans 128d-130d; Q 46, A I, REP 2-3 250a-252d; q
48,  a 2, ans and REP 3 260c-261b; q 50, a 5 274b-275a; q 63, A I, REP 2
325c-326c;  q  66,  a  2  345d347b;  q 68, a i, ans 354a-355c; q 75, a 6
383c-384c;  q  76,  a  3,  rep  1-2  391a-393a; q 97, A I 513c-514c; a 4
515d-516d;  q  104,  a  i, rep 1,3 534c-536c; q 113, a 2, ans 576d-577d;
PART  i-ii,  q  22,  A I, rep 3 720d-721c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 49, A 4, ans 5a-6a; q 85, a 6 182d-184a; part ii-ii, q 24,
A  II,  ANS  498b-499c;  part  m  SUPPL,  q  91, A I 1016b-1017c; aa 4-5
1022d1025b    21   Dante:   Divine   Comedy,   paradise,   vii   [64-84]
115d-116a;[i2i-i48]116b-c;xni[52-87]126a-b  31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  127c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, prop 6-8 356b-357d; PROP
12-13 359b-d; prop 15, schol, 361d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[i 16-156] 96a97a; bk
ii
[94-105] 113a-b; bk vi [320-347]
203a-b; [430-436] 205b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi,
541b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi, ch hi, sect 19, 259c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knotvledge,  sect  141  441a-b  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
121a-128b; 203d-204c / Practical Reason, 348d-349a 53 James: Psychology,
221b-222b; 224a-b lb{4) Extension and thought as dependent substances or
as  attributes  of  infinite substance 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
51d-52a / Meditations, vi 96b-103d / Objections and Replies, def vi-viii
130c-d;  prop  iv  133c;  135d-136b;  152d-155d esp 153c-155c; 224d225d;
231a-232d;  248b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 14, corol 2 360a; part
ii, def 1-2 373a-b; prop 1-2 373d374a; prop 5-6 374c-375a; prop 7, schol
375b-c  35 Loc '.e: Human Understanding, bkii, chxiii, SECT 18 152a-c 42
Ka^t: Judgement, 580c-d ,\

[203a]
7^(5)  Substance as subject to change and to diflferent kinds of change:
the  role  of  accidents  or modifications 8 Aristotle: Categories^ ch 5
[4*10-^19]  8b-9a / Physics, BK I, CH 6-bk ii, ch i 264c-270a; BK in, CH
1-3 278a-280c; bk v-viii 304a-355d / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch
1-5 ;. ,409a-420b; bk ii, ch 9-10 436d-439c / Metaphysics, RK I, CH 3
[983''7-984^8] 501d-502c;
bk  III, cH 4 [999*24-^24] 518a-c; BK VII, cH 7-9 555a-558a; bk viii, ch
i  [io42*24-*'7]  566b-d; CH 3 [1043^15-23] 568a-b; ch 4-5 568d-569d; BK
IX,  ch  i  570b,d-571b;  ch  3  572a-c;  ch  6-7 573c-575a; bk xi, ch 9
593d-594d; ch ii 596a-d; ch 12
[io68'*7-''26] 596d-597d;
bk XII, ch 1-5 598a-601a / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[416^8-17] 646d-647a
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2 167b168c; ch 5 169b-c; bk ii, ch
4,  187a-b;  bk hi, CH 7 203b-205a; ch 15, 214d-215d 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead, tr i, ch 3-4 36b37b; TR IV, ch 6 51d-52a; tr vi, ch 1-2 60c62b /
Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch 7-19 llOd119a 19 Aquinas: Surnma Theologica,
part  i, q 3, A 6, ANs 18c-19a; q 9, a 2 39c-40d; q 41, a 3 219d'221c; a
5  222b-223b;  q  44,  a  2 239b240a; q 45, aa 1-5 242a-247a passim; a 8
249b-250a;  q  50,  a 5 274b-275a; q 53 280d284d; Q 65, A 4 342b-343c; q
66,  aa  1-2  343d347b;  Q  67,  A 3, ANs and rep i 351b-352a; Q 73, A 3
371d-372c;  q 75, a 6 383c-384c; Q 76, A 4 393a-394c; q 78, a 2, ans and
rep  4  409a-410a;  q 90, a 2, ans and rep 2 481d-482c; Q 92, A 3, REP I
490c-491b;  q 98, a i 516d517d; Q 104 534c-538c; q 105, aa 1-2 538d540c;
A 5, ANS 542a-543b; q 115, aa 1-3 585d589c; A 6, ans 591d-592d; q 118, a
i  600a601c; Q 119 604c-608d; part i-ii, q 22, a i 720d-721c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 51, A 2, ANS and REP 1-2 13c-14b; q 52,
aa  1-2  15d-19a; q 53, a i, rep i 19d-21a; a 2, rep 1-3 21a-d; q iio, a
2,  rep  3  349a-d;  part  hi suppL, q 75, a 3, ANS 938a-939d; q 80, a 4
959c-963a;  q  82,  aa  1-2  968a-971a;  q  83,  a i 974d-976b; a 5, ans
981b-982c;  q  84  983c989b;  Q  86,  aa 2-3 993c-996a,c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66,  li5a-b 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
162d165d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 6 356b-c; prop 12-13 359b-d;
prop  23  364d-365a;  prop  28  365c-366a; part ii, prop 13 377d-378c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxii, SECT II 203c-d; ch xxvi,
sect  1-2  217a-d;  bk  III, ch VI, SECT 42 280b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
74b-76c;  82a-83b;  86c87b;  141b,d-143a  passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, intro, 156d157b; 178c-d

[203b]
;  7b(6) The nature and kinds of accidents or modifications 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 2
[i*20-''9J 5b c;
CH  4  5d-6a;  ch  5  [2*27-^5} 6b-c; [3*6-21] 7b; CH 6-9 9a-16d / Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 1:5
[32^4-14] 48b-c / Posterior Analytics, bk
1, en 4
[73''33-^i6] lOOb-d / Topics, bk
i, ch 9 147a-b / Physics, BK I, ch 2 [i85'^2o-i86*4] 260a-d; ch 4
[188*5-13] 263b; BK
II, CH i
[192^35
39]  269a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [210^1-8]  289b-c;  bk vii, ch 3 329a-330d /
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 [1015'* 16-34] 536a-b; ch 7
['ioi7'*23-3o] 537d-538a;
CH 9
[ioi7*^27-ioi8''3] 538c; ch 30 547a-d;
BK vii, CH I [io28''io-i8] 550b; ch 4-6 552b555a; bk viii, ch 4
[i044*'8-2o] 569b; bk x,
ch 9 586a-c; bk xii, ch i [1069*18-25] 598a / Sense and the Sensible, ch
6
[445*^4-446*20]
683b  684c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk i [449-482] 6c-7a 17
Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  vi 60c-62d / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-24
253b-265b;  ch  30 268b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, A 6
18c-19a;  q  8,  a  2,  rep  3 35c-36b; q 9, a 2, ANS 39c-40d; q 28, a 2
158d-160a;  q  29,  a  2,  ANS  and  REP  4-5  163b-164b; q 44, a 2, ANS
239b-240a;  q 45, a 4, ans 244d-245c; Q 54, A I 285a-d; a 3 286c-287b; q
66,  A  I,  REP 3 343d-345c; q 67, a 3 351b-352a; Q 76, A 6 396a-d; a 8,
ans 397d-399b; Q 77 399b-407a passim; q ioi, a i, rep i 522c523a; q 108,
a  5,  ans  555d-558b;  q  115, a i, ans and rep 3,5 585d-587c; a 6, ans
591d592d; q 116, a i, ans 592d-593d; part i-ii, q 2, A 6, ANS 619d-620d;
q  7  651d-655a passim; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c; q 18, a 3 695d-696b; q
35, a 4, ans and rep 2 774d775d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
qq 49-54 la-25d passim, esp q 49, aa 1-2 Ib4a; Q 56, A I, rep 1,3 30a-c;
part ii-ii, q 23, A 3, REP 3 485a-d; q 24, a 5, ans and rep i 492b-493d;
part ni, q 2, a 6 716b-718b; part III suppL, q 70, A I, ANS 893d-895d; q
79,  A I, REP 4 951b-953b; q 83, a 3 978c980d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i,  57a-b;  59c-d  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 66, 114d115a 31
Descartes:  Discourse, part i, 41d / Objections and Replies, 135b-136b ;
136c  ;  162d-165d  228c-229c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 4-5 355b;
prop  10  358a-b;  prop  19, demonst 363c-d; prop 20, coROL 2 364a; prop
21-23  364a-365a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii 133b-138b
esp  sect  8-10  134b-d; ch xii, sect 3-6 147d-148c; ch xiii, sect 17-20
152a-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  3  178d;  sect  75  200bd;  CH xxiii, sect 7-10
205d-206d; sect 37 213d-214b; ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c; ch xxxi,

[204a]
146  The distinction between substance and attri- {lb. bute, accident or
modification:  independent  and  dependent  being.  lb{6) The nature and
kinds  of accidents or modifications.) SECT 2 239b-d; bk hi, ch iv, sect
i6  263b-c;  CH  IX, SECT 13 288a-ci 35 Berkeley: Hu?nan Knowledge, sect
1-15 413a-416a; sect 25 417d-418a; sect 49 422b; sect 73 427b-c; sect 78
428a-b;  sect  102 432d-433a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div
122  SOSc-d  53  ]AMES  -.Psychology,  503a-b; 572a-b; 650b-651a 7c. The
distinction  between  potentiality  and  actuality:  possible and actual
being 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 [19^6-^4] 29bd; CH 13 [23^18-26]
35b-c / Topics, bk v, ch 8
[138^27-139*9] 191c-d/ Physics, bk hi, ch 1-3
278a-280c; bk iv, ch 9 [217^20-^26] 297a-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2
[301^33-302*9] 393b /
Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5 [1009*22-39] 528d; BK V, ch 2
[1014*7-9]
534b;
[1014*19-25]
534b-c;  ch  7 [1017*35-^9] 538a-b; ch 12 540b541b; BK IX 570b,d-578a,c;
bk xii, ch 2
[1069^15-34] 598d-599a; ch 5 600b-601a; bk
XIII, CH 3 [1078*21-31] 609d; ch 10 [1087*1025] 619c / Soul, bk II, CH 2
[414*14-28]  644b-c;  ch  5 [417*2-418*6] 647c-648d 17 Plotinus : Second
Ennead, tr v 57d-60c / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-19 lllc-119a; tr ix, CH
3,  137d-138a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  15-17  260c-261d; ch 25-30
265b-268c;  tr  hi,  ch  22,  293d-294a;  ch  27 296b-297a 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  h,  ch 35, 653c 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 2, A 3, ANs 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ANs 15c-16a;
a  4,  ans 16d-17c; a 5, ans 17c18b; A 6, ans 18c-19a; a 7, ans 19a-c; a
8,  ans  19d-20c; q 4, a i 20d-21b; a 2, ans 21b22b; Q 5, A I 23c-24a; a
2,  rep  2 24b-25a; A 3, REP 3 25a-d; q 6, a 3, rep i 29c-30b; Q 7, A 2.
REP  3 31d-32c; q 9, a i, ans and REP I 38c-39c; a 2, ans 39c-40d; q ii,
a  i,  REP  2  46d-47d;  q  14,  a 2 76d-77d; a 3, ans 77d-78b; a 4, ans
78b-79a;  q  18,  a  i,  ans 104c-105c; A 3, REP I 106b-107c; a 4, rep 3
107d-108c; q 25, a i, rep i 143d-144c; Q 45, A 5, rep 3 245c-247a; q 46,
a  i,  rep  I  250a-252d;  q  54,  a  i,  ans 285a-d; a 3, ans and rep 2
286c-287b;  q 75, a i, ans and rep 2 378b-379c; q 86, a 3 463b-d; q 115,
a I, ANS and rep 1,4 585d-587c; part i-ii, Q 10, A I, REP 2 662d-663d; q
27,  a  3  738c739c  31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 86d-87a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  def 4 424a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 90c-91a / Practical
Reason,  291a-292a  /  Judgement,  570c-571c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of
History, intro, 156d157b; 160d-161c; 178a-179d

[204b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7c  to  7c(2)  7c(l)  The  order  of potentiality and
actuality 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23*21-26]
35b-c  /  Physics,  bk  hi, ch i [201*19-27] 278d / Heavens, bk iv, ch 3
[310^22-311*12] 402b-c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 6
[1002^32-1003*5]
521d;  BK  V,  CH II [1019*1-14] 540a; bk vh, ch 9 [1034^16-19] 558a; bk
ix, ch 8-9 575b-577c; BK XII, CH 5 [1071*30-36] 601a; ch 6-7 601b603b 17
Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  v  57d-60c  / Third Ennead, TK vi, ch 7,
llla-b;  ch  i  i,  113bc;  ch 14-15 115b-116c; tr ix, ch 3, 137d-138a /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 15-22 260c-264c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  3,  a  i,  ANS  14b-15b;  a 8, ans 19d-20c; q 4, a i, rep 2
20d-21b;  a  2,  ans  21b-22b;  q  9, a i, ans 38c-39c; q ii, a 2, rep i
47d-48d;  q  25,  a  i,  rep 2 143d-144c; g 94, a 3, ans 504a-505a; PART
i-ii,  q  2,  A 7, ANS 620d-621c; q 3, a 2, ANS 623a-624b; q 9, a i, ans
657d-658d;  q  22,  a  2, REP I 721c-722c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 50, A 2, REP 3 7c-8a; q 71, a 3 107c-108b; part hi, Q 10, A
3,  ans 769d-771b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-142] 107b-d;
xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xxix  [22-36]  150c  lc{2)  Types of potency and
degrees  of actu> ality 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13 [22^35-23*17]
34d-35b / Physics, bk hi, ch 6
[206*18-24]
284c; BK IV, CH i
[208^8-209*1] 287b-c; bk
VH, CH 3 [247^1-248*6] 330b-d; bk vih, ch 4
[255*30-^31] 340a-c / Heavens, bk
iv, ch 3
[310^22-311*12] 402b-c
/ Metaphysics, bk v, CH 12 540b-541b; bk ix, ch 1-9 570b,d-577c; BK XII,
CH 5 600b-601a / Soul, bk ii, ch i
[412*6-12] 642a; [412*22-28] 642b; bk hi, ch
4-5 661b-662d / Sense and the Sensible, ch 4
[441^16-24] 679b
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1103*26-^24]  348d-349b;  ch  5
[1106*7-10]  351c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr v 57d-60c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 8
626c-627a  19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 4, a 2, ANS 21b-22b;
q  5, a i, rep i 23c-24a; q 14, A 2, ans and rep 2-3 76d-77d; q 18, a 3,
ans and rep i 106b-107c; q 25 143c-150a; q 48, A 4, ANS 262a-263a; q 50,
a  2  270a-272a; q 52, AA 1-2 278d-280a; q 58, a i 300c-301a; q 63, A I,
REP  I  325C'326c;  q 66, a 2 345d-347b; q 75, A 5 382a-383b; a 6, rep 2
383c-384c;  q  77, A I 399c-401b; a 3 401d-403a; a 6 404c405c; Q 79, A 2
414d-416a;  a  10  423d-424d; q 87, A 2, ANS 466c-467b; q 92, a 4, rep 3
491b-d;  q 104, a 4, rep 2 538a-c; q 105, a 5, ANS 542a-543b; part i-ii,
q 3, a 2, ans and rep i 623a-624b; q 10, a i, rep 2 662d-663d; Q 22, A I
720d-721c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 3 4b-5a; q
50, a 2 7c-8a; a 6 lla-12a; q 51,

[205a]
7r(3)  to  Id  Chapter 7: BEING \Hh A 2 13c-14b; Q 55, a 2, ans 27a-d; q
71,  a  4, REP 3 108b-109a 35 Lockh: Human Understandingy bk ii, ch vii,
SKCT  8  132d-133a;  ch  xxi,  sect 1-4 178b179c; SECT 74, 199d-200b; ch
xxhi,  sect 7 205d-206a; sect 28 211b-d 7c(3) Potentiality and actuality
in relation to matter and form 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[ic)2'^2^-t,t,]
268c; BK II, CH I
[193*9-^21] 269b-270a; bk
III, CH 1-3 278a-280c / Heavens, bk iv, ch 3
[3io''22-3ii''i2] 402b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk
I,  CH  3 413c-416c; ch 7 421d-423b; CH 9 425d-426c / Metaphysics, bk v,
ch 4 534d-535c; bk vii, ch 16
[1040^5-16]
564c;  BK  viii,  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk ix, ch 6-9 573c577c; bk xi, ch 9
593d-594d;  bk  xii,  ch  5 600b-601a; bk xiii, ch 3 [1078^21-31] 609d /
Soul, BK II, ch 1-2 642a-644c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii, ch 3-8
28a31c;  CH  10  32a-33a;  ch  12  33d-34a  / Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 6
51d-52a;  tr  v 57d-60c / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 7-19 110d-119a; tr IX,
ch 3, 137d-138a / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 2 208c-209b; tr ix, ch 3 247b-d
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  25-30 265b-268c; tr v, ch 5-8 307a308c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par 3-6 99d100c; par 8, 101b; par 9,
101c; par 14-16 102b-103a; par 24-26 104c-105b; par 28-31 105c-107a; par
38-40  108d-110a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, ans and
rep  3 15c-16a; a 4, AxNS 16d-17c; q 4, A I 20d-21b; a 2, ans 21b-22b; q
7, a i, ans 31a-d; a 2, ans and rep 3 31d-32c; q 14, a 2, REP 3 76d-77d;
q  18,  a 3, rep i 106b-107c; Q 25, A I, REP I 143d-144c; q 44, a 2, ans
and  REP  3  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  5, rep 2 245c-247a; Q 50, A 2, rep 3
270a-272a; a 5, ans 274b275a; q 55, a 2, ans 289d-290d; q 62, a 7, REP I
322d-323b; q 66, a 2 345d-347b; q 75, A 2, ANS 379c-380c; a 5 382a-383b;
q  77,  a  i,  REP  2  399c-401b;  q  86,  a  3 463b-d; q 90, A 2, REP 2
481d-482c;  q  92,  a  3,  rep  i  490c491b;  Q  104, A I, ANS and rep i
534c-536c;  Q  105,  A  I,  ANS  538d-539c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, A 3, ANS
611b-612a;  q 10, a i, ans and rep 2 662d-663d; q 22, a i, ans and rep i
720d721c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 4, ANS and REP
I  5a-6a;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a;  PART  III,  q 2, A I, ANS and REP 2
710a-711c;  PART  III  suppL, q 82, A I, REP 2 968a-970c; q 92, A I, ANS
1025c-1032b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, i [121-141] 107c-d 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 384c-d; 494a-b 31 Descartes: Objections
and Replies, 212a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b

[205b]
b  ld»  The distinction between real and ideal being, or between natural
being  and  being in mind 7 Plato: Parmenides, 489a8 \\i\STOTi.v.: Prior
Analytics, bk i,ch 36 (4H'*4o- ''9 1 66d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 7
[i or 7^3 1^34)
538a; bk vi, ch 4 550a,c; bk ix, ch 3
[1047'^
30-^2] 572c; CH 10 577c-578a,c; bk xii, ch 7
[i072*'i8-24]
602d-603a; cii 9
[io74''351075*^11] 605c-d / Soul, BK
III, CH 4 [429*1329] 661b-c; CH 8
[43i''2o-432*9]
664b-c / Memory and Reminiscence, en i
[4 50^' 1245r'i4J 691c-692b
11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  403b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  viii, ch 8 132d133c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
2, A I, rep 2 lOd-lld; g 3, a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; Q II, A I, ANS and REP 3
46d-47d;  q  12, a 2 51c-52c; q 13, a 3, rep 3 64d-65c; a 7, ans and REP
2,4-5  68d-70d; a 9, ans and rep 2 71b-72c; a 12 74c-75b; q 14, a i, ans
and  REP  3 75d-76c; a 2, ans and rep 2-3 76d-77d; A 6, REP I 80a-81c; a
8,  ans  82c-83b;  a 9, ans 83b-d; a 13, rep 2-3 86d-88c; q 15, a i, ANS
and  rep  1,3 91b-92a; a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 16, A 2 95c-96b; a 7, rep 2
99a-d;  q  17, a 3, ANS 102d-103c; q 18, a 4, rep 2-3 107d-108c; q 19, A
3,  rep  6  llOb-lllc;  q  29,  a  i,  rep 3 162a-163b; q 30, a i, rep 4
167a-168a;  a  4  170c-171b;  Q 34, A I, rep 3 185b-187b; q 50, A 2, ANS
270a-272a;  q  55, a 2, ans and rep i 289d-290d; a 3 esp rep i 291a-d; q
56,  a 2, ANS and REP 3 292d-294a; a 3, ans 294a-d; q 57, A 2 295d-297a;
q 58, a 6, ans and rep 1,3 304c-305b; a 7, ans 305c-306b; q 66, a 2, REP
2  345d-347b;  q 67, a 3, ans 351b-352a; q 74, a 3, REP 5 375a-377a,c; q
76,  a  3, rep 4 391a-393a; a 6, rep 2 396a-d; q 84 440b-451b; q 85, A 2
453d-455b;  a 3, rep 1,4 455b-457a; A 5, REP 3 457d-458d; q 88, a 2, rep
4  471c472c; PART I-II, q 5, A 6, rep 2 641a-642a; q 6, A 6, ANS and rep
2  649a-650a;  q  8,  a  i,  ans and rep 3 655b-656a; q 12, a 3, rep 2-3
670d-671b; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c; q 22, A 2, ANS and rep 3 721c-722c;
q 28, a i, rep 3 740b-741a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, A
5, REP 2 715a-716b; part hi suppl, q 82, A 3, ans and rep 2 971a-972d 23
HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 53c; part hi, 172a-d; part iv, 262a-d; 270a-c
26  Shakespeare:  Richard //, act v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a 29 Cervantes:
Don Quixote esp part i, la-8c, 18d-22a, PART II, 285a-288c 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  71d-72a; iii, 83b86a; v, 93a-94a / Objections and Replies,
108b109d;   121a-c;  def  iii-iv  130b;  axiom  v  131d132a;  157b-158a;
212c-213a

[206a]
(7.  The  divisions  or modes of being. Id. The distinction between real
and  ideal  being,  or  between  natural  being  and  being in mind.) 31
Spinoza: Ethics, Part i, appendix 369b-372d esp 371c-372c; part ii, prop
5-9  374c-376c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxii, SECT 2
201a-b;  ch  xxx,  sect 2 238b-c; ch XXXI, SECT 2 239b-d; ch xxxii, sect
14-18  245c-247a  passim;  bk  hi,  ch  hi,  sect 15-19 258b-260a; ch vi
268b-283a passim, esp sect 2-3 268c-d, SECT 8 270b-c; bk iv, ch ii, sect
14  312b-d;  ch iv, sect 6-8 325a-c; ch IX, SECT I 349a; ch xi, sect 4-9
355b-357a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 1-96 413a-431d esp sect
1-24  413a-417d,  sect  2944  418c-421a,  sect  48-49 422a-b, sect 82-84
428d-429c,  sect  86-91  429c-431a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v,
div  44  468d-469c esp 469b-c; sect xii, div i 17-123 504a-506a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  24a-33d  esp 25c-26a, 28a-b, 31d-32c; 85d-93c; 200c-209d;
211c212a  /  Practical  Reason, 295b-d / Judgement, 551a-553c; 604a-b 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 134c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 153a-c;
158a-160b;  188d-189a; part i, 219d-220a; 236a-c; 257c-d; part iv, 354b;
364b-c  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 385b 50 Marx: Capital, llb-c 53 ]A\i^s:
Psychology,  128a-b;  142a-b;  176a-177a; 191b-192a; 302a; 639a-645b esp
640a,  644b645b;  659a-660b;  851b-852a;  865b-866a; 868b; 879b-886a esp
881a-882a; 889a-890a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 597d-598a 7d(l) The
being of the possible 7 Plato: Republic, bk v-vi, 368c-383a 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 3 572a-c / Soul, bk III, ch 4 [429*18-23] 661c 17
Plotinus  :  Second  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  4-5 59c60c 19 Aquinas : Stimma
Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, ANS and rep 3 31d-32c; q 9, a 2, ans
39c-40d;  Q  14,  A  2,  rep  3 76d-77d; a 9, rep i 83b-d; A 13, rep 2-3
86d-88c;  q  18,  a  4,  rep 3 107d108c; Q 46, A I, REP 1-2 250a-252d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  33,  schol  i 367c-d; part ii, prop 8
375c-376a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk i, Ic 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
85d-88a;  95a-d;  97a-b; 176d-177a; 179c-180c / Judgement, 550a-578a esp
550c-d,  552c-d,  555a-b,  564a-565b,  568ac,  569a, 570c-575b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a-c; 156d-157b; 178a-179d 53 jAMts:
Psychology, 233b [fn i]; 301b-302a ld{2) The being of ideas, universals,
rights  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  87d-89a;  113c-114a,c / Phaedo, 224a-225a;
228d-230c; 231b-232b;

[206b]
148  THE  GREAT IDEAS 7d{\) to 7d{2) 240b-246c esp 242c-244b / Republic,
bk  v-vi,  368c-388a;  bk ix-x, 426d-429c / Timaeus, 447a-d; 457b-458a /
Parmenides,  486c-491a esp 489a-c / Sophist, 567b; 570a-574c / Philebus,
610d-613a  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch ii
[77*5-9] 105d-106a; ch 22 [83*23-35] 113c-d;
CH 24
[85*31-^3]
116c;
[85^17-22]
117a / Topics, bk ii, ch 7 [113*24-33] 158d; bk vi, CH 8 [147*5-11] 201a
/  Sophistical Refutations, ch 22 [178^37-179*10] 246c / Physics, bk ii,
CH  2  [193^31-194*6] 270b; BK III, CH 4 [203*49] 280d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 6 505b-506b; CH 9 508c-511c; bk hi, ch i [995*^13-18] 514a;
[995^27-996*10]
514b-c; CH 2
[997*34-^12]
516a-b; [998*6-13] 516d; ch 4 [999^24-1000*4] 518c-d;
[1001*4-^25] 519d-520c; ch 6
[1002^
11-31] 521b-d;
[1003*5-17]
521d-522a,c; bk VII, CH 8 [1033^19-1034*8] 556d-557b; ch 10
[1035^28-32] 559b; CH
13-16  562a-565a;  bk  VIII, CH 6 569d-570d; bk ix, ch 8 [1050^351051*2]
576d-577a; bk x, ch 2
[i053*'9-23]
580b-c; CH 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch i [1059*34-^8] 587b-c; ch i [io59^2i]-ch
2 [1060*27] 587d588b; ch 2 [1060*36-^30] 588c-589a; bk xii, CH I
[1069*27-37] 598b; ch 3 [1070*4]-ch 5
[1071^2] 599b-601a; bk xiii, ch
i  [1076*17-33]  607a-b;  ch 4-5 610a-611d; ch 10 618c-619a,c / Soul, bk
II,  CH  5  [417^17-28] 648b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6 341b-342c
passim  17  Vi^oTiNus:  Second  Ennead,  tr v, ch 3 58d-59c; tr vi, ch 3
62b-d  /  Third Ennead, tr viii, ch 8 132d-133c / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch
i, 229a; TR VII 238a-239b; tr ix, ch 5-8 248a-250a / Sixth Ennead, tr v,
ch  5-8  307a-308c  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 9, 3a / City of
God,  bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, A
4,  rep  I 37c-38c; q 14, preamble 75c-d; Q 15 91b-94a; q 16, a 7, rep 2
99a-d;  q  18,  A  4  107d-108c;  q  29, a 2, rep 4 163b-164b; q 44, A 3
240b-241a;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  2 256a257b; q 55 288d-291d; q 57, aa 1-2
295a297a;  q  65,  a 4 342b-343c; q 76, a 2, rep 4 388c-391a; q 79, a 3,
ans  416a-417a;  q  84,  aa  1-7  440d-450b;  q 85, a i, ans and rep 1-2
451c-453c;  a  2,  ans and rep 2 453d-455b; A 3, REP 1,4 455b-457a; a 8,
ans  460b-461b;  q 86, A 4, REP 2 463d-464d; q 87, a i, ans 465a-466c; q
88, a i, ans 469a-471c; a 2, ANS 471c-472c; q 105, a 3, ans 540c-541b; q
no,  A I, REP 3 564c-565d; a 2, ans 565d566d; q 115, a i, ans 585d-587c;
a  3,  rep  2 588c-589c; part i-ii, q 29, a 6, ans 748b749a 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica, part hi, q 2, A 5, REP 2 715a-716b; q 4, a 4, ans and
rep  2  733a-734a;  part hi suppl, q 92, a i, ans 1025c-1032b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 55b-c; 59d; part IV, 262a-b

[207a]
7d{3)  to  7d(^) Chapter 7: BEING 149 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
43d-44c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 51 111c; hk ii, aph 2 137b-c; APH 17
149b-d 31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 84a-85a / Objections and Replies,
121a-c; def i-iv 130a-b; AXIOM VI 132a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
37-40  386b388b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch i, SECT 15
98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  viii 133b-138b passim; ch xi, sect 8-9 145b-c; ch
xxii, sect 2 201a-b; ch xxx 238a-239b; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch xxxii,
sect  6-8  244b-d;  sect  14-18  245c-247a;  bk  hi,  ch  hi, sect 11-20
257a-260a;  ch  v-vi  263d-283a passim, esp ch VI, SECT 32-33 277c-278c,
sect  36-37  279ab; bk IV, ch IV, sect 4-5 324c-d; sect 11-12 326b-d; ch
vi,  sect  4 331d-332b; ch ix, sect I 349a; ch xi, sect 4-9 355b-357a 35
Berkeley:  Hiunan  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  i2-i6  408a-409d;  sect 2-4
413b-414a;  sect  48-49  422a-b;  sect  86-91  429c-431a  35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xii, div 122 505c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 93c-99a;
112d-209d  esp 112d-120c, 121a-128b, 129c-145c, 173b-190a; 237b / Fufjd.
Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  281c282d  /  Science  ofRight,  404d-408b;
416b-417b  / Judgement, 461a-c; 489b-c; 504d-505a; 528d-530c; 542b-544c;
551a-552c; 570b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a; INTRO, par
I  9a;  part i, par 66-67 29a-c; par 71 31b-c; part hi, par 184 64b; par
280 94d-95a; additions, 2 llSd / Philosophy of History, intro, 156d-190b
esp  156d-157b, 158a-160b, 165a-b; part iv, 364b-c 53 James: Psychology,
113a-115a esp 113b-114a; ^r 128a-b; 300a-313a passim, esp 300a-301a, -I:
^  304b, 307a-b, 309a-311a; 641b-643a passim; ^y 659a-b; 865b; 881b-882a
7d{b)  The  being  of  mathematical objects 7 Plato: Phaedo, 228b-229d /
Republic,  bk  vi,  387b-c;  bk  vii, 392a-394c; 395c-397a / Theaetetus,
535b-c;  541  b-d / Sophist, 562c-d / Philebus, 636b-c / Seventh Letter,
809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[79^6-10] 108c; ch 18 [81*40-^5] lllb-c / Topics, bk VI, CH 6 [143^11-33] 197b-c / Physics,
bk II, CH 2 [193^23-194^1 1] 270a-c; bk hi, ch 4
[203V9] 280d; ch 5
[204^8-34] 282a-b; bk
IV, CH I [208^19-24] 287b-c; ch ii
[219^5-8]
299b;  ch 14 [223*^21-29] 303a / Metaphysics, bk I, CH 5 [985^22-986*21]
503d-504b; ch 6 ...
[987^10-34] 505c-506a; ch 8
[989^^29-990*32]
^'  508a-c;  ch  9  [991^9-992^18] 509d-511a; bk iii, ^ ch i [995^13-18]
514a; [996*13-15] 514c; ch 2 ^
[997^12-998*19] 516b-d; ch 5 [iooi^26]-ch 6
[1002^25] 520c-521c; bk vii, ch 2 [1028^18-28]
551a-b; ch 10 [1035^32-1036*12] 559b-c; ch II
[1036*^32-1037*4]
560b-c; BK XI, ch 2
[1060*36-^19]
588c-d; ch 3
[1061*29-^4]

[207b]
589c; BK XII, ch i
[io69*:5o-37] 598b;
cii 10
[1075^25-1076*4] 606c-d; BK XIII, CH i-^607a610a; CH6-9 611d-618c; bk xiv 619b.d 626d
/ Soul, BK III, CH 7 [43i''i3-i9| 664b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*17-19]
341b;  bk  VI,  ch 8 [1142*16-19] 391b 11 Nicomaciius: Arithmetic, bk i,
811a-812a;  813d-814b  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr vi 310d-321b 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 19 76a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch  38  654b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 5, A 3, rep 4
25a-d; q 10, a 6, ans 45c-46d; q 11, A I, REP I 46d-47d; A3, rep2 49a-c;
q 30, a i, REP 4 167a-168a; q 44, a i, rep 3 238b-239a; Q 85, A I, REP 2
451c-453c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 83, A 2, ANS
976c-978c;  a  3,  rep  2  978c-980d 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 30b-32a /
Discourse, part IV, 52d-53a / Meditations, i, 76c; v, 93a-d; v-vi, 96a-b
/  Objections  and  Replies,  169c-170a;  216d-217c;  218c; 228c-229a 35
Locke:  Human Uttderstanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 5-6 149b-d; bk hi, ch
hi, sect 19, 259c-d; bk iv, ch iv, sect 5-8 324d-325c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  12-16  408a-409d;  sect  12-16 415b-416a; sect
118-128  436b-438d  passim,  esp  sect  121-122  436d-437c, sect 125-126
438a-c  35 Hume: fluman Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b; sect xii,
div  122  505c-d  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 16a-b; 17d-18d; 24d-25b; 31b-d;
46a-c;  55c;  62a-d;  68a-69c;  86b-c; 87b-c; 91c-d; 94b-95a; 211c-213c;
217c-d  /  Practical  Reason,  312c  /  Judgement,  551a-552c  53 James:
Psychology,  874a-878a  passim;  880b881a ld{4) The being of relations 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  242c-245b  /  Parmenides,  489ac / Sophist, 570a-574c 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [990^9-17]  508d;  bk xiv, ch i
[1088*15-^4] 620b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*18-22]
341b-c  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead, tr i, ch 6-9 254d257a 19 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q i 3, a 7, ANS and REP 2,4-5 68d-70d; q 28,
aa  1-2  157c160a;  A  4,  ANS  and  rep  1,3-4 160c-161d; q 40, A2,REP4
214b-215b;Q45,  A3,REP 1-3 244a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi,
q  2,  A  7,  REP 2 718b-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 45 110b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  11, ch xxv, sect I 214d-215b; sect 10
216d-217a;  chxxx,  SECT  4 238d-239a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
ii, 415a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24a-33d esp 31d-32c; 61a-64a esp 62d-63c;
72c-85d; 99a-108a,c; 119b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, istro, 156b-c

[208a]
{Id.  The  distinction  between real and ideal being, or between natural
being  and  being  in  mind.  7d{4)  The  being of relations.) 53 James:
Psychology,  157b-161a esp 158b-159b; 458a-459b; 865b; 873a-b; 879b-886a
esp  884b-885a;  889a-890a  ld{5)  The being of fictions and negations 7
Plato:   Sophist,   561d-564b;  571d-574c  esp  573a-574c  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 9 [990^9-15] 508d; BK IV, CH 2 [1004*9-15] 523a;
bk v, ch 7
[1017*18] 537d; [1017*31-34] 538a; bk vii, ch
4 [1030^24-27] 553a; ch 7 [1032^1-6] 555b-c; bk IX, CH 3
[1047*30-^2] 572c; bk xii, ch
i
[1069*18-24] 598a
9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch 24 [1402*3-6] 651b-c 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of Things, bk iv [722-748] 53d-54a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
hi,  par  12  16b  /  City  of God, bk xi, ch 22 333d-334c; bk xii, CH 7
346c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, A 7, ANS 68d-70d; q
34,  a 3, rep 5 188b-189a; Q 48, A 2 esp rep 2 260c-261b; q 51, a 2, ans
276b-277a;  part  i-ii,  q  8, a i, rep 3 655b656a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  50d;  53c; 57b-c; PART IV, 262a-d 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  157b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, SECT 1-6
133b-134a;  bk hi, ch hi, sect 19 259c-260a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
345c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 62d-63a; 174d-175b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro, 160a 53 James: Psychology, 639a-644a esp 642b [fn 2] 54
Freud:  General  Introduction,  597b-598a  esp  598a 7e. The distinction
between  appearance and reality, between the sensible and suprasensible,
between   the   phenomenal   and  noumenal  orders  7  Plato:  Cratyhts,
113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 124d127a / Symposium, 167a-d / Phaedo, 224a225a;
228a-232a  /  Republic,  bk  v,  370d-373c;  BK  VI,  383d-388a; bk vii,
396d-398c   /   Timaeus,   447a-d;  450b-c;  455c-458a  esp  457c458a  /
Theaetetus,   534d-536a  /  Sophist,  567a568c  /  Statesman,  595b-c  /
Philebus,  634b635b / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
i, ch 4
[187*27-^7]
262b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  29 [1024^2227] 546c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk ii [308-332] 19a-b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  i,  60c61b  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr viii, ch 6 203d-204b / Sixth
Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-2 281a-282a

[208b]
150 THE GREAT IDEAS 1d{5) to 8« 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 10
lla-b;  BK  III, par 10 15b-d; bk vii, par 23 50b-c; BK X, par 13 74c-d;
par  16-19 75b-76b / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A 2, ANS 105c-106b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
291b-294b 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 238a-b; 257d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i, appendix, 372a-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch viii 133b-138b passim, esp sect 7-10 134b-d, sect 15-20 135c-136c; ch
xxiii, sect 5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 29 211d-212a; sect 32 212c-d;
CH  xxxi,  sect 6-13 240d-243b; bk III, CH III, sect 15-18 258b-259c; ch
vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  9  270d-271a;  bk IV, CH XVI, sect 12
370b-371a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 25-27 417d-418b; sect 86-91
429c-431a  passim;  sect  101-102 432c-433a; sect 135-142 440a441c; sect
148 442b-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 29 461a-d 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 19a; 19d-20c; 27b-33d; 53b-59b esp 58a-b; 86c-88c;
93c99a;  101b-108a,c;  112b-d;  113c-115a; 153a-c; 164a-165c; 172c-173a;
227a-228b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 281c-282d / Practical
Reason, 292a-c; 307d-314d; 319c-321b; 328a329a; 331a-337c; 340a-342d esp
340c-341c;  348b-353d  /  Intro. Metaphysic ofMorals, 383cd / Science of
Right,  416b-417b  /  Judgement,  465a-c;  474b-475d; 500c-d; 501d-502a;
506d507a;  510b-c;  530a;  541a-542a;  543a;  543c544c; 551a-552c; 558d;
560c;  564a-c;  570b572b  esp 571c-572a; 574b-577a; 579a; 581ab; 584c-d;
587d-588a; 594d
[fn
i];   599d600d;   603a-b;   604a-b;  606d-607c;  611c-613a,c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy   ofRight,  part  i,  par  82-83  34d-35a;  additions,  52-53
124d-125a / Philosophy of History, intro, 156d-157b; part ii, 270d-271c;
part   iv,   349b-350a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  120a-121a;  385b  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  168b-c 53 James: Psychology,
185a-b;  234a-b; 503a-b; 569b-570a; 606b-608b esp 608a-b; 648a 54 Freud:
Unconscious,  430b-c  8.  Being  and knowledge %a. Being and becoming in
relation  to sense: perception and imagination 7 PhATo: Phaedrus, 126b-d
/  Phaedo,  224a-225a;  231b-232a  /  Republic,  bk hi, 333b-334b; bk V,
368c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c / Timaeus, 447b-d; 450b-c; 453b-454a;
455c-458b esp 457b-458a / Theaetetus, 517b-536b / Sophist, 565a-569a esp
568a-569a  / Philebus, 610d-613a 8 Aristotle: Generation and Corruption,
bk i, CH 3 [318^18-319*2] 415c-d; cH 4
[319*^5-24]

[209a]
8^ to Sc Chapter 7: BEING 151 416c-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5
[986^25987*11 504d-505a;
cii 6 [987''29-^i81 505b-d; BK IV, CH 5-6 528c-531c; bk xi, ch 6 [1062*'
:j^-  1063^8]  591a-d  /  Soul, bk i, ch 2 (404*'7405^9] 633d-635a; en 5
[409^18-41 r''7] 639c641a; bk ii, ch 5 647b-648d; bk 11, c:h 12
[424*i6]-BK
III, CH 2 (426'*25] 656a-658c 11 NicoMACHUs: Arithmetic, bk i, 811c-d 17
Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v, ch i 228b229c; TR IX, CH 5 248a-249a /
Sixth  Enneady  TR  I, CH 27-28 266c-267c esp ch 28 267b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 10 15b-d; BK IV, par 15-17 23a-c; bk vii, par
27,  50b-c  /  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 67, A T„ ANs 351b-352a; q 78, a 3, ans 410a-411d;
Q  86,  A  3  463b-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-293d  31  Descartes:
Discourse,  part iv, 51c-53b / Meditations, 74a, c; 11, 81d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  2-3  413b-d;  sect  25-27 417d-418b; sect 88-91
430a-431a;  sect  135-142  440a-441c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 34a-72c esp
34a-c,   39a-c,  41c-42b,  45b-59b,  61a-64a,  65d-72c  /  Furid.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c-282d  / Judgement, 603d-604b 8^. Being and
becoming  in  relation  to intellect: abstraction and intuition 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a126c / Symposium, 167a-d / Phaedo,
224a226c;  228a-232a / Republic, bk hi, 333b334b; bk v-vi, 368c-375b; bk
vi,  376d;  382a-c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus,  447bd; 450b-c;
455c-458b/  Theaetetus,  534d-536b/  Sophist,  565a-569a esp 568a-569a /
Philebus,  610d-613a;  615c-619d esp 619a-d; 634b-635b / Seventh Letter,
809c-810d  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 8 104a-b / Topics,
bk  iv,  ch  i  [121*20-26]  169ab  /  Physics, bk iv, ch ii [219^23-31]
299c-d;  bk  VII,  CH  3  [247^1-248*8]  330b-d  / Heavens, BK III, CH I
[298^15-24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk I, CH 5
[986^25-987*1] 504d-505a; ch 6
[987*29-^18] 505b-d; bk hi, ch
i
[995*'4-26]
513d-514b;  ch  2  [996*18-997*34]  514d-516a;  bk  IV  522a-532d; bk vi
547b,d-550a,c;  bk VII, CH 15 [1039^^20-1040*8] 563c-564a; bk xi, CH 1-8
587a-593d;  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a-603b;  CH  9 605a-d / Soul, bk i, ch 2
[404^7-405^29] 633d-635a; ch 5
[409^18-411*7]
639c-641a; bk II, CH 5 [417*21-418*3] 647d-648c; bk hi, CH 4-8 661b-664d
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-d 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr v,
ch  1-2  228b-229d; tr ix, ch 5 248a-249a / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 27-28
266c-267c  esp  ch  28  267b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 23
50b-c / City ofGod, bk xi, ch 10, 328c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch
38 654b-c

[209b]
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, A 2, ans 24b-25a; q 12, a i
50c-51c; aa 3-4 52c-54c; q 16, aa 2-3 95c 96d; q 26, a 2, ans 150c-151a;
q  34, a i, rep 2 185b-187b; o 50, A 2, ans and rep i 270a 272a; o 54, a
2  285d286c; Q 78, A I, ans 407b-409a; q 79, aa i-io 413d-424d passim; q
84,  aa 1-2 440d-443c; AA 6-7 447c-450b; q 85, a i 451c-453c; a 5, rep 3
457d  458d;  q  86, a i 461c-462a; a 3 463b-d; q 88 468d-473a; q 89, a 4
476c-477a;  Q  105,  A  3,  ANS  540c-541b;  part  i-ii,  q  3, a 8, ANS
628d-629c; q 10, a i, rep 3 662d-663d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii,  q 2, A 3, ans 392d-393c; part hi suppl, q 92, a i 1025c-1032b 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51c-53b  /  Meditations, 11, 81b-d 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 25-27 417d-418b; sect 88-91 430a-431a;
sect  135i42  440a-441c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  38a-108a,c esp 39a-c,
41c-93c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 281c-282d; 285a-287d /
Judgement,  465a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 343 llOd-
llla / Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 16bd161c 8c. Essence or substance as
the  object  of  definition:  real  and  nominal essences 7 Plato: Meno,
174a-179b passim / EuthyphrOy 196a-b / Gorgias, 252d-253b / Republic, bk
vi,  384a-386c  esp  385b-c/ Theaetetus, 514b-515c; 547c-549c / Sophist,
551a-552c  / Laws, bk x, 763c-d / Seventh Letter, 809a-810b 8 Aristotle:
Categories,  ch  5  [2*19-3^24] 6b-8a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 22
113b-115b; ch 33 [89*17-^5] 121d-122a,c; bk ii, ch 3-10 123c-128d; ch 13
131b-133c / Topics, bk i, ch 4
[101^17-23]
144b-c; CH 5
[101^37-102*5]
144d; CH 8 [103^1-11] I46d; ch 18 [108*38-^9] 152d; [108^19-32] 153a, c;
bk vi, ch i [139*2434] 192a; bk vi, ch 4-BK vii, ch 5 194c-211a,c passim
/  Physics,  bk  i,  ch 3 [186^14-34] 261c262a; bk ii, ch i [193*30-^19]
269c-270a; ch 2
[194*11-14] 270c / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12
493d-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk i, ch 3 [983*2429] 501c; ch 5 [987*19-27]
505b;  ch  6  [987*35-  ^^lo]  505c; [987^30-33] 506a; bk ii, ch 2 [994^
16-27]  513a-b; bk hi, ch 2 [996^12-21] 515ab; bk IV, CH 4 [1006*29-^18]
525c-d;  [1007*20- ^^18] 526c-527a; bk v, ch 2 [1013*27-28] 533b: bk VI,
CH I
[1025^28-1026*6] 547d-548a; bk
vii,  ch  I  [1028*31-37] 550d;cH4-6 552b-555a, CH 10-17 558a-566a,c; bk
viii,  ch 2-3 566d568d; CH 6 569d-570d; bk xi, ch 7 [1064*1928] 592c; bk
xii, ch 9 [1074^37-1075*2] 605c; BK XIII, CH 2
[1077^1-10] 608d-609a; ch 4
[1078^18-32] 610b-c / Soul, BK
I, CH I 631a632d; BK II, CH i [412*1-^24] 642a-d; bk hi, CH 6 [430^26-^5
1 ] 663b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[641*14-31] 163d-164a; ch 2-3 165d-167d

[210a]
152  (8.  Being and knowledge. Sc. Essence or substance as the object of
definition:  real  and  nominal essences.) 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  i,  a  7,  REP  I 7a-c; Q 2, A I, REP 2 lOd-lld; a 2, rep 2
lld-12c;  Q  3,  A 3, ANS 16a-d; a 5, ans 17c18b; Q 17, A 3 102d-103c; q
18, a 2, ans 105c106b; Q 29, A I 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3 163b164b; Q 44, A
I,  REP  I 238b-239a; a 3, rep 3 240b-241a; q 58, a 5 303c-304c; q 75, a
4,  ANS  381b-382a; q 85, a 6 458d-459c; q 116, A I, contrary 592d-593d;
part  i-ii,  q  10,  A I, REP 3 662d-663d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 2, A I, ANS 710a-711c; a 2, ans 711d-712d; q 60, A 4, REP I
849C'850b  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c; 56b; part IV, 269b-271a
28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 142d143a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learnings  43d-44c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  4 137d-138b 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a  /  Objections  and  Replies,
postulate  iv 131a-b; 153d; 160d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 4 355b;
prop  8,  scHOL  2, 357b-d; prop 10 358a-b; part ii, DEF 2 373b; prop 37
386b-c;  part  hi, prop 4 398d 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 372b-373b; 376b-377a /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b-431b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  XXIII,  SECT  1-16 204a-209a esp sect 6 205b-c, SECT 14 208b-c;
sect  29-32  211d-212d;  ch XXXI, sect 3 240a-b; sect 6-13 240d-243b; CH
XXXII,  SECT  18  246c-247a;  sect  24 247c-d; BK HI, CH III, SECT 12-20
257b-260a; ch iv, sect 3 260b; ch v, sect 14 267b-c; ch vi 268b-283a; ch
ix,  sect 11-17 287d-290a; ch X, sect 17-21 295d-297b; ch xi, sect 15-23
303b'305b;  bk  iv,  ch iv, sect 11-17 326b328d;cHVi, SECT4-i6331d-336d;
chxii.sect  7-12  360b-362c  passim,  esp  sect 9 360d-361b 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 18 410a-c; sect 101-102 432c-433a 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 179d-180a; 215d-216c / Science of Right, 404d; 423d-424b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 176c 53 James: Psychology, 185a-b;
668a-670b  Sd. The role of essence in demonstration: the use of essence,
property,  and  accident  in inference 8 Aristotle : Prior Analytics, bk
ii, ch 27
[yo'^S-SP] 92a-c / Posterior Analytics 97a-137a,c
esp  bk  II 122b,d-137a,c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3 [983^24-29] 501c; BK
III, ch 2 [996^^12-21] 515a-b;
[997*25-34] 515d-516a; bk
vi, ch i
[i025'^i-i8] 547b, d; bk xi, ch
i [1059^29-34] 587b; CH 7 [1063^36-1064^9] 592b / Soul, bk II, CH 2
[413^10-^13] 643a-d; ch
4
[415*142i\ 645b-c

[210b]
THE GREAT IDEAS %d to 8/ 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 2,
rep  2-3 lld-12c; q 3, A 5, ans 17c-18b; q 17, A 3, rep 1-2 102d-103c; q
18,  a  2,  ans  105c106b;  Q  46,  A 2, ANS 253a-255a; q 77, a i, rep 7
399c-401b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  269d-270c  31  Descartes:
Meditations,  v,  93b-c  /  Objections and Replies, 207b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch xi, SECT 15-17 303b-304a esp sect 16 303c-d; BK
IV,  CH III, sect 9-17 315c-317c passim, esp SECT 14 316b-d; ch vi, sect
4-16  331d-336d passim; ch xii, sect 6-9 360a-361b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
180c-182b  53  James  :  Psychology,  666b-673a  esp  667b-671a  Se. The
accidental  in  relation  to  science  and definition 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 13 [32''423] 48b-d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 4
100a101b; CH 6
[75^18-38] lb3a-c; ch 8 104a-b;
CH  30  119d  /  Topics,  BK  ii-iii  153a-168a,c; BK IV, CH I [121*6-9]
168d-169a; ch 2 [122^1218] 170d-171a; ch 4 [125*33-^10] 174b-c; ch 6
[127^1-4] 177a; bk v 178b,d-192a,c; bk vi, ch
6  196d-199c;  ch  14  [151*32-^2]  206b-c  /  Metaphysics,  BK  I, ch 9
[990^22-991*2] 509a; bk hi, CH I
[995^18-27]
514a-b; ch 2
[997*25-34]
515d-516a;  bk  iv,  ch  2 522b-524b esp [1005* 13-17] 524b; BK VI, ch 2
548c-549c;  bk vii, CH 4-6 552b-555a; bk viii, ch 4 [1044^8-20] 569b; BK
XI, ch i
[1059*29-34] 587b; ch 3
589a-d; bk xiii, ch 2 [1077*23-^14] 608c-609a 11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic,
bk  i,  811b-812a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 13, ANS
and rep 3 86d-88c; q 18, a 2, ans 105c-106b; q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; q
86,  A 3 463b-d; part i-ii, q 7, a 2 esp rep 2 652d-653c; q 18, a 3, rep
2  695d-696b 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 135b136b; 153d; 170d;
207b;  209c-210b  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii, SECT
3-16  204c-209a esp sect 6 205b-c, sect 14 208b-c; sect 29-32 211d-212d;
sect 37 213d-214b; ch xxxi, sect 8-1 i 242a-243a; SECT 13 243a-b; bk hi,
ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  SECT  2-5  268c-269d; ch ix, sect 13-17
288a-290a;  chxi,sect 19-22 304b-305a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
i  413a-b;  sect 49 422b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 67
480c-481a  8/.  Judgments and demonstrations of existence: their sources
and  validity  7  Plato: Laws, bk x, 757d-765d esp 758c-760a, 760d-762b,
765b-d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [990^9-22] 508d-509a; bk vi,
ch i [1025^1-18] 547b,d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 9
[ii7o*i6-*'8]
423d-424b  passim, esp [1170*28-^1] 424a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk i [418-448] 6b-c

[211a]
8/  Chapter 7: BEING r53 VII 131a-c; 140b-c; 207b; 209d-210b; 224b,d; 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  85d-88a;  179c-201c  esp  261a  193a-b;  228c-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop ii 358b-359b; 44 Bosv,'ei.i.: Johnson,
134c-d prop 14 359d-360a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 280
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch vii, 94d-95a SECT7 132d; CH
XIV, SECT3 155c-d; CH xxiii, 53 James: Psychology, 176a-177a; 640b
[fn
i];  sect  5  205a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  14  312b-d; 643a-659a csp
643b-645b,  648a  CROSS-REFERENCES For: 'Being' as a transcendental term
or  concept,  see  Idea  4b(4); Metaphysics 2b; Opposition 4b; Matter i;
Necessity  and  Contingency  2c. reason, /^^ Change ii; Knowledge 6a(i);
Opinion  i; Sense ib. being and of thought, see Opposition 2a; Principle
ic.

[211b]

[212a]
154  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence Descartes. The
Principles  of  Philosophy, part i, 51-54 HoBBES. Concerni?ig Body, part
ii,  ch  8,  10  Berkeley.  Three Dialogues Bettveen Hylas and Philonous
Hume.  A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part i, sect VI ; PART II, sect
VI   Kant.   Metaphysical  Foundations  ofNatural  Scieiice  Hegel.  The
Phenomenology  of  Mind,  viii  . Science of Logic, vol i, bk i, sect i;
sect  hi,  CH I (c), 3 ; BK II, sect i, ch i ; sect II, CH I ; sect III,
CH  2,  3  (a) . Logic, CH 7-8 W. James. Some Problems of Philosophy, ch
2-3  II. Sextus Empiricus. Against the Physicists, bk ii, ch 5 Porphyry.
Introduction  to  Aristotle's  Predicaments  Proclus.  The  Elements  of
Theology,  (c, j) BoETHius. In Isagogem Porphyri Commenta . De Trinitate
{On  the Trinity) Erigena. De Divisione Naturae BonAVENTURA. Itinerarium
Mentis in Deum {The Itinerary of the Mind to God) Duns Scotus. Tractatus
de  Primo Principio {A Tract Concerning the First Principle) Crescas. Or
Adonai,   propositions   18-25   Albo.  The  Bool^of  Principles  {Sefer
ha-I^j^arim),  bk  II,  CH I G. Pico della Mirandola. Of Being and Unity
Cajetan.  De  Conceptu  Entis SuAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae John of
SaintThomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, part ii, qq
2,  13-19  Malebranche.  Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion Leibnitz.
Discourse  on  Metaphysics,  viii-xiii  .  Netv  Essays Concerning Human
Understandings  BK  II,  ch 23-24 . Monadology, par 1-9 Wolff. Ontologia
Diderot. Le reve de d'Alembert

[212b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo\s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibhography  of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  J.  G. FiCHTE. The Science of Knowledge
Schopenhauer.  The World as Will and Idea, vol i, BK I, IV I. H. Fichte.
Ontologie  Kierkegaard. Concluding Unscientific Postscript Clifford. "On
the  Nature  of  Things-In-Themselves,"  in  vol ii. Lectures and Essays
LoTZE.  Microcosmos,  bk  ix,  ch  1-3 . Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-3 C. S.
Peirce.  Collected  Papers, vol i, par 545-567; VOL VI, par 327-372, 385
Bradley.  The Principles of Logic, Terminal Essays, VII, XI . Appearance
and  Reality, bk i, ch 2, 7-8 ; bk ii, CH 13-15, 24, 26 Royce. The World
and  the Individual, series i (1-4^ 8) Cassirer. Substance and Function,
part  i;  part  ii,  CH  6  Husserl. Ideas: General Introduction to Pure
Phenomenology Garrigou-Lagrange. God, His Existence and Nature, part II,
APPENDIX  2  Bergson.  Creative  Evolution  . The Creative Mind, ch 3, 6
McTaggart.  The  Nature of Existence, bk i Moore. Philosophical Studies,
ch  6 Dewey. Experience and Nature, ch 2, 8, 10 Heidegger. Sein und Zeit
B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  ch  23 Santayana. The Realm of
Essence, ch i-ii Whitehead. Process and Reality LoveJOY. The Great Chain
of  Being  A.  E. Taylor. Philosophical Studies, ch hi Blondel. Uetre et
les  etres  Weiss.  Reality  Sartre.  Uetre et le neant . Existentialism
Maritain.  An Introduction to Philosophy, part ii (5-7) . The Degrees of
Knowledge,  ch  4  . A Preface to Metaphysics, lect i-iv . Existence and
the Existent Gilson. Vetre et Vessence . Being and Some Philosophers

[213a]
Chapter  8:  CAUSE  INTRODUCTION  EXPLANATION  is  an  inveterate  human
tendency. Even philosophers who think that we cannot attain to knowledge
of  causes  get  involved  in  explaining why that is so. Nor will their
disputes  about the theory of causes ever remove the word "because" from
the  vocabulary of common speech. It is as unavoidable as the word "is."
"The  impulse  to  seek causes," says Tolstoy, "is innate in the soul of
man.  The  question  "Why  ?"  remains  after  all  other  questions are
answered.  It  is  sometimes the only unanswerable question—unanswerable
either  in  the very nature of the case or because there are secrets men
cannot  fathom.  Sometimes, as Dante says, man must be "content with the
quia,'*  the  knowledge that something is without knowing why. "Why?" is
the  one question which it has been deemed the better part of wisdom not
to  ask;  yet  it has also been thought the one question which holds the
key to wisdom. As Virgil writes, in one of his most famous lines, Felix,
quipotuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas (Happy the man who has been able to
know the causes of things). The question "Why V takes many forms and can
be  answered in many ways. Other knowledge may prove useful in providing
the  answers. A definition, for example, which tells us what a thing is,
may  explain why it behaves as it does or why it has certain properties.
A  narrative,  which  tells  us  how  something happened by describing a
succession  of events, may also be part of the total explanation of some
event  in  question.  In  other  circumstances,  a  demonstration  or  a
statement  of grounds or reasons may be explanatory. "How do you know ?"
is  often  a  concealed  form of the "Why" question. To answer it we may
have  to  give  our  reasons for thinking that something or other is the
case; or perhaps 155

[213b]
give  the  genesis  of  our  opinion.  Things  as different as a logical
demonstration  and  a  piece  of  autobiography  seem  to be relevant in
accounting  for  our convictions; as, in accounting for our behavior, we
may  refer  to  our  purposes and to our past. The Greek word for cause,
from  which  our  English  word  "aetiology"  is  derived, came into the
vocabulary  of  science  and  philosophy  from  the  language of the law
courts.  In  its  legal  sense  it  was  used  to  point  out  where the
responsibility  lay.  A  suit at law is based upon a cause of action; he
who  demands  redress  for  an  injury suffered is expected to place the
blame.  The  charge of responsibility for wrongdoing— the blame or fault
which  is  the cause for legal redress or punishment—naturally calls for
excuses,  which  may  include  a  man's motives. In the context of these
legal  considerations^  two different meanings of cause begin to appear.
One  man's  act is the cause of injury to another, in the sense of being
responsible  for its occurrence. If the act was intentional, it probably
had  a cause in the purpose which motivated it. These two types of cause
appear  in  the  explanations  of the historians as well as in trials at
law.  Herodotus and Thucydides, trying to account for the Persian or the
Peloponnesian  war, enumerate the incidents which led up to the outbreak
of  hostilities. They cite certain past events as the causes of war— the
factors   which  predisposed  the  parties  toward  conflict,  and  even
precipitated  it. The historians do not think they can fully explain why
the particular events become the occasions for war except by considering
the  hopes  and  ambitions, or, as Thucydides suggests, the fears of the
contestants.  For  the  ancient  historians at least, finding the causes
includes a search for the motives

[214a]
156  THE  GREAT IDEAS which underUe other causes and help to explain how
other   factors   get   their  causal  efficacy.  Thucydides  explicitly
distinguishes  these  two  kinds  of  causes in the first chapter of his
history.  After  noting  tliat  the "immediate cause" of the war was the
breaking  of  a treaty, he adds that the "real cause" was one "which was
formally  most  kept  out of sight," namely, the "growth of the pow^r of
Athens,  and  the  alarm  which  this  inspired  in  Lacedaemon."  It is
sometimes  supposed that Thucydides owes his conception of causes to the
early  medical  tradition.  That  might  very  well  be  the  case,  for
Hippocrates constantly seeks the "natural causes" of disease; and in his
analysis  of  the various factors involved in any particular disease, he
tries  to  distinguish between the predisposing and the exciting causes.
But  the classification of causes w^as not completed in the Athenian law
courts, in the Greek interpretation of history, or in the early practice
of  medicine.  Causes  were  also  the preoccupation of the pre-Socratic
physicists.  Their study of nature was largely devoted to an analysis of
the  principles,  elements,  and  causes  of  change. Concerned w4th the
problem  of  change  in  general,  not  merely  with  human  action,  or
particular phenomena such as crime, war, or disease, Greek scientists or
philosophers,  from  Thales  and  Anaxagoras  to Empedocles, Democritus,
Plato,  and  Aristotle,  tried  to  discover  the causes involved in any
change.  Aristotle  carried  the analysis furthest and set a pattern for
all later discussions of cause. The explanation of a thing, according to
Aristotle,  must  answer  all  of  the  queries  "comprehended under the
question  'why.' " This question can be answered, he thinks, in at least
four  different ways, and these four ways of saying why something is the
case constitute his famous theory of the four causes. "In one sense," he
writes,  "that  out  of which a thing comes to be and which persists, is
called 'cause' "— the material cause. "In another sense, the form or the
archetype" is a cause—the formal cause. "Again the primary source of the
change  or  coming  to rest" is a cause— the efficient cause. "Again the
end  or  'that  for  the sake of which' a thing is done" is a cause— the
final cause. "This," he concludes, "perhaps ex-

[214b]
hausts  the  number  of  ways  in  which  the term 'cause' is used." The
production  of works of art, to which Aristotle himself frequently turns
for  examples,  most  readily  illustrates these four different kinds of
causes.  In  making  a shoe, the material cause is that out of which the
shoe is made— the leather or hide. The efficient cause is the shoemaker,
or  more precisely the shoemaker's acts which transform the raw material
into the finished product. The formal cause is the pattern which directs
the  work;  it is, in a sense, the definition or type of the thing to be
made,  which,  beginning  as a plan in the artist's mind, appears at the
end  of  the work in the transformed material as its own intrinsic form.
The  protection of the foot is the final cause or end— that for the sake
of  which  the  shoe  was  made.  Two of the four causes seem to be less
discernible  in  nature  than  in art. The material and efficient causes
remain  evident  enough. The material cause can usually be identified as
that  which undergoes the change—the thing which grows, alters in color,
or  moves  from  place  to  place. The efficient cause is always that by
which  the  change  is  produced. It is the moving cause working on that
which  is  susceptible  to change, e.g., the fire heating the water, the
rolling  stone  setting another stone in motion. But the formal cause is
not as apparent in nature as in art. Whereas in art it can be identified
by  reference  to the plan in the maker's mind, it must be discovered in
nature  in  the  change itself, as that which completes the process. For
example,  the redness which the apple takes on in ripening is the formal
cause  of  its  alteration in color. The trouble with the final cause is
that  it  so  often  tends  to be inseparable from the formal cause; for
unless some extrinsic purpose can be found for a natural change some end
beyond itself which the change serves — the final cause, or that for the
sake  of  which  the  change took place, is no other than the quality or
form  which  the m.atter assumes as a result of its transformation. This
sunlvIary  of Aristotle's doctrine of the four causes enables us to note
some of the basic issues and shifts in the theory of causation.

[215a]
The  attack  on final causes does not, at the beginning at least, reject
them completely. Bacon, for example, divides natural philosophy into two
parts,  of which one part, "physics, inquireth and handleth the material
and  efficient causes; and the other, which is metaphysics, handleth the
formal  and  final  causes."  The error of his predecessors, of which he
complains,  is their failure to separate these two types of inquiry. The
study  of  final  causes  is  inappropriate in physics, he thinks. "This
misplacing,"  Bacon  comments,  "hath caused a deficiency, or at least a
great  improficiency  in  the  sciences  themselves. For the handling of
final   causes,   mixed  with  the  rest  in  physical  inquiries,  hath
intercepted  the  severe  and  diligent inquiry of all real and physical
causes,  and  given men the occasion to stay upon these satisfactory and
specious   causes,   to  the  great  arrest  and  prejudice  of  further
discovery."  On  this score, he charges Plato, Aristotle, and Galen with
impeding  the  development of science, not because "final causes are not
true,  and  worthy to be inquired, being kept within their own province;
but  because  their  excursions  into the limits of physical causes hath
bred  a  vastness  and  solitude in that tract." Such statements as "the
hairs  of  the eyelids are for a quickset and fence about the sight," or
that "the leaves of trees are for protecting of the fruit, "or that "the
clouds  are  for  watering  of  the  earth,"  are,  in  Bacon's opinion,
"impertinent" in physics. He therefore praises the mechanical philosophy
of  Democritus,  It seems to him to inquire into the "particularities of
physical  causes" better "than that of Aristotle and Plato, whereof both
intermingled final causes, the one as a part of theology, the other as a
part  of  logic."  As  Bacon's  criticisms indicate, the attack on final
causes  in nature raises a whole series of questions. Does every natural
change  serve some purpose, either for the good of the changing thing or
for the order of nature itself .f^ Is there a plan, analogous to that of
an  artist,  which  orders the parts of nature, and their activities, to
one  another  as  means  to  ends? A natural teleology, which attributes
final  causes  to everything, seems to imply that every natural thing is
governed  by  an indwelling form working toward a definite end, and that
the

[215b]
Chapter  8:  CAUSE  157  whole  of  nature exhibits the working out of a
divine  plan  or  design.  Spinoza  answers  such  questions negatively.
"Nature  has  set  no  end  before herself," he declares, and "all final
causes  are  nothing but human fictions." Furthermore, he insists, "this
doctrine  concerning  an end altogether overturns nature. For that which
is  in  truth the cause it considers as the effect, and vice versa.'* He
deplores  those  who  "will  not cease from asking the causes of causes,
until  at  last  you  fly  to the will of God, the refuge of ignorance."
Spinoza  denies that God acts for an end and that the universe expresses
a  divine purpose. He also thinks that final causes are illusory even in
the  sphere of human action. When we say that "having a house to live in
was the final cause of this or that house," v/e do no more than indicate
a  "particular  desire,  which  is  really  an  efficient  cause, and is
considered as primary, because men are usually ignorant of the causes of
their  desires." Though Descartes replies to Pierre Gassendi's arguments
"on  behalf of final causality," by saying that they should "be referred
to  the  efficient  cause,"  his position more closely resembles that of
Bacon  than of Spinoza. When we behold "the uses of the various parts in
plants  and  animals," we may be led to admire "the God who brings these
into existence," but "that does not imply," he adds, "that we can divine
the  purpose for which He made each thing. And although in Ethics, where
it  is  often  allowable  to  employ conjecture, it is at times pious to
consider  the  end  which  we  may  conjecture God set before Himself in
rufing  the universe, certainly in Physics, where everything should rest
upon  the securest arguments, it is futile to do so." The elimination of
final  causes from natural science leads Descartes to formulate Harvey's
discoveries  concerning  the  motion  of  the  heart and blood in purely
mechanical  terms.  But  Harvey  himself,  as  Boyle  points  out in his
Disquisition  About  the  Final  Causes  of  Natural Thi7igs, interprets
organic  structures  in  terms  of  their  functional utility; and Boyle
defends the soundness of Harvey's method—employing final causes— against
Descartes.  Guided  as  it  is  by the principle of utility or function,
Harvey's reasoning about the circula-

[216a]
158  THE GREAT IDEAS tion of the blood—especially its venal and arterial
flow in relation to the action of the lungs —appeals to final causes. He
remarks  upon  the  need  of arguing from the final cause in his work on
animal  generation.  "It  appears  advisable to me," he writes, "to look
back  from  the  perfect  animal,  and to inquire by what process it has
arisen and grown to maturity, to retrace our steps, as it were, from the
goal  to  the starting place." Kant generalizes this type of argument in
his Critique of Teleological Judgement. "No one has ever questioned," he
says, "the correctness of the principle that when judging certain things
in  nature,  namely organisms and their possibility, we must look to the
conception  of  final  causes.  Such a principle is admittedly necessary
even  where  we  require no more than a guidingthread for the purpose of
becoming  acquainted  with  the  character  of  these things by means of
observation."  Kant  criticizes  a  mechanism which totally excludes the
principle  of  finality  —whether  it is based on the doctrine of "blind
chance"  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus,  or  the "system of fatality" he
attributes  to  Spinoza. Physical science, he thinks, can be extended by
the principle of final causes "without interfering with the principle of
the  mechanism  of  physical  causality."  The tendency to dispense with
final  causes seems to prevail, however, in the science of mechanics and
especially  in  the  domain  of  inanimate nature. Huygens, for example,
defines  light  as  "the  motion  of some sort of matter." He explicitly
insists  that  conceiving  natural  things  in  this way is the only way
proper to what he calls the "true Philosophy, in which one conceives the
causes   of  all  natural  effects  in  terms  of  mechanical  motions."
Mechanical  explanation  is distinguished by the fact that it appeals to
no  principles except matter and motion. The material and the moving (or
efficient)  causes  suffice.  The  philosophical  thought  of  the  17th
century,  influenced  by  that  century's  briUiant  accomplishments  in
mechanics,  tends  to  be  mechanistic  in its theory of causation. Yet,
being  also  influenced by the model and method of mathematics, thinkers
like  Descartes  and  Spinoza  retain the formal cause as a principle of
demonstration, if not of

[216b]
explanation.  Spinoza,  in  fact,  claims  that  the reliance upon final
causes "would have been sufficient to keep the human race in darkness to
all  eternity,  if  mathematics, which does not deal with ends, but with
the  essences  and properties of forms, had not placed before us another
rule  of  truth."  Nevertheless,  the  tendency to restrict causality to
efficiency—a  motion producing a motion —gains headway. By the time Hume
questions  man's  ability  to know causes, the term cause signifies only
efficiency,  understood  as  the energy expended in producing an effect.
Hume's  doubt  concerning  our  ability  to know causes presupposes this
conception  of  cause  and  effect,  which  asserts  that "there is some
connection  between  them,  some power in the one by which it infallibly
produces the other." The identification of cause with the efficient type
of cause becomes a commonly accepted notion, even among those who do not
agree  with Hume that "we are ignorant ... of the manner in which bodies
operate  on  each  other";  and that "their force and energy is entirely
incomprehensible"  to  us. The narrowing of causality to efficiency also
appears  in  the  doctrine,  more prevalent today than ever before, that
natural  science  describes,  but does not explain— that it tells us how
things  happen,  but  not  why.  If it does not require the scientist to
avoid  all  reference  to  causes,  it does limit him to the one type of
causality which can be expressed in terms of sequences and correlations.
The  exclusion  of  all causes except the efficient tends furthermore to
reduce the causal order to nothing but the relation of cause and effect.
The  four  causes  taken together as the sufficient reason for things or
events  do  not  as such stand in relation to an effect, in the sense in
which  an  effect  is something separable from and externally related to
its  cause.  That  way of conceiving causation—as a relation of cause to
effect—  is appropriate to the efficient cause alone. When the efficient
cause is regarded as the only cause, having a power proportionate to the
reahty  of its effect, the very meaning of cause involves relation to an
effect.  In  the other conception of causation, the causal order relates
the four causes to one another. Of the four causes of any change or act,
the first, says Aquinas, "is the final cause; the

[217a]
reason  of which is that matter does not receive form, save in so lar as
it is moved by an agent, for nothing reduces itself from potent iahty to
act.  But  an  agent does not move except from the intention of an end."
Hence  in  operation  the  order of the four causes is final, efficient,
material,  and  formal;  or, as Aquinas states it, "first comes goodness
and  the  end, moving the agent to act; secondly the action of the agent
moving  to  the form; thirdly, comes the form." The theory of causes, as
developed  by  Aristotle and Aquinas, proposes other distinctions beyond
that  of  the  four causes, such as the difference between the essential
cause  or  the cause per se and the accidental or coincidental cause. As
indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Chanxe,  it is in terms of coincidental
causes  that  Aristotle speaks of chance as a cause. A given eff^ect may
be  the  result  of a number of efficient causes. Sometimes these form a
series,  as  when  one  body  in motion sets another in motion, and that
moves  a  third;  or, to take another example, a man is the cause of his
grandson  only  through having begotten a son who later begets a son. In
such  a  succession of causes, the first cause may be indispensable, but
it  is  not by itself sufficient to produce the eff^ect. With respect to
the  effect  which it fails to produce unless other causes intervene, it
is an accidental cause. In contrast, an essential cause is one which, by
its operation, immediately brings the eff^ect into existence. Sometimes,
however,  a  number  of  efficient causes may be involved simultaneously
rather than successively in the production of a single eff^ect. They may
be  related  to  one  another  as  cause and eff^ect rather than by mere
coincidence.  One  cause  may be the essential cause of another which in
turn  is  the  essential  cause of the eff^ect. When two causes are thus
simultaneously  related  to  the  same  effect,  Aquinas  calls  one the
principal,  the other the instrumental cause; and he gives as an example
the  action  of  a  workman  sawing wood. The action of the saw causes a
shaping  of  the  wood,  but  it is instrumental to the operation of the
principal cause, which is the action of the workman using the saw. These
two  distinctions—between  essential  and  accidental causes and between
principal

[217b]
Chapter   8:   CAUSE   159   and  instrumental  causes—become  of  great
significance  in  arguments, metaphysical or theological, concerning the
cause  of causes—a first or ultimate cause. Aristotle's proof of a prime
mover, for example, depends upon the proposition that there cannot be an
infinite  number of causes for a given eff^ect. But since Aristotle also
holds  that  the  world  is  without  beginning  or end and that time is
infinite, it may be wondered why the chain of causes cannot stretch back
to infinity. If time is infinite, a temporal sequence of causes reaching
back  to  infinity  would  seem  to  present no difficulty. As Descartes
points  out,  you cannot "prove that that regress to infinity is absurd,
unless you at the same time show that the world has a definite beginning
in time." Though it is a matter of their Jewish and Christian faith that
the  world  had  a  beginning  in  time, theologians like Maimonides and
Aquinas  do  not  think  the  world's beginning can be proved by reason.
Theydo,  however,  think  that  the  necessity  of  a first cause can be
demonstrated,  and both adopt or perhaps adapt the argument of Aristotle
which  relies  on the impossibility of an infinite regression in causes.
The  argument  is  valid,  Aquinas  makes  clear, only if we distinguish
between  essential  and  accidental  causes.  "It is not impossible," he
says,  "to proceed to infinity accidentally as regards efficient causes.
...  It  is  not impossible for man to be generated by man to infinity."
But,  he  holds,  "there cannot be an infinite number of causes that are
per  se  required  for  a certain eff^ect; for instance, that a stone be
moved  by a stick, the stick by the hand, and so on to infinity." In the
latter   case,  it  should  be  observed,  the  cooperating  causes  are
simultaneous  and  so  if there were an infinity of them, that would not
require  an  infinite  time,  llie crux of the argument, therefore, lies
either  in  the  impossibility  of  an  infinite  number of simultaneous
causes,  or  in the impossibility ofan infinite number of causes related
to  one  another  as  instrumental  to  principal cause. Among causes so
related, Descartes, like Aquinas, argues that there must be one first or
principal  cause.  "In  the  case  of  causes which are so connected and
subordinated  to one another, that no action on the part of the lower is
possible without the activity of the higher; e.g., in

[218a]
160 THE GREAT IDEAS the case where something is moved by a stone, itself
impelled  by  a stick, which the hand moves . . . we must go on until we
come  to  one  thing  in  motion  which first moves." But for Descartes,
unlike  Aquinas,  this  method  of proving God as the first cause of all
observable  effects  has  less  elegance than the so-called "ontological
argument" in which the conception of God as a necessary being, incapable
of  not  existing,  immediately implies his existence. The argument from
effect  to  cause  is  traditionally  called  a posteriori reasoning, in
contrast  to  a  priori  reasoning  from  cause  to effect. According to
Aristotle and Aquinas, the latter mode of reasoning can only demonstrate
the nature of a thing, not its existence. Aquinas, furthermore, does not
regard  the  ontological  argument  as  a  form of reasoning at all, but
rather  as  the  assertion  that  God's existence is self-evident to us,
which  he  denies.  The various forms which these arguments take and the
issue concerning their validity are more fully discussed in the chapters
on  Being,  God,  and  Necessity  and  Contingency. But here it is worth
noting  that  Kant  questions whether the a posteriori method of proving
God's  existence  really  differs  from the ontological argument. It is,
according  to  him,  not  only  *'illusory  and  inadequate,"  but  also
"possesses the additional blemish of an ignoratio elenchi— professing to
conduct  us  by  a  new  road to the desired goal, but bringing us back,
after  a  short  circuit,  to  the old path which we had deserted at its
call."  Hence  the  causal proof does not, in Kant's opinion, succeed in
avoiding  the  fallacies  which  he,  along with Maimonides and Aquinas,
finds  in  the  ontological  argument. The analysis of causation figures
critically  in  the  speculation of the theologians concerning creation,
providence,  and the government of the world. The dogma of creation, for
example,  requires the conception of a unique type of cause. Even if the
world  always  existed—a supposition which, as we have seen, is contrary
to Jewish and Christian faith but not to reason— the religious belief in
a  Creator  would  remain  a  belief  in that unique cause without whose
action  to  preserve  its being at every moment the world would cease to
be.

[218b]
a  On the assumption that God created the world in the beginning, it is,
perhaps,  easy  enough  to  see  with  Augustine  how  "the creating and
originating work which gave being to all natures, differs from all other
types  of  causation  which  cause  motions  or  changes,  or  even  the
generation  of  things,  rather  than  their  very  existence."  It may,
however,  be  more difficult to understand the creative action of God in
relation  to a world already in existence. But a theologian like Aquinas
explains that "as long as a thing has being, so long must God be present
to  it" as the cause of its being— doctrine which Berkeley later reports
by saying that this makes "the divine conservation ... to be a continual
creation." Aquinas agrees that "the conservation of things by God is not
by a new action, but by the continuation of that action whereby He gives
being."  But  in the conservation of things Aquinas thinks that God acts
through natural or created causes, whereas in their initiation, being is
the  proper  effect  of  God  alone. The dogma of divine providence also
requires  a theory of the cooperation of the first cause with natural or
secondary  causes.  Dante,  in describing the direction which providence
gives to the course of nature, uses the image of a bow. "Whatsoever this
bow  shoots falls disposed to its foreseen end, even as a thing directed
to  its  aim." That God governs and cares for all things may be supposed
to  reduce  nature to a puppet show in which every action takes place in
obedience  to  the divine will alone. Natural causes would thus cease to
be causes or to have any genuine efficacy in the production of their own
effects.  Some theologians have tended toward this extreme position, but
Aquinas argues contrariwise that natural causes retain their efficacy as
instrumental  causes,  subordinate  to  God's  will as the one principal
cause.  "Since  God  wills  that effects be because of their causes," he
writes,  "all  effects  that  presuppose some other effect do not depend
solely  on the will of God"; and, in another place, he says, "whatsoever
causes He assigns to certain effects. He gives them the power to produce
those  effects  ... so that the dignity of causality is imparted even to
creatures." In addition to the role of divine causality in

[219a]
the  regular processes of nature, still another kind of divine causation
is  presupposed  by the religious belief in supernatural events, such as
the  elevation  of nature by grace and the deviations from the course of
nature  which  are  called  ."miracles."  All  these considerations, and
especially  the  matter  of God's miraculous intervention in the regular
course  of  nature,  have been subjects of dispute among theologians and
philosophers (and sometime physicists and historians). Some of those who
do  not deny the existence of a Creator, or the divine government of the
universe  through natural law, nevertheless question the need for divine
cooperation   with   the   action  of  every  natural  cause,  or  God's
intervention in the order of nature. Throughout these controversies, the
theory of causes defines the issues and determines the lines of opposing
argument.  But since other basic notions are also involved in the debate
of these issues, the further consideration of them is reserved for other
chapters,  especially  God,  Nature,  and World. The discussion of cause
takes  a  new  turn  in  modern  times.  The  new issues arise, not from
different  interpretations  of  the principle of causality, but from the
skeptic's  doubts  concerning  our ability to know the causes of things,
and  from  the  tendency  of  the  physical sciences to limit or even to
abandon the investigation of causes. According to the ancient conception
of  science,  knowledge,  to  be  scientific,  must  state the causes of
things.  The  essence  of  scientific method, according to the Posterior
Analytics  of  Aristotle, consists in using causes both to define and to
demonstrate.   Sometimes  genus  and  differentia  are  translated  into
material  and  formal cause; sometimes a thing is defined genetically by
reference  to  its  efficient  cause,  and  sometimes  teleologically by
reference  to  its  final  cause. The degree to which this conception of
science  is  realized  in  particular  fields  may  be  questioned.  The
treatises  of  the astronomers, for example, do not seem to exemplify it
as much as do Aristotle's own physical treatises or Harvey's work on the
circulation  of the blood. Yet until modern developments in mathematical
physics, the ascertainment of causes seems to be the dominant conception
of the scientific task;

[219b]
Chapter  8:  CAUSE  161  and  until  the  separation  widens between the
experimental  and the philosophical sciences, the possibility of knowing
causes  is  not  generally  doubted.  Galileo's  exposition  of  the new
mechanics explicitly announces a departure from the traditional interest
of  the natural philosopher in the discovery of causes. The aim, he says
in  his  Two  New  ScienceSy  is  not  "to  investigate the cause of the
acceleration  of  natural motion, concerning which various opinions have
been  expressed by various philosophers"; but rather "to investigate and
to  demonstrate  some  of  the  properties  of  accelerated motion." The
"various  opinions" about causes are referred to as "fantasies" which it
is "not really worth w hile" for the scientist to examine. This attitude
toward  causes,  especially  efficient  causes, characterizes the aim of
mathematical  physics, both in astronomy and mechanics. For Newton it is
enough—   in  fact,  he  says,  it  "would  be  a  very  great  step  in
philosophy"—"to  derive  two  or three general principles of motion from
phenomena  .  .  .  though  the  causes of those principles were not yet
discovered.  And,  therefore, I scruple not to propose the principles of
motion . . . and leave their causes to be found out." In other passages,
Newton disparages the search for "hidden or occult causes" as no part of
the  business  of science. Hume goes further. He insists that all causes
are  hidden.  By  the  very nature of what causes are supposed to be and
because  of  the  manner  in which the human mind knows, man can have no
knowledge  of how causes really produce their effects. "We never can, by
our  utmost  scrutiny,"  he  says,  "discover  anything  but  one  event
following  another,  without being able to comprehend any force or power
by  which  the  cause  operates,  or  any  connexion  between it and its
supposed  effect."  All  that  men can be referring to when they use the
words  "cause"  and  "effect," Hume thinks, is the customary sequence of
"one  object  followed  by another, and where all objects similar to the
first  are  followed  by  objects  similar to the second." So far as any
knowledge  based upon reason or experience can go, the relation of cause
and effect is simply one of succession, impressed upon the mind "by a

[220a]
162  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  customary  transition."  That one event leads to
another  becomes more and more probable— but never more than probable—as
the  sequence  recurs  more  and  more  frequently in experience. Hume's
skepticism  about  causes,  and  his  reinterpretation of the meaning of
cause,  gains  wide  acceptance  in subsequent thought, especially among
natural   scientists.  William  James,  for  example,  considering  "the
principle that 'nothing can happen without a cause,' " declares that "we
have  no  definite  idea  of what we mean by cause, or of what causality
consists  in.  But the principle expresses a demand for some deeper sort
of  inward  connection  between  phenomena  than  their  merely habitual
timesequence  seems to be. The word 'cause' is, in short, an altar to an
unknown  god;  an empty pedestal still marking the place for a hoped-for
statue.  Any really inward belonging- together of the sequent terms," he
continues,  "if discovered, would be accepted as what the word cause was
meant  to  stand for." Though Hume holds that we cannot penetrate beyond
experience  to  the  operation  of real causes imbedded in the nature of
things,  he  does  not  deny  the reality of causation as a principle of
nature.  On  the  contrary, he denies that anything happens by chance or
that  any  natural  occurrence  can  be  uncaused.  "It  is  universally
allowed,"  Hume says with approval, "that nothing exists without a cause
of  its  existence,  and  that chance, when strictly examined, is a mere
negative  word,  and means not any real power which has anywhere a being
in  nature."  But "though there is no such thing as chance in the world,
our  ignorance  of the real cause of any event has the same influence on
the  understanding,  and begets a like species of belief or opinion." In
other  words,  Hume's  position seems to be that man's ignorance of real
causes,  and  the  mere  probability  of  his  opinions  about customary
sequences  of  "cause"  and  "effect,"  indicate  human limitations, not
limits   to   causal  determination  in  the  order  of  nature  itself.
Adversaries of Hume, coming before as well as after him in the tradition
of  the  great books, take issue with him on both points. Against Hume's
determinism,  which  is  no less complete than Spinoza's, Aristotle, for
example, affirms the existence of chance or real

[220b]
contingency  in  the  happenings  of nature. Against Hume's reduction of
statements  about  causes to probable opinion, Kant insists that, in the
metaphysics  of  nature,  such  judgments  can  be  made  with  absolute
certainty. These related issues are discussed in the chapters on Chance,
Fate,  and  Necessity and Contingency. In the development of the natural
sciences  since  Hume's  day,  his  translation of cause and effect into
observed  sequences or correlations reinforces the tendency, which first
appears  with  Galileo  and  Newton,  to describe rather than to explain
natural  phenomena.  Yet to the extent that the findings of science bear
fruit  in technology, man's control over nature seems to confirm Bacon's
view  of  science  rather  than  Hume's—at  least to the extent that the
application of scientific knowledge to the production of effects implies
a  knowledge  of  their causes. The principle of causality— that nothing
happens  without  a  cause or sufficient reason, or, as Spinoza puts it,
"nothing  exists  from  whose nature an effect does not follow"—has been
made  the  basis  for  denials  of human freedom as well as of chance or
contingency  in  the  order of nature. The problem of man's free will is
discussed  in  the  chapters on Fate, Liberty, and Will, but we can here
observe  how  the  problem  is stated in terms of cause, with respect to
both divine providence and natural causation. If God's will is the cause
of  everything which happens, if nothing can happen contrary to His will
or  escape  the  foresight  of His providence, then how is man free from
God's  foreordination when he chooses between good and evil ? If, as the
theologians  say,  "the very act of free choice is traced to God as to a
cause,"  in  what  sense  can  the  act  be  called  "free"?  Is  it not
necessarily  determined  to conform to God's will and to His plan } But,
on  the  other  hand, if "everything happening from the exercise of free
choice must be subject to divine providence," must not the evil that men
do  be  attributed  to God as cause } The problem takes another form for
the  scientist who thinks only in terms of natural causes, especially if
he  affirms a reign of causality in nature from which nothing is exempt—
just as,

[221a]
for the theologian, nothing is exempt from God's give to these questions
have  profound  consevvill.  Since  the  realm  of nature includes human
qucnces  for man's view of himself, the universe, nature, must not human
acts be caused as are and his place in it. As the issue of necessity and
all  other  natural  events?  Are  some  human acts chance is central in
physics  or  the  philosophy  of  free  in  the  sense  of being totally
uncaused, or nature, so the issue of determinism and freedom only in the
sense  of  being caused differently is central in psychology and ethics,
in  political  from  the motions of matter? Are causality and theory and
the  philosophy  of history, and above freedom opposed principles within
the  order  of  all  in  theology.  It  makes opponents of James nature,
appropriate  to  physical and psychologiand Freud, of Hegel and Marx, of
Hume  and  cal  action;  or  do they constitute distinct realms Kant, of
Spinoza  and  Descartes,  of  Lucretius  —as  for  Kant,  the  realms of
phenomena  and  and  Marcus Aurelius. It raises one of the most noumena,
the  sensible  and  the  supra-sensible;  perplexing  of all theological
questions  for  Auor  as  for  Hegel,  the realms of nature and gustine,
Aquinas, Pascal, and for the two great history ? poets of God's will and
man's  freedom—Dante  The  different  answers  which the great books and
Milton. OUTLINE OF TOPICS i^. The order of causes: the relation of cause
and  effect  2. Comparison of causes in animate and inanimate nature 166
3.  Causality  and  freedom 167 4. The analysis of means and ends in the
practical  order  5. Cause in relation to knowledge 168 5^. Cause as the
object of our inquiries ^d. The limits of our knowledge of causes 6. The
existence  and  operation of final causes 171 7. The causality of God or
the  gods  1  72 ya. Divine causality in the origin and existence of the
world:  creation  and  conservation yb. Divine causality in the order of
nature or change: the first cause in relation to all other causes 8. The
operation of causes in the process of history 176

[221b]
Chapter 8: CAUSE 1<J3[ PAGE

[222a]
164  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or passage cited. , The general theory of causation 7 Plato: Eiithyphro,
195c-d  /  Phaedo,  226d228a;  240b-246c  /  Timaeus, 447b-d / Philebus,
615c-619d / Laws, bk x, 760a-765c 8 Akistot-l-e: Posterior Analytics, bk
ii,  ch  11-12  128d-131b  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  3-9  271a-278a,c  /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996^18-997*14]
514d-515d; bk v, ch 1-2 533a-534c; bk vi, ch 2
[1026*^24-1027^15]
549a-b;  bk  vii, ch 17 565a-566a,c; bk viii, ch 3 [1043^5-14] 567d568a;
ch  4 568d-569b; ch 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch I [1052^8-14] 579a; bk xii, ch
4-5 599d601a; bk xiv, ch 6 625d-626d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361^391362*11] 602c-d; ch 10 [1369*5-^27] 612b-613a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  vi [703-711] 89c-d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch i
78a-c; ch 4 79d-80a; ch 10 82b / Fourth Ennead, tr IV, CH 31 174d-175c /
Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 2 322b-323a 19 Aquinas: Sum7na Theologica, part
i,  q 2, a 3 12c-14a; q 3, a 4, ans 16d-17c; q 33, a i, REP I 180d-181c;
Q 49 264d-268a,c passim; Q 52, A 3, ANS 280a-d; q 65, a i 339b-340b;

[222b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James  : Psychology, I16a-119h, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and  lower halves of the right-hand side of thepage. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  hne  numbers,  in  brackets,  are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation **esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. A 3 341c-342b; q 82,
a  3,  rep i 433c-434c; Q 87, A 2, REP 3 466c-467b; q 103, a 7 533b-d; Q
104, AA 1-2 534c-537b; q 105, aa 1-2 538d540c; A 5 542a-543b; q 106, a 3
547c-548b;  Q  115, AA 1-2 585d-588c; q 115, a 6-q 116, a 4 591d-595c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 51, AA 2-3 13c-15a; q 75, a i
137d-138c;  a  4  140a-d;  q  76,  a  i 141a-c; part hi suppl, q 76, A I
939d-941a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  42a-46a  31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 84b-86b / Objections
and  Replies, llld-112a; 121b-c; axiom i-iv 131d; 212a; 212c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  def  i 355a; def 7 355b; axiom 3-5 355d; prop 3 356a;
prop 8, scHOL 2, 357b-d; prop 36 369b; appendix 369b-372d; part ii, prop
7,  corol  and schol 375a-c 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule i-ii 270a
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 1-5 178b-179d; sect
19  182b-c;  ch  xxii,  SECT  11  203c-d;  ch  xxvi,  sect 1-2 217a-d 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-33  417d-419a  passim; sect 60-66
424b-426a  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect hi, div i8-SECT VIII, DIV
75 457c-485a passim

[223a]
la  io  \b  Chapter  8:  CAUSE  165  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15a-b; 17c d;
46d-47c;  57c-d;  58d  59b;  63b; 67d-68b [ii\ i]; 76c-83b; 95a-d; 133a;
140b,d-143a; 152a-153a; 164a171a; 187c-189a; 214b,d
[fn
i];  225c-226b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Mctaphysic  of  Morals,  279b,d287d csp
285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason,  291a292a; 294c-295d; 311d-314d; 339a /
Judgement,   550a-578a   csp  550a-551a,c,  555a-558b,  564a-c,  566a-b,
568c-570a, 577c-578a; 587a591b; 592a-d; 597a-599d; 611d-613a,c 53 James:
Psychology,  885b-886a  la.  The  kinds of causes: their distinction and
enumeration  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240c-245c / Timaeus, 447b-c; 455a-458a;
465d-466a   /   Sophist,   577d-578b  /  Statesman,  592d-593a;  596a-b/
PAZ/tf^w^,  615c619d;  637c-d  /  Laivs, bk x, 760a-765c esp 762b-763b 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[71^33-72^6] 98b-c; BK
II,  CH  II  128d-129d  /  Physics,  BK  II,  CH  3-7 271a-275d esp ch 3
27ia-272c; bk hi, ch 7 [207^35-208*4] 286c; BK IV, CH I [209^18-23] 288a
/ Genei'ation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 9-10 436d-439c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 3-10 501c-511d; bk ii, ch 2
[994^28-31] 513b; bk
III, CH 2
[996*18-^26]
514d-515b;  bk  v,  ch 2 533b-534c; ch 18 543cd; CH 30 547a-d; bk vi, ch
2-3 548c-549d; bk VII, CH 17 565a-566a,c; bk viii, ch 2 566d567d; CH 3
[1043*^5-24]
567d-568b; ch 4 568d-569b; bk xi, ch 8
[1065*26-^4] 593d;
BK XII, CH 4-5 599d-601a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^8-642*^4] \^\6i-\^^A I Generation of Animals,
BK I, CH I
[715*1-18]
255a-b; ch 20
[729*io]-CH
22
[730*^33]
269b-271a passim; BK V, CH I
[778*i6-*'i9] 320a-321a
/  Ethics,  BK  III,  CH  3  [1112*30-33]  358b / RJietoric, bk i, CH 10
[i369*3i-*'5]  612c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3
12c-14a;  q  3, a 8, rep i 19d-20c; q 4, a 3, ANs 22b-23b; q 5, a 2, rep
1-2 24b-25a; a 4 25d-26c; q ii, a 3, ans 49a-c; q 13, a 5, ans and REP I
66b-67d;  q 14, a 8, ans and rep i 82c-83b; a ii, ans 84c-85c; a 16, rep
i  90b91b; Q 19, A 6, ans 113c-114d; q 25, a 2, rep 2-3 144c-145b; q 36,
a  3, ans 194c-195d; q 39, A 2, REP 5 203b-204c; q 44 238a-241d; q 46, a
2, REP 7 253a-255a; q 48, a i, rep 4 259b260c; Q 49, A I, ans 264d-265d;
q 51, a i, rep 3 275b-276b; q 52, a 3, ans 280a-d; q 65 339a-343c; q 75,
a  5,  rep  3  382a-383b;  q  82,  A  4, ans 434c-435c; q 87, a 2, rep 3
466c467b;  Q  104 534c-538c; q 105, a 5, ans 542a543b; part i-ii, q 2, a
5,  rep  3  618d-619c;  Q  7,  A  3,  ans  653c-654b  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 60, A I, ANS 49d-50c; q 72, a 3 113b-114a; q
75, a I, ANS and rep 2 137d-138c; q 76, a i, ans and rep i 141a-c; q 85,
a i, rep 4 178b-179b; A 5, ANS and rep i 181d-182d; part hi, q 62,

[223b]
A  I 858c 859d; a 4 861a 862a; part hi suppl, Q76, A 1, ANS 939d-941a 22
Chaucer:  Tak  of  Melibeus,  par  37 417b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part r,
78c-d   28  Cjilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  36d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 335d; 407c; 408b; 415b-417a; 425a-429b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  43a d; 45a46a 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 87c-88c; iv,
90a-b  /  Objections  and Replies, llOc-llld; axiom viii 132b; 158b-161d
passim,  esp  158c161b;  212a;  213b-c; 214c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i, def i 355a; prop ii 358b-359b; prop 17, schol-prop 18 362c363c;
prop  28,  schol  366a; appendix 369b372d; PART II, PROP 45, schol 390b;
part   hi,  DEF  1-3  395d-396a;  prop  1-3  396a-398c;  part  IV,  pref
422b,d-424a;  def  7 424b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 11, ch xxvi,
sect  2  217b-d  35  Berkeley: Human Knotuledge, sect 51-53 422d-423a 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229b-230a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 133a; 164a-171a
/  Judgement,  550a-551a,c;  553c-555a;  556b-558b;  577c-578a;  584c-d;
594b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 165a166b lb. The order of
causes:  the  relation  of  cause  and  eflfect  7  Plato:  Lysis, 24b /
Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Euthyphro,  195c-d / Gorgias, 267c-268a / Timaeus,
455a-b;  460c;  465d-466a  /  Theaetetus, 521b-522b / Philebus, 617b-c /
Laws,  bk  x,  760a-765c  esp  762b-763b  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 12
[14*^10-22] 20b / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[71*^33-72*6)
98b-c; bk ii, ch 12 129d-131b; ch 16-18 134b136a / Physics, bk ii, ch 6
[198*5-13] 275a;
CH 8-9 275d-278a,c; bk hi, ch 2 [202*2 ]-ch 3
[202*^22] 279c-280c; bk vii, ch 1-2 326a-329a;
bk viii 334a-355d / Heavens, bk i, ch 7
[275*1-^29] 366a-367a
/  Generation and Corruption, BK I, CH 7 421d-423b / MetaphysicSy BK II,
CH I [993*^23]-cH 2 [994*^30] 512a-513b; BK V, CH 2
[ioi3*'3-i6] 533c-d; [1014*20-25]
534b-c; bk xi, ch 8 [1065*^2-4] 593d; bk xii, CH 3
[1070*20-24]
599c; CH 4
[1070*^22-35]
600b; CH 6-8 601b-605a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[406*2-12] 635b-c;
[406*^5-9] 635d-636a; ch 4
[408*29-33] 638a
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639*^13-642*24]
161d-165b esp
[639*^13-32]
161d-162a;  bk  ii,  ch  i [646*25-*^^] 170b-c / Motion of Animals, ch 5
235c-d  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii, ch 6 [742*i6-*'i7] 283b-d /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 7 [1364*33-36] 606a; bk ii, CH 23 [1400*28-35] 649a-b
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 168b-c; CH 4 169a

[224a]
(1.  The  general  theory  of  causation,  lb.  The order of causes: the
relation of cause and effect^ 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 854b; 940b-941a
17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr ii, ch i 214c-215a / Sixth Ennead, tr vii,
ch 2 322b-323a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 24-25 358a-359a; bk
xxii,  ch  2  587b-588a;  ch 24 609a-612a 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 2, a 3 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c16a; A 4,
ans  16d-17c;  a  6, ans 18c-19a; a 7, ans and rep i 19a-c; a 8, ans and
rep 1-2 19d-20c; Q 4, A 2, ANS 21b-22b; a 3, ans and REP 4 22b-23b; q 5,
a  2,  rep i 24b-25a; a 4, ANS 25d-26c; q 8, a i 34d-35c; q 13, a 5, ans
and  rep i 66b-67d; a ii, rep 2 73c-74b; q 18, A 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19,
aa  4-5 lllc-113c; A 6, ans and rep 3 113c-114d; a 7, rep 2 114d-115d; a
8  116a-d;  q 22, aa 2-3 128d-131c; Q 23, A 5, ANS 135d-137d; q 36, a 3,
ans  and  rep  4 194c-195d; q 39, a 2, rep 5 203b-204c; Q 41, A I, REP 2
217d-218c;  a  2,  ans 218c-219d; Q 42, A 2, ANS 225d-227a; a 3, ans and
rep  2 227a-d; q 44, a i, rep i 238b- 239a; a 2 239b240a; q 45, a 2, rep
2  242d-244a; a 3 244a-d; A 5, ANS 245c-247a; q 46, a i, rep 6 250a252d;
A  2,  rep  i  253a-255a;  q  48,  a  i, rep 4 259b-260c; q 50, a i, ans
269b-270a;  q 52, a 3, ANS 280a-d; q 63, a 8, rep i 332c-333b; Q 65, A 3
341c-342b;  q  75,  a i, rep i 378b379c; Q 82, A 3, REP I 433c-434c; a 4
434c435c;  Q 87, A 2, REP 3 466c-467b; q 88, a 3, REP 2 472c-473a; q 90,
a  3  482c-483a; q 103, AA 6-8 532b-534b; q 104, a i, ans 534c-536c; A 2
536c-537b;  q  105 538d-545b; q 112, a i, ANS 571d-573a; q 114, a 3, ans
583b-d;  qq  115-116 585c-595c; q 118, a 2, rep 3 601c603b; part i-ii, q
i, a 2 610b-611b; q 46, a i, ANS 813b-814a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  66,  A 6, REP 3 80c-81b; q 75, a 4 140a-d; q 112, AA 1-3
356c-358d;  q 113, a 8 367d-368c; part ii-ii, q I, A 7, REP 3 385c-387a;
q  9,  a  2,  ans  424b-425a; part hi, q 6, a i, ans 740b-741b; A 5, ANS
744a-d;  q 18, a i, rep 2"810a-811c; Q 19, a I, ANS and rep 2 816a-818b;
q 62 858b864c passim; q 64, a i, ans 870c-871b; a 8, ^' REP I 876c-877c;
part  hi  suppl,  q 70, a 3, ans 897d-900d; q 74, A3, rep 2 927c-928d; Q
76,  A  I, rep I 939d-941a; a 2 941b-942b; Q 80, a I, rep 1 956c-957c; g
86,  a  3,  rep  2  994d-996a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [i
12-148]  109a-b  22  Chaucer:  Tale  ofMelibeus, par 37 417b 23 HoBBiiS:
Leviathan,  part  i,  78c-  79a;  79d80a 28 Galileo: Ttvo Netv Sciences,
first  day,  135c136b  28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 390c; 415b416c;
426a-429b; 442c-443c; 445c; 447a-b

[224b]
166  THE  GREAT IDEAS 1^/0 2 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 43a-d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  55d-56a  /  Meditations, iii, 84b-86b;
87c-88c  /  Objections  and  Replies, 110a-112a esp llld-112a; 120b121c;
AXIOM  i-v  131d-132a;  axiom viii 132b; PROP II 132c; 158b-161d passim;
212a;  213b-d;  229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics^ part i, def i 355a; axiom 3-5
355d;  PROP  3  356a;  prop  8, schol 2, 357b-d; prop ii 358b-359b; prop
21-29  364a366c  esp  prop 28 365c-366a; prop 33 367b369a; prop 36 369b;
appendix 369b-372d; PART II, DEF 5 373b-c; def 7 373c; prop 7, corol and
schol 375a-c; lemma 3 378d-379a; prop 48, demonst 391a; part hi, def 2-3
395d-396a;  prop 1-3 396a-398c; part v, axiom 2 452c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  v [469-490] 185b186a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 505 261a-b / Vacuum,
369a  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  i-ii 270a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, SECT 1-5 178b-179d; sect 19 182b-c; ch
xxii,  sect  ii  203c-d;  ch  xxvi,  sect  1-2 217a-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  25-33  417d-419a passim; sect 65-66 425d-426a 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect hi, div 18-SECT VIII, div 75 457c-485a passim,
esp  sect  vii,  div  60  477a-c;  sect xi 497b-503c passim, esp div 105
498d-499a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 15a-b; 17c-d; 47b-c; 57c-d; 58d-59b;
63b; 67d-68b
[fn i];
76c83b esp 81c-d; 95a-d; 140b,d-145c; 152a153a; 187c-189c; 214b,d
[fn i]
/ Practical Reason, 311d-314d; 339a / Judgetnent, 550a551a,c; 553c-555a;
561c-562a,c; 577c-578a; 582c-583b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
582b-584a  passim  49  Darwin:  Origin  ofSpecies,  9b-c; lOd; 65a-66a /
Descent ofMan, 285b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 447c-448d; bk XI,
470a-c;  epilogue i, 650b-c; epilogue ii 675a-696d 53 James: Psychology,
772b;  884b-885a  Comparison of causes in animate and inanimate nature 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  241d-242b  / Laws, bk x, 763a765d 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bkii, cH8-9 275d-278a,c; BK VIII, CH 2 [252^16-28] 336c-d;
[253^6-21]
337a-b;  ch  4  [254^12-33]  339a-b  / Heavens, BK II, ch 12 383b-384c /
Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4
[1014^20-26]
535a; bk vii, ch 9
[1034^32-
*^8] 557c-d; ch 10 [1035^14-28] 559a-b; ch 16
[1040^5-16] 564c; BK IX, CH 2 571c-572a; ch 5
573a-c; ch 7 [1049*12-19] 574d / Soul, bk ii, CH 4
[415^8-28] 645d-646a; bk
iii, ch 9-13 664d-668d / Sleep, ch 2 [455^13-28] 698b-c

[225a]
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^12-642*14] 161d-165b / Gait of Animals,
CH 2 [704^12-18] 243c / Generation ofAnimals, BK I, CH I [715*1-7] 255a;
bk  ii, ch i [734''i7735*4] 274c-275c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i,
ch 12 172d173c; CH 14-17 177a-183d; bk ii, ch 1-7 183b,d-191b passim; ch
9,  197b  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk ii [700-729] 23d-24b 16
Kepler:   EpitomCy   bk   iv,  930b-931b;  959a960a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theological  part  i, q 8, A I, rep 3 34d-35c; q 14, a 8, ans 82c-83b; Q
18,  A 3, ANS 106b-107c; q 22, a 2, ans 128d130d; Q 70, A 3 365b-367a; q
98,  a i, ans 516d-517c; part i-ii, q i, a 2 610b-611b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi suppl, Q 75, A 3, REP 4 938a-939d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvih
[19-39] 80a-b; paradise,
i
[94-142] 107b-d;
II
[i 12-148] 109a-b
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50a;  part  iv,  271d 27 Shakespeare:
Othello, act v, so ii
[7-14]
239a  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 385a-c 31 Descartes: Meditations,
iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, 215a-b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi,
rule  i-ii  270a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXIII, sect
28-29  211b-212a  42  Kant:  Judgement, 555a-558b esp 557c-558b; 564a-c;
566a-b;  578d-580a;  581a-582c  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity,
540a'541a,c  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 9b-10d 53 James: Psychology,
4a-6b; 84a-94b esp 85a87b, 88b-90b 3. Causality and freedom 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  5  573a-c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[1112*18-^12] 358a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 [1368^^7-1369^27] 611d-613a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d; BK V [306-310]
65a  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b 15 Tacitus: Annalsy
bk  hi,  49c;  bk  iv, 69a; bk VI, 91b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i
78a-82b esp ch 4 79d-80a, ch 9-10 82a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v,
ch  9-10  213b216c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, AA 3-10
110b-118b  passim;  q 41, a2 218c-219d; Q 46, A I, REP 9-10 250a-252d; q
47,  a  i,  rep  i  256a-257b;  Q  59,  a  3 308b-309a; q 62, a 8, REP 2
323c-324a;  q 83, a i 436d-438a; q 103, A I, REP 1,3 528b-529a; q 115, a
6, ans 591d592d; PART I-II, q 10 662d-666a,c; q 13, a 6 676c-677b

[225b]
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71, A 4, ans and rep 3
108b'109a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [5284] 77b-d 22
Chaucer:  'Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 138-154 106b-108b / Nun's
Priest's Tale
[15,238-256] 456b-457a
23 Hobbes: leviathan, part ii, 112d-113c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 452a-d 26
Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii
[135-141] 570d
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 7 355b; prop 16-17 362a-363c; prop 26-36
365b-369b;  appendix  369b-372d; part ii, prop 48-49 391a-394d; part hi,
395a-d; part iv, pref, 423b-c 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 154b-159a /
Pensees,  821 331b-332a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect
14,  108d-109a; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 7-27 180a-184c; sect 48-53 190c-192b
35   Hume:   Human   Understanding,  sect  viii  478b487a  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  337d-338a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a;  132d-133a;
140b,d-145c;   164a-171a;   234c-235a;  236d237a;  238b  /  Fund,  Prin.
Metaphysic  ofMorals,  264d-265a;  275b;  279b,d-287d esp 282c, 286a-c /
Practical  Reason,  292a-293b;  296a-d; 301d-302d; 310b-321b esp 314b-d,
320c-321b;  327d-329a;  331c-337a,c/  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383c;
386b-387a,c;   390b;   392d-393c   /Judgement,   463a-465c;   571c-572a;
587a-588a;  594d  [fn  i]  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  392d-393a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 39 21d; par 66, 29a; part ii, par 139
48d-49b;  PART  III, par 187 65a-c; par 352 112b; additions, 90 130b-d /
Philosophy  of History, inTRO, 160c-164d; 170c-172b; 178a-d 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic{, 158b-159a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b; bk X,
389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-572a; bk xv, 619d-621b;
epilogue  i,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii, 688a-696d 53 James : Psychology,
84a-94b esp 85a-87b, 88b90b; 291a-295b; 388a; 820b-826a esp 825b826b [fn
2]  54  Freud:  Origin  and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 13c / General
Introduction, 454b-c; 486c-487a 4. The analysis of means and ends in the
practical  order  7  Plato:  Lysis,  23a-b  /  Laches,  29b-c / Gorgias,
262a-264b;  280b-d / Republic, bk ii, 310c-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi,
ch i
[116^22-36]
163b-c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12
[292*i4-*'26]
383d-384b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii, ch 2 [994^816] 512d-513a; bk v, ch 2
[1013*32-^3] 533c;
[1013^25-28] 533d-534a; bk ix, ch 8 [1050*4-
^i] 575d-576b / Soul, bk hi, ch 10 665d-666d

[226a]
168  THE  GREAT IDEAS (4. The analysis of theansand ends in thepractical
order. ^ 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; ch 5 340d-341b esp
[1096*5-10]
341a-b; ch 6
[1096^8-26] 341d-342a; ch 7 342c-344a
passim; CH 9
[1099^25-32] 345b; bk
hi, ch 3 358a-359a; bk vi, ch 2
[1139^17-^5] 387d388a; ch 5 389a-c passim; ch 9 [1142^17-33]
391d-392b / Politics, bk vii, ch 13 [1331^2438] 536b-c / Rhetoric, bk i,
ch 6-7 602d-607d; ch 8
[1366*3-16] 608b-c; ch 10 [1369*5-^27]
612b-613a  12  Epictetus  :  Discourses,  bk  in,  ch 2 177c-178d; CH 10
185d-187a;  ch 14, 189d; bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  VI, SECT 40-45 277d-278c; bk vii, sect 44
282b-c;  bk viii, sect 19-20 286d-287a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv,
ch  6  15a-b  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk viii, ch 4 266d267c; ch 8
270a-d;  bk  xix, ch 1-3 507a511a; CH 13-17 519a-523a; ch 20 523d-524a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 3-5 625b-626a; CH 22 629b-630a; ch 31-33
633b-634b;  ch  35 634c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 4
25d-26c;  a  6,  ans 27c-28b; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 2, rep 2
109c-110b;  a  3,  ANS  llOb-lllc;  AA  4-5  lllc-113c;  q  23, a 7, ans
138d-140a;  q  44,  a  4  241a-d;  q  65,  a  2  340b-341b; q 82, aa 1-4
431d-435c;  q  83,  a  3,  ANS 438d-439c; a 4, ans 439c-440b; q 103, A 2
529a-530a; part i-ii, qq 1-2 609a-622b; Q 3, A I, ANS 622c-623a; q 4, aa
1-4  629d-632c; Q 5, a 6, rep I 641a-642a; q 6, aa 1-2 644d646c; Q 8, aa
2-3  656a-657c;  q 9, a i, ans 657d-658d; a 3, ans 659c-660a; q 10, a 2,
rep  3 663d-664d; q 11, a 3 667d-668d; q 12, aa 2-4 670b-672a; q 13, a 3
674c-675a; q 14, A 2 678b-c; q 15, a 3 682c-683b; q 16, a 3 685b-686a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 54, A 2, rep 3 23d-24c; q 57, a
5,  ans 39a-40a; Q 94, A 2, ans 221d-223a; a 4, ans 223d-224d; Q 95, A 3
228c-229b; q 107, a i, ans 325c-327b; Q 114, A 4, REP I 373a-d; part ii-
ii,  q  27,  a 6, ans 524c-525c 22 Chaucer: Tale ofMelibeus 401a-432a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53a-b;  76c-d;  90a;  part  hi,  237d  25
Montaigne:  Essays, 330b-332a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 91d-92a
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-45b; part hi, 50b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  369b-370a;  part iv, def 7 424b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  98  190b  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect
52-53  191d-192b;  sect  62  194c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 235a-b / Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254c; 256a-b;

[226b]
4  to  5a  257c-d;  260a-c;  265c-268b;  271c-279d  esp 274d-275b; 282c;
286a-287b / Practical Reason, 307a-d; 314d-329a esp 320c-321b, 327d329a;
357c-360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 367c / Science of
Right,  397b-398a  / Judgement, 477b-c; 478a-b; 557d [fn 2]; 586ab; 588b
[fn  2];  594b-595c;  605d-606b  [fn  2]  43 Federalist: number 23, 85b;
number  31, 103c-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-d; 446d-447a; 461c-463c
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 45 23c-d; par 61 27b-c; part
ii,  par  1 19-128 43b45d esp par 122 44a; par 140 49b-54a; part hi, par
182  64a;  par 191-193 66b-c; par 328 108b-c; par 340 llOb-c; additions,
38 122c-d; 76-81 128a-129a/ Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 162a-170c; part
ii,  267a-b  53  James: Psychology, 4a-6b; 203a; 381b-382a; 788a-789a 5.
Cause  in relation to knowledge 5a. Cause as the object of our inquiries
7  Plato:  Meno,  188b-189a  /  Phaedo, 240a-246c / Gorgias, 260a-262a /
Timaeus, 465d-466a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[71^19-33] 98a-b; ch 13 107c-108c; bk
ii,  ch 1-2 122b,d-123c / Physics, bk i, ch i [184*1016] 259a; bk ii, ch
3
[194^16-23]
271a-b;
[195^21-28] 272b; ch 7 275b-d / Meteorology,
BK  IV,  CH 12 [390^14-19] 494d / Metaphysics, bk I 499a-511d esp ch 1-2
499a-501c, ch 7 506b-d, CH 10 511c-d; bk iii,ch2 [996*18-^26] 514d-515b;
bk  iv,  ch  2  [1003*33-^19] 522b-c; BK VI, CH I [1025^1-18] 547b,d; bk
vii, ch 17
[1041*10-^11] 565b-d; bk viii, ch 4 [1044*33-
^20] 569a-b; bk xi, ch i
[1059*17-23] 587a;
[1059*34-38]
587b; ch 7
[1063^36-1064*9]
592b; bk xii, ch i 598a-c 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[646*6-13] 170a / Gait ofAnimals, ch i 243a-b
/  Generation  ofAnitnals,  bk  i,  ch  i [715*1-18] 255a-b; bk ii, ch 6
[742^17-743*1] 283d-284a; BK IV, CH I
[765*35-^6]
306c; BK V, ch I
[778^7-10] 320d / Ethics, bk i, ch 7 [1098*34-
^2]  343d;  BK  HI,  CH  3  [1112^15-24]  358c-d  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354*1-11]  593a  10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 168bc; CH 4
169a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[10531075] 43c-d; bk v [526-533] 67d-68a
13  Virgil:  Georgics, 11 [475-493] 65a-b 16 Copernicus : Revolutions of
the  Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 959a-960a 17
Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d / Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch it,
348b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, A 5, rep 2 112d-113c; q
85, a 7, contrary 459c-460b; part i-ii, q 3, a 8, ans 628d629c

[227a]
5b  Chapter  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 9, A 2, ANS
424b-425a  23  rioBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 53a-b; 60a-c; 63a; 78a-80a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  497d-498a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 5a-7a passim
28   Galileo:   Two   New  Sciences,  tuikd  day,  202a203a  28  Harvey:
Circulationofthe  Blood,  316ah; 319c I On Animal Generation, 335c-336c;
425a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-46a;  46c-47c  / Novum
Organum,  bk i, apii 48 llOd111a; APH 117-119 131a-132a; bk ii 137a-195d
esp  APH 2 137b-c / New Atlantis, 210d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi,
61d-62c  /  Meditations,  iv,  90a-  b  /  Objections and Replies, 110a;
llOc-d;  axiom  i  131d;  158b-162a;215a-b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
appendix 369b372d; part ii, prop 40, demonst 387a; prop 45, demonst 390b
34  Newton: Principles, lb-2a / Optics, bk hi, 543a-b 34 HuYGENs: Light,
ch i, 553a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 16 317a-c
35  Berkei.ey: Human Knowledge, sect 32 418d419a; sect 102-109 432d-434b
passim, esp sect 107 433d-434a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div
9  454c-455a;  sect  iv, div 26 460b-c; sect vh, div 60 477a-c 39 Smith:
Wealth  ofNations,  bk  v,  335b-337a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 285c-d / Practical Reason, 311d-314d 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
169a  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 6d-7a passim 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b;  bk  xiii,  563a-b; epilogue ii 675a-696d 53
James:  Psychology,  2a;  89b-90a;  745b;  885b886a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  454b-c  5b. Cause in philosophical and scientific method:
the  role of causes in definition, demonstration, experiment, hypothesis
7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240b-246c/  Timaeus,  455a-b; 465d-466a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c  esp  bk  I,  ch  13  107c-108c,  bk ii
122b,d-137a,c / Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[145^32-^20]
199a-b  /  Physics, BK II, CH 7 275b-d; ch 9 [200*30-^9] 277d-278a,c; bk
iv, ch 4
[211^6-11] 290a
/  Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 3 [983^24-32] 501c; bk III, ch 2 [996^18-^26]
514d-515b; bk v, ch 5
[1015^6-9] 535d-536a; bk viii, ch 4 [1044^1215] 569b / Soul, BK I, ch I [403^5-^7] 632b-c;
BK  II, CH 2 [413^11-19] 643a-b 9 Aristotle: Parts ofAnimals, bk i, ch i
161a165d esp [642^14-^4] 165b-d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[715*1-18] 255a-b; bk
ii, CH 6 [742^17-743*1] 283d-284a; bk iv, ch i
[765*35-''6] 306c; bk v, ch
i [778^7-11] 320d

[227b]
8:  CAUSE 169 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 4 169a 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [526-53:^] 67d-68a; bk vi [703-711] 89c-d 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv, 846b 847b; 959a960a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  2,  a  2,  ANS  and rep 2-3 lld-12c; q 14, a 7 81d-82b; A II, ANS
84c-85c;  q  19, a 5, ans 112d-113c; q 44, a I, rep I 238b-239a; q 57, a
2,  ans  295d-297a;  part  i-ii, q 14, a 5, ans 680a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55,  A 4 28c-29d; part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, ans
424b425a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60a-b;  part  iv, 267a-b 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, third day, 202a203a; fourth day, 252a-b 28
Harvey:  Circulation  of the Blood, 316a-b; 319c / On Animal Generation,
335c-336c; 393b-c;425a 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 43a-d; 56c59c /
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  73 117d118a; APH 117, 131a-b; bk ii, aph 2
137b-c  /  New  Atlantis,  210d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d;
part  VI, 61d-62c; 66a-b / Meditations, in 81d-89a esp 84b-85a, 87c-88c;
iv,  90a-b  /  Objections  and  Replies, 108a-115a,c; 120c-122c; axiom v
131d-132a; 212c; 215a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom 2,4 355d; prop
8,  schol  2  356d-357d esp 357b-d; APPENDIX 369b-372d; part hi, 395a-d;
part  IV,  pref,  422b,d-423c;  appendix,  i  447a  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,
368b-369a  34  Newton:  Principles,  lb-2a; def viii 7b-8a; bk III, rule
i-ii 270a / Optics, bk hi, 531b; 541b-542a; 543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, ch
i,  553b-554a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 9-17
315c-317c; sect 28-29 322a-323a; CH XII, sect 9 360d-361b; ch xvii, sect
2  371d-372b  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 50-53 422c-423a passim;
sect  60-66  424b-426a  passim;  sect  102-109  432d-434b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b
[fn 2]; div 60, 477a; sect viii,
div  70,  481d-482a;  sect ix, div 82 487b-c; SECT XI, DIV 115 503b-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a,c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 46d-47c / Fu7id.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 2 85c- 286a / Practical Reason, 311d-314d;
339a  /  Judgement,  574a-b;  578a-d;  579b-c 45 Lavoisier: Ele?nents of
Chemistry,  part i, 9b10b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a; 183a-184a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRight,  additions,  3 116a / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro, 156c-158a; part IV, 361a-b

[228a]
(5.  Cause  in  relation  to  knowledge.  5b. Cause in philosophical and
scientific  method:  the  role  of  causes in definition, demonstration,
experiment,  hypothesis.)  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  217d-218a;
239c240d  50  Marx:  Capital,  lOb-llb 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
470a-c;  bk  XIII,  563b;  epilogue  ii 675a'696d passim, esp 677b-680b,
687b-688a,  694d-695c 53 James: Psychology, 89b-90a; 324b; 668a-671a esp
670a-b;  745b;  824b-825a;  884b-886a  54  Freud:  General Introduction,
454b-c; 483d484a 5c. The nature and sources of our knowledge of causes 7
Plato:  Meno, 188b-189a / Phaedo, 240c-245c / Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a
/ Timaeus, 455ac; 465d-466a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[71^33-72^6] 98b-c; BK II, CH 19 136a-137a,c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2 499a-501c; bk ii, ch I [993*^19-31] 512a-b; bk
hi, ch 2 [996^i8-'^26] 514d-515b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 4
169a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk xi, ch 7 326a-c; ch 29 339a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 13, a 5, ans 66b-67d; q 14, a 8,
rep  i  82c-83b;  Q  19,  A 5, ans 112d-113c; q 57, a 2, ans 295d297a 23
Hobbes : Leviathan, part i, 53a-b; 60a-b; 63a; 78c-d; 79b-80a 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  442c;  443c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learni?ig,
42a-c;  43a-c; 45a-46a; 46c-47c / Novum Organum, bk I, APH 48 llOd-llla;
aph 99 127b-c; bk ii 137a-195d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 62a-b /
Objections and Replies, llOa-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom 4 355d;
APPENDIX 369b-372d 33 Pascal: Pen<:ees, 234-235 216b / Great Experiment,
388b  34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 543a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi, sect 1-7 178b-180a; ch xxv, sect ii-ch XXVI, SECT 2 217a-d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  hi,  div  18-SECT  VIII,  DIV 75
457c-485a  passim;  sect  IX 487b-488c passim; sect xi 497b-503c passim,
esp  div 105 498d-499a, div 115 503b-c 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v,
335b-337a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15a-b; 17c-d; 46d-47c; 57c-58b; 58d-59b;
66d-67b;  76c-83b;  85a-b;  86c-d;  95a-d;  110b;  164a-171a; 194d-195a;
214b,d
[fn
i];  225c-226b / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 285c-286a / Practical
Reason,  294c-295d;  311d-314d  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b /
Judgement, 562d-563b 53 James: Psychology, 88a-90b passim

[228b]
170  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5c to 5d 5d. The limits of our knowledge of causes
Old  Testament: Job, 38-39— (D) Job, 38:139:30 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi,
383d-388a  / Timaeus, 447b-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 4 [196^5-7]
273a / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 2
[982^28-983*11]
501a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [996^18-^26]  514d-515b 9 Aristotle: Generation
ofAnimals, bk ii, ch 6
[742^17-743*1] 283d-284a
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [526-533] 67d-68a; bk vi [703-711]
89c-d  16  Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 17
Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  ii  348b-c  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, A 8, ans 57b-58b; q 19, a 5, rep 2 112d-113c;
Q  57,  A 3, ans 297b-298a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [2445]
56a-b; xviii [49-60] 80b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 54a; 78a-80c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  80b-82b;  271b-273b;  497b-502c  passim  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 45a-46a / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 2 137b-c 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b  /  Objections and Replies, llOa-b;
215a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d; PART IV, PREF,
422b,d-423c  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b passim, esp 233-241
213b-217b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, general schol, 371b-372a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi, SECT 4 178d-179c; sect 70
197a-b;  ch  xxiii,  sect  28-29  211b-212a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 1016
315c-317c;  sect  28-29 322a-323a; ch vi, SECT 5-16 332b-336d passim; ch
xvi, sect i2,370b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 102-109 432d-434b
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv-vii 458a-478a; sect viii, div
71-72 482c-483c; sect XI 497b-503c passim, esp div 105 498d499a, DIV 115
503b-c;  sect  xii,  div 127 507b-c 38 Rousseau: /«(?^W(2///y, 348a,c 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-336c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 46d-47c;
140b,d-145c;  171a-172c;  234c-235a  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
267d-268a;  285c-d / Practical Reason, 291a-292a; 294c-295d; 313b-314d /
Intro.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  390b / Judgement, 550a'551a,c; 557c-558b;
564a'C;  584c-d;611d613a,c  45  Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a 49 Darwin:
Origin of Species, 65a; 92d-94c passim 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix,
342a-344b;  BK  X, 405a-b; bk xi, 469a-470c; bk xhi, 563a-b; epilogue i,
646c-647b;  650b-c;  EPILOGUE II 675a-696d esp 687d-688a, 693c 53 James:
Psychology, 90a; 822b; 885b-886a

[229a]
6.  The  existence  and  operation  of  final  causes  7  Plato: Phaedo,
241b-242b   /   Timaeus,   447d448a;465d-466a   8  Aristotle:  Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch ii
[94^8-95*9]
129b-d / Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92'*i6-24]
268b-c; bk ii, ch i
[i93*'i2-i9]
269d-270a; ch 2 [194*27-^8] 270d-271a; ch 3
[194*^33-195*2]
271b-c;
[195*22-26] 271d; ch
8-9 275d-278a,c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12
[292*14-^26] 383d-384b / Meteorology, bk iv,
CH  12  [389*^22-390^2]  493d-494c  /  Metaphysics,  BKi, CH2 [982^4-11]
500d;cH 7 [988^6-15] 506c-d; CH 9
[992*29-34] 510c; bk
ii, ch 2
[994^8-16] 512d-513a; bk hi, ch 2 [996*22-36]
514d-515a; bk v, ch 2 [1013*33-^2] 533c; ch 4
[1014^34-1015*10] 535b; BK XII, ch 7 [1072^14] 602c; CH 10 [1075*12-^16] 605d-606c / Soul,
BK II, CH 4
[415^15-22]
645d-646a; ch 8
[420^16-23]
652a; bk hi, ch 9
[432*^21-26]
665b-c;  ch  12-13  667a-668d passim / Sleep, ch 2 [455*^13-28] 698b-c 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639*^8-640*12]
161d-162b;
[641*^10-642*^4]
164c-165d; ch 5
[645*23-26] 169a; bk
ii-iv 170a-229d passim, esp bk ii, ch i [646*25-*'27] 170b-d, bk III, ch
2 [663*^22-23] 191b, bk iv, CH 2 [677*15-19] 206d-207a / Gait ofAnimals,
ch  2 [704*^12-18] 243c; ch 12 249b-d passim / Generation of Animals, bk
i, ch i
[715*1-11]
255a; ch 4-13 257a-260b; bk ii, ch 5 [741*^24] 282c; ch 6
[742*i6-*^i7] 283b-d; [744*36-
^^28] 285c-286a; bk hi, ch 4 296b-c; bk iv, ch 3
[767*^6-15] 309a; bk
v, ch i
[778*i5-*'i9]
320a-321a; ch 8
[788*^22-789*^15] 330c-331a,c
/  Politics,  BK  I,  ch  2  [1252*^30-1253*1] 446a-b; CH 8 [1256*^8-26]
450b-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 6, 170b-c; CH 10 171b-172b;
ch 12 172d-173c; ch 13, 174d'175c; bk ii, ch 3 185a-186d; ch 4, 187c; BK
III,  CH  I 199a-c; ch 3 200a-201a 12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk i
[1022-1037] 13c-d; BK II [1052-1063] 28b-c; bk iv [823857] 55a-b; bk v
[76-90]
62a-b;
[156-234]
63a'64a 12 aVurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b; bk vi, sect 40
277d  16  Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 511b 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk iv, 846b-847a; 857b860b; 863b-887a passim; 913a-b;
915b-916a;  925b-928a;  932a-933a  / Harmonies of the World, 1023b-1080b
esp  1049b-1050a  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a41a / Fifth
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 7 242d-243c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 22
333d334c;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  344b-345b; bk xix, CH 12-14, 518c-520c; bk
xxii,  ch  24,  610c611c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3,
ANS and rep 2 12c-14a; q 5, a 2, rep 1-2 24b-25a; a 4 25d-26c; q 6, a i,
rep 2 28b-d;

[229b]
Chapter  8: CAUSE 171 Q 18, A 3, ANS 106b-107c; q 19, a i, ans 108d109c;
A 4, ANS lllc-112c; q 22, a 2, ans 128d-130d; g 23, a i, ans and rep 1-2
132c133b;  Q  36, A 3, ANS 194c-195d; q 44, a 4 241a-d; o 48, a i, rep 4
259b 260c; q 59, a i, ANS 306c-307b; q 60, a 5, ans 313b-314c; g 65, A 2
340b  341b;  g 70, a 3, ans 365b-367a; g 76, A 5, ans 394c-396a; g 78, a
i,  rep  3  407b-409a;  g  82,  a  4,  ans  434c-435c;  g 85, A 3, rep I
455b-457a;  g  91, a 3 486b-487d; g 92, A I, REP I 488d-489d; g 98, a i,
ans  516d-517c;  g 103 528a-534b passim; g 105, A 5, ans 542a-543b; part
i-ii, g i, a 2 610b-611b; a 3, ans and rep 3 611b-612a; A 6, ans 614a-c;
a  8  615a-c; g 2, a 5, rep 3 618d-619c; g 8, a i, ans 655b-656a; g 9, a
i,  ANS  657d-658d;  g  12,  a 5, ans 672a-c; g 21, A I, ANS and rep 1-2
717a-d  20  AguiNAs:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, g 75, A3, ANS and
rep 4 938a-939d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-39] 80a-b; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107b-d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a; part iv, 271d 28
Harvey:  Motion ofthe Heart, 302c / Circulation ofthe Blood, 309b-d / On
Animal  Generation,  349a-b;  355c-d;  390b-c;  402c; 418b-c; 439c-440a;
442d-443c; 447a-b; 453c; 454b-c; 461a-c; 462c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  43a-d;  45a-46a  /  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 48 llOd-llla 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-45a  /  Meditations,  iv, 90a-b /
Objections  and  Replies,  215a-b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix
369b-372d; PART IV, pref 422b,d-424a; def 7 424b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72,
184b;  75  185b-186a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 371a /
Optics,  bk  hi,  528b-529a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i,
sect 15, 125b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 60-66 424b-426a passim;
sect 107 433d-434a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 44, 469b-c;
sect  xi,  div  hi 501b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229b-230a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  187a-190a;  205a-209b;  239a-240b / Judgement, 467d-470b;
473a474b;  523c-d;  550a-613a,c  esp  550a-562a,c, 568c-570b, 575b-578a,
587a-588a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 157b-c; 161d-162a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 40c-d; 41c-42a; 60b-61d passim; 95d-97a esp
96b; 217d-218a / Descent ofMan, 593d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
i, 646c647b; 650b-c; epilogue ir, 687d-688a 53 James: Psychology, 4a-6b;
671b  [fn  i]  54 Freud: Narcissism, 401b / Instincts, 415b / Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 651d-654c passim, esp 654a-c

[230a]
172  7.  The  causality  of  God or the gods la. Divine causality in the
origin  and  existence  of  the  world:  creation  and  conservation Old
Testament:  Genesis, 1-2; 7:4 / Nehemiah, 9:6— (D) // EsdraSy 9:6 / Job,
26:7;  37:18;  38:1-42:2  / Psalms, 8 esp 8:3-5; i9-i5 33:6-9; 74:16-17;
89:11-12;  95:4-5;  96:5;  102:25;  104;  115:3; 119:73; 121:2; 136:5-9;
146:5-6;  148:16—  (D)  Psalms,  8  esp  8:4-6;  18:2; 32:6-9; 73:16-17;
88:12-13;  94H~5'  95o5  101:26;  103;  113:3;  118:73;  120:2; 135:5-9;
145:5-6;  148:16  /  Proverbs, 3:19-20; 8:23-29 / Isaiah, 40:2628; 42:5;
44:24;  45:7-12,18;  48:13;  65:17—  (JD) Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5; 44:24;
45:7-12,18; 48:13; 65:17 / Jercfniah, 10:12; 27:5; 31:35; 51:15-16— (Z))
Jeremias,  10:12;  27:5;  31:35; 51:15-16 / Amos, 5:8 / Zechariah, 12:1—
(D)  Zacharias,  12:1  Apocrypha: Judith, 16:14— (D) OT, Judith, 16:17 /
Rest  of Esther, 13:10— (D) OT, Esther, 13:10 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:14;
ii:ij—{D)  OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom, 1:14; 11:18 / Ecclesiasticus, 24:8-9;
33:10-13;  39:16-35;  43-(£>)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  24:12-14; 33:10-14;
39:2141;  43  /  Bel and Dragon, 5— (D) OT, Daniel, 14:4 / 11 Maccabees,
7:23,28—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees, 7:23,28 New Testament: Acts, 7:49-50;
14:15;  17:22-28  —  (D)  Acts,  7:49-50;  14:14; 17:22-28 / Colossians,
i:i6-iy  / Hebretvs, 1:10; 3:4; 11:3 / // Peter, 3:5 / Revelation, 4:11;
14:7—  (D)  Apocalypse,  4  :  1 1 ; 1 4 :7 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-452d;
465d-466a  /  Sophist,  577d-578b  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[146-158]  2d-3a;  bk v [146-234] 63a-64a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
ix, ch 1-12 65d-73d / Fifth Ennead, tr ii, ch i 214c-215a; TR VIII, CH 7
242d-243c  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i, par 10 3b-c; BK VII, par
16-23  48c-50c;  bk  xi,  par 4-1 90a-92b; bk xii, par 2-9 99c-101c; par
14-40  102b-110a;  bk xiii, par 6-48 112a-124a / City of God, bk VII, CH
29-31  261a-262a; bk xi, CH 4-24 324a-336a; bk xii, ch 10-27 348b360a,c;
bk  xxii,  ch  i 586b,d-587b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a i 34d-35c; a 2, ans 35c-36b; a
3,  ans  and  rep  i  36b-37c;  q  9, a 2, ans 39c-40d; q 21, a 4, REP 4
126c-127c;  qq  44-46  238a-255d;  q  50,  a  I, ANS 269b-270a; a 3, ans
272a-273b;  q 56, a 2, ans and rep 4 292d-294a; q 57, a 2, ans and REP 2
295d-297a; q 61 314d-317c; q 65 339a-343c; q 75, a 6, rep 2 383c-384c; q
84,  a 3, rep 2 443d-444d; qq 90-93 480c-501c; Q 94, A 3, ans 504a-505a;
q  104,  a  i esp rep 4 534c-536c; q 118, aa 2-3 601c-604b; part i-ii, Q
17,  A  8,  rep  2 692a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv [3778]
91d-92a; paradise, vii [121-148] 116b-c;

[230b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7/0 7^ X [1-6] 120b; xiii [52-84] 126a-b; xix [40-51]
135c;  XXIX  [13-45] 150b-c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2987-3010] 209a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part hi, 173d; part iv, 251a-b 28 Galileo: Ttvo
New  Sciences,  fourth  day,  245b-d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
17b-d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a / Meditations, iii,
87b-88c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  AXIOM IX 132b; prop hi 132d-133a;
137d-138a; 214c; 215a-b; 228a-c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
16-18  362a363c;  prop  25  365b;  prop 33, schol 2, 368c369a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk i [650-659] 107b; BK II
[345-353] 118b-119a; bk
iii
[708-735]
150b-151b; bk iv
[720-735]
168a-b; bk v
[468-505]
185b-186a;
[577-594]
187b-188a;
[800-868] 192b-194a; bk
vii
[59-640]
218b231a esp
[139-161]
220a-b,
[216-550]
221b229a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  482  258a  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk hi,
542a-543a  35  Locke: Human U?iderstanding, bk ii, ch xv, sect 12, 165c;
bk  iv,  ch x, sect 15 352d353a; sect 18-19 353c-354c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  25-33  417d-419a  esp sect 29-33 418c-419a; sect 45-46
421b-c;  sect  48 422a passim; sect 57 423d-424a; sect 146-150 442a-443b
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 132, 509d [fn i] 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  81d-82a;  143a-145c  /  Judgement,  597a-599d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d246c; PART IV, 361a-b 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  239C'd;  243d 7b, Divine causality in the order of
nature  or  change:  the  first  cause in relation to all other causes 7
Plato:  Timaeus,  455a-b;  465d-466a / Statesman, 587a-589c 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  vii, ch 1-2 326a-329a; BK VIII 334a-355d / Heavens, bk ii,
ch  12  383b-384c  / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10 [336^25-34]
438d; [337^15-23] 439a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[983*7-9] 501b; bk
xii,  ch  4 [1070^22-35] 600b; ch 5 [1071^30-36] 601a; CH 6-10 601b-606d
10  Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 154a-156a; 160b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk i [146-158] 2d-3a; bk ii [167-183] 17a-b; [1090-1104] 29a;
BK  VI  [43-95] 80d-81c; [379-422] 85b-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  6  110c-112b;  CH  14  120d-121c  16 Kepler: Harmonies ofthe PFor/^,
1049b-1050a  17  Plotinus  :  Second  Ennead,  tr ii, ch 2 41a-c / Third
Ennead,  tr  ii-iii 82c-97b passim; tr viii 129a-136a / Fifth Ennead, tr
i, ch 2 208c-209b

[231a]
lb to Ic Chapter 8: CAUSE 173 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par lo 3b
c;  BK  VII, par 16-23 48c-50c / City ofGod, bk vii, CH 29-31 261a-262a;
bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; BK XI, CH 22 333d-334c; bk xii, ch ? 358b359a; bk
xix,  ch  12-17  517b-523a;  bk xxii, CH 24 609a-612a 19 Aquinas: Surnma
T/ieoIogica,  part  i, q 2, A 3 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ans
15c-16a; a 4, ans 16d-17c; a 6, ans 18c-19a; A 7, ANS and REP I 19a-c; a
8, ans and rep 1-2 19d-20c; Q 4 20c-23b; q 12, a i, ans 50c-51c; Q 18, A
3,  ANS  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  5  112d-113c; Q 23, A I, ANS and REP 1-2
132c-133b;  q 46, A 2, REP 7 253a-255a; q 47, aa 1-2 256a-258c; Q 49, A2
266a-c;  q  51,  a  i,  rep 3 275b-276b; A 3, REP 3 277a-278c; q 52, a 2
279b-280a;  Q  60, A I, REP 2-3 310b-311a; q 75, a i, rep i 378b-379c; q
76,  a  5,  rep  i 394c-396a; q 83, A I, REP 3 436d-438a; q 84, a 2, ans
442b443c;  A  4,  REP  I  444d-446b;  a  5  446c-447c;  Q 88, A 3, REP 2
472c-473a;  q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; q 92, a i, rep i 488d-489d; a 2,
rep  2  489d-490c;  a  4  491b-d;  q  94, a 3, ans 504a-505a; qq 104-105
534c-545b; q 116 592d-595c; part i-ii, q 2, a 3, ans 617b-618a; A 5, rep
3  618d-619c;  q 6, a i, rep 3 644d646a; q 9, a 6 662a-d; q 12, a 5, ans
672a-c; Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  79,  A  2,  ans  157b-158a;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a; Q 109, A I, ANS
338b-339c;  q  iio,  a  i,  rep  2  347d-349a; part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, ans
424b425a; q 18, a 4, ans 464c-465a; part hi, q 6, A I, rep I 740b- 741b;
q 13, a 3, contrary 782b-783b; part hi suppl, q 74, a 2, rep 3 926c-927c
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d; II
[112-148]
109a-b; xiii
[52-84]
126a-b; xxvii [97-120] 148b-c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a  /  Tale of Melibeus, par 37-38 417b418a 23 Ho^B-Es: Leviathan,
part  i,  78d-79a;  79d-80a;  PART  III,  241c-242a;  part iv, 272b-c 28
Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 390d-391a; 406b-407b; 416b-c; 426a-429b;
443a-c;  490d493a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning, 2c-d; 4b-c / New
Atlantis, 203a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55d-56a / Meditations,
hi,  87c-88c;  iv,  90a-b / Objections and Replies, 110a; 123b; axiom ix
132b;  158a-162a;  213b-d; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop r6-i8
362a363c;  PROP  24-29  365a-366c; prop 33 367b369a; appendix 369b-372d;
part  ii,  prop  5-7  374c-375c;  prop 9-10 376a-377a; prop 45 390a-b 32
Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk v [468-474] 185b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 77 186a;
513,  262a  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, general schol, 369b-371a /
Optics, bk hi, 528b-529a

[231b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, cm xxi, SECT 2 178c; ch xxiii,
SEct  28  211b d; bk iv, ch III, SECT 28-29 322a-323a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  25-33 417d-419a passim, esp sect 29-33 418c-419a; SECT
51-53  422d-423a;  sect 57 423d-424a; SECT 60-66 424b-426a; sect 105-109
433b434b  passim;  sect 146-153 442a-444a passim, esp SECT 150 442d-443b
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect vii, div 54-57 474b-475d 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 140b,d-145c; 164a-165c; 171a-172c; 177b-179b; 183b
[in
ij; 184b-c; 187a-189c esp 188c-189a; 190a-b; 191a-d; 205a-209a;239a-240b
/  Practical  Reason, ZZ^h335c; 345a-c / Judgement, 564a-567b; 572b578a;
581b-582c;  587a-592d; 597a-599d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
161d162a; part i, 245d-246c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 396b-397a 49 Darwin:
Origin  of Species, 243b-d 7c. Divine causality in the government of the
universe:  providence and free will Old Testament: Gejiesis, 1-3; 4:5-7;
6-9  esp  8:21-22;  12-13  esp  12:1-3, 12:7, 13:14-18; 15 esp 15:13-21;
17-18;  21-22  esp  22:1-19;  26:16,22-25;  28:10-22; 35:9-15; 37-50 esp
45:7-8 / Exodus, 3; 4:21; 7-14 esp 7:3, 9:12, 10:1, 10:20, 10:27, 11:10,
12:1-51, 13:21-22, 14:4, 14:8, 14:17; 15:18; 19-20 esp 19:3-9; 23:20-33;
33:18-19;  40:34-38—  (D)  Exodus,  3;  4:21;  7-14 esp 7:3, 9:12, 10:1,
10:20,  10:27, 11:10, 12:1-51, 13:21-22, 14:4, 14:8, 14:17; 15:18; 19-20
esp  19:3-9; 23:20-33; 33:18-19; 40:3236 / Numbers, 9:15-23; 12; 22-24 /
Deuteronomy, 4:1-40; 5-11 esp 11:26-28; 29:1-31:8 esp 30:1-4, 30:19-20 /
Joshua,  i-ii;  23-24 esp 24:14-28— (D) Josue, i-ii; 23-24 esp 24:1428 /
Judges,  1-16  /  I  Samuel,  8-10; 15-16— (D) / Kings, 8-10; 15-16 / //
Samuel, j—{D) U Kings, 7 / / Kings, 11; 13-22 passim— (D) /// Kings, 11;
13-22  passim  /  U  Kings passim — (Z>) IV Kings passim / / Chronicles,
17:4-14;   29:11-12—   (Z))  I  Paralipomenon,  17:4-14;  29:11-12  /  U
Chronicles,  11-36 passim, esp 36 ip) U Paralipomenon, 11-36 passim, esp
36 / Esther esp 4:12-17— (D) Esther, 1:1-10:3 esp 4:12-17 / Job esp 1-2,
24,  27,  38-41  / Psalms passim, esp 3-4, 9-1 1, 13, 17-18, 20, 23, 65,
104—  (D)  Psalms  passim,  esp  3-4, 9-10, 12, 16-17, i9> 22, 64, 103 /
Proverbs,  16:33  / Ecclesiastes, 3; 8-9; 11-12 / Isaiah, 36-37; 46; 51;
52:7—  (D)  Isaias,  36-37;  46; 51; 52:7 / Jeremiah, 17:5-8; 18-19; 3''
45""(^) J^remias, 17:5-8; 18-19; 31; 45 / Ezekjel, i8-(D) Ezechiel, 18 /
Daniel  esp  3,  6—  (D)  Daniel,  1:1-3:23  esp  3:1-23; 3:91-12:13 esp
3:91-97'  6:1-28  /Jonah,  1-2—  (D)  Jonas, 1-2 Apocrypha: Tobit—(D)OT,
Tobias  /  Judith  tsp  5_6, 8-i6-(D) OT, Judith esp 5-6, 8-16 / Rest of
Esther- (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-16:24 / -tili b;OS

[232a]
174  The  causality  of God or the gods. Ic. Divine (7. causality in the
government  of  the  universe: providence andfree will.) Ecclesiasticus,
15:11-20— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-22 / Song of Three Children— {D)
OT, Daniel, 3:24-90 / Susanna— {D) OT, Daniel, 13:1-64 / Bel and Dragon—
{D) OT, Daniel, 13:65-14:42 / / Maccabees, 3:13-26— {D) OT, / Machabees,
3  :  13-26  /  //  Maccabees,  6:1-16— (D) OT, 11 Machabees, 6:1-16 New
Testament:   Matthew,  6:25-34;  10:29-33;  23:37/  Luke,  12:4-7,22-34;
21:12-19 esp 21:18 /John, 6:22-71 esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:64-65— (£>) John,
6:22-72 esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:65-66 / Acts, 6:8-7:60 esp 7:51; 13:48— (D)
Acts,  6:8-7:59  esp  7:51;  ly.^^  /  Romans,  8:28-11:36  / Ephesians,
1:4-2:10;  4:1-7  /  Philippians,  2:12-13  / // Timothy, 1:9 / Hebrews,
13:5-6 / / Peter, 1:1-5 / Revelation, 11:15-18— (D) Apocalypse, 11:15-18
4 Homer: Iliad, bk viii [130-144] 52c; bk xxiv
[522-551] 176d-177a
5  Euripides  :  Helen  [703-733] 304d-305a 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
112d-113b 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 321d-322d; bk x,439b / Critias, 479c
8  Aristotle: Generation and Corruption, bk ii, CH 10 [336^25-34] 438d /
Metaphysics, bk xii, CH 10 605d-606d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1179*23-32]
434a / Politics, bk vii, ch 4
[1326*29-32]
530b-c   12   Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [167-183]  17a-b;
[1090-1104]  29a;  bk  v  [146-234]  63a64a;  [1161-1240] 76b-77b; bk vi
[43-95]  SOd81c;  [379-422]  85b-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6
110c-112b;  CH 12 118d-120b; ch 16 121d-122d; bk ii, ch 14 153d-155b; bk
hi, ch 17 191d-192a; ch 22 195a-201a; bk iv, ch 3 224b-d; ch 5 228a230b;
CH  7  232c-235a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; SECT II
258a-b;  bk  hi,  sect  ii 262a-b; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; bk vi, sect 8
274b;  sect  II 274c; SECT 40-45 277d-278c; sect 58 279d; BK VII, sect 8
280b;  sect  58  283c-d;  sect 68 284c-d; bk viii, sect 17 286d; sect 35
288b;  sect  46-47  289b-c; sect 51 289d-290a; bk x, SECT 3 296d; sect 6
297a-b;  sect  25  299c;  SECT  35  301b;  bk xii, sect 3 307b-d; sect 5
307d-308a;  sect  11-14  308b-c 13 Virgil: Aetieid, bk i [254-296] llOa-
llla;  bk  IV  [332-363]  176a-177a;BKix  [123-139]  282a-b 14 Plutarch:
Coriolanus,189a'C/ Nicias, 43Sb-d 17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr hi, ch
7  44c-45a  / Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b passim / Fourth Ennead, tr
hi, ch 13 149b-d; tr iv, ch 31, 175b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par  14 12a-b; BK IX, par I 61c-d / City of God, bk i, ch 8-9 133a-135a;
bk iv, ch 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i-ii 207d-216d; ch 21-22 226a-227a; bk vh,
ch 30

[232b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Ic  261b-d;  bk  ix,  ch 22 296d-297a; bk x, ch 14-15
307c-308b;  bk  xi,  ch  17  331c-d;  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk xii, ch 1-9
342b,d-348b;  ch 22 357c; CH 25 358b-359a; ch 27 359c-360a,c; BK XIV, CH
27 396c-397a; bk xix, ch 12-17 517b-523a; bk xxii, ch 1-2 586b,d-588a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, ANs 12c-14a; q 3, a i, rep
i  14b-15b;  q 8, a 3, ans and rep 2-3 36b-37c; q 13, a 8, ans and rep I
70d-71b;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a;  q 19, A 3 llOb-lllc; QQ 22-24
127c-143c;  q 63, a 7, ANS 331c-332b; q 96, a i, ans and rep 2 510b511b;
QQ  103-119  528a-608d  esp  qq  103-105  528a-545b; part i-ii, q 9, a 6
662a-d;  q  10,  A  4  665d-666a,c;  q  19, a 4 705b-c; q 21, a 4, rep 2
719d-720a,c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 91, AA 1-2
208b-209d; q 93 215b,d-220d passim; part ii-ii, q I, a 7, ans 385c-387a;
q  25,  a  ii, rep 3 508d-509c; part hi, q 61, a i, ans 855a-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, xvi [52-114] 77b-78a; xxi
[40-72] 85b-d; paradise,
i [94-142] 107b-d; II
[112-148]
109a-b; vni
[85-148] 117c-118c;
XI  [28-39] 122b; xn [37-45] 124a; xx [118-138] 138a 22 Chaucer: Troilus
and   Cressida,   bk  iv,  stanza  137-154  106b-108b  /  Knight's  Tale
[1251-1267] 180b;
[1303-1333]
181b-182a;
[1663-1672]
187b;
[2987-3046]
209a-210a / Friar's Tale
[7064-7085] 281a-b / Franklin's Tale [11,177206] 353b-354a / Monk^s Tale 434a-448b
/  Nun's Priest's Tale [15,236-256] 456b-457a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
xxv,  35a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 53d; 96b; part ii, 113b-c;
160b-c;  163d-164a;  part  iv,  254b;  271b;272b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
98b-99a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, so ii
[7-1 1]
68a;  [230-235]  70a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491d-492a 29
Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  408c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,  38a;  94b-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  93 125d-126a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  iv  89a-93a; vi, 99c / Objections and Replies,
229c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, def 7 355b; prop 17, corol 1-2 and
schol  362b-363c;  appendix  369b-372d; part ii, prop 3, schol 374b-c 32
Milton : Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Paradise Lost, bk II
[310-328]
118a; bk hi
[80-134] 137a138a; bk v
[600-615] 188b; bk vi
[171-188]
200a;  bk  vii  [139-173]  220a-221a;  bk  x [1-62] 2 74b- 275b / Samson
Agonistes  [667-709]  354a355a  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b  33  Pascal:
Pensees,   205   211a;  619-641  284b290a;  876  345a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  XXVIII,  SECT  8  230a  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3 405b-c; sect 29-33 418c-419a passim; sect 57
423d-424a; sect 60-66 424b-426a; sect 93-

[233a]
b Id Chapter 8: CAUSE 175 94 431b-c; sect 105-109 433b-434b passim; SECT
146-155  442a-444c  passim  35  Hume:  Human UnderHanding, sect vii, div
54-57  474b-475d;  sect  vtii,  div  78-81  485c487a;  sect xi 497b-503c
passim,  esp  div  108109  500b-501a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 75c-d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk i, la-2b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract,
bk  hi, 414d; bk IV, 437d-438b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 292d-293b 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason,  334a-335c  / Judgement, 594d [tn i] 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 156d160b; 161d-168b; 168d-176b; 182d-184d;
PART  IV,  368d-369a,c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-270] 7a-b 48
Melville:  Moby Dic{, 85a; 237a; 396b-397a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  272a-b;  bk  VIII,  303d-304b;  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 357b358b; BK X,
389a-391c;   447c-448a;  465c-467a  passim;  bk  xiii,  563a-b;  bk  xv,
619d-620a;  631a-c; epilogue i, 645a-650c passim, esp 646c-647b, 650b-c;
epilogue   ii,   675a-676a;   680b-c;  684b-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-137c passim; bk xi, 343b-c 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 771a-b / Netv Introductory Lectures, 878aId. Divine
causality  in  the  supernatural  order:  grace, miracles Old Testament:
Genesis,  19:24-26;  21:1-8  /  Exodus,  3-12 passim, esp 3:2, 3:20; 14;
16-17  /  Numbers,  9:15-23;  11-12;  16-17; 20:1-13; 21:5-9; 22:21-34 /
Joshua,  3:13-4:24;  6:120;  10:12-14;  24:6-7—  (D)  Jostle, 3:13-4:25;
6:1-20;  10:12-14;  24:6-7 / Judges, 6:36-40 / / Samuel, 12:17-19— (D) /
Kings, i:i\ij-i^ / / Kings, 17; 18:30-39— (D) III Kifigs, 17; 18:30-39 /
// Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11— (D) IV Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11 /
Nehemiah, g—(D) II Esdras, 9 / Psalms, 78; 84:11; 85:1-3; 86:5; 103:1-5;
105;  106:7-11;  130— (D) Psalms, 77; 83:12; 84:2-4; 85:5; 102:1-5; 104;
105:7-11;  129  /  Proverbs,  3:1-4,21-26  / Isaiah, 38; 44:22: 35:7-{D)
Isaias,  38;  44:22;  55:7  /Jeremiah,  33:1-14— (D) Jeremias, 33:1-14 /
Daniel,  3:1-4:3;  5-6;  9:9— (D) Daniel, 3:123,91-100; 5-6; 9:9 / Joel,
2:30-31  /  Jonah—  iP)  Jonas  I Micah, 7:18-20— (D) Micheas, 7:18-20 /
Zechariah,   12:10—  (D)  Zacharias,  12:10  Apocrypha:  Song  of  Three
Children—  {D)  OT,  Daniel,  3:24-90  /  Bel and Dragon, 28-42— (D) OT,
Daniel,  14:27-42  /  // Maccabees, 1:18-22; 2:10— (D) OT, II Machabees,
1:18-22; 2:10 New Testament: Matthew, 8-9; 12:22-29; 14:13-36; 15:22-39;
17:1-8;  20:29-34  /  M[^r{, 1:29-34,40-44; 2:3-12; 4:34-41; 5; 6:34-56;
7:24-8:26;  9:2-10,17-30;  10:46-52; 13:24-26 — (D) Mar\, 1:29-34,40-44;
2:3-12; 4:34-40; 5; 6:34-56; 7:24-8:26; 9:1-9,16-29; 10:46-52;

[233b]
13:24-26  /  Luke,  1:5-66;  4:31-5:26;  7:1-16; 8:22-56; 9:12-17,28-42;
11:14-26;   15:11-17;   i4:i-6;i7:ii-i9;i8:35-43—   (D)/.«^«?,   1:5-66;
4:31-5:26;  7:1-16;  8:22-56; 9:12-17,28-43; 11:14-26; 13:11-17; 14:1-6;
17:11-19;  18:35-43  /  John,  1:14-17; 2:1-11; 4:46-54; 11:1-45 / Acts,
2:1-22;  3:1-16;  4:33;  5:12-16;  9:36-43;  14:8-10; 19:11-12; 20:7-12;
28:1-10—   (D)/^r//,   2:1-22;  3:1-16;  4:33;  5:12-16;  9:36-43;  M79;
19:11-12;   20:7-12;   28:1-10  /  Romans,  1:3-5;  3:19-7:25;  II  /  I
Corinthians, 3:1-15; 15:9-10 / // Corinthians, 4:15; 8-9 passim; 12:1-10
/  Galatians,  5:4  / Ephesians, 1:1-11/ Philippians, 2:12-13; 4:13 / //
Thessalonians,  2:16-17— (D) II Thessalonians, 2:15-16 / // Timothy, 2:1
/  Titus,  2:11-15;  3:3-9  /  Hebrews,  2:9; 12:14-29 / James, 4 :6 / /
Peter,   5   13   14   Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 5-6 2b-c; BK II, par 15 12b-c; bk vi, par 4 36a-b
/  City  of  God, BK X, CH 8 303a-d; ch 12-18 306d-310d; bk xiii, ch 3-5
361a-362c; ch 7 362d-363b; CH 14-15 366b-d; ch 20 370c-371a; bk xiii, CH
23-BK  XIV,  ch  1 372a-377a; bk xiv, ch 26-27, 396b-397a; bk xv, ch 1-3
397b,d-399c;  BK  XVI, ch 26 438c-439a; ch 37 444b-445a; bk XVIII, ch II
477c-d;  bk  xxi,  ch 5-8 563d568d; CH 15-16 572c-574a; bk xxii, ch 5-10
589a-599b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  1, ch i 624b,d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, a 2, rep i lld-12c; q 8, a 3, ans and rep 4
36b37c; Q 12, A 2 51c-52c; aa 4-5 53b-55b; a 13 61c-62b; q 62 317c-325b;
q  89,  a i, rep 3 473b-475a; a 2, rep 3 475a-d; a 8, rep 2 479c-480c; q
92,  a  4,  ans 491b-d; q 95 506b510a; Q 104, A 4, ans 538a-c; q 105, aa
6-8  543b-545b;  q  106, a 3, ans 547c-548b; q 108, A 8, ans and rep 1-2
561a-562a;  q  no,  a  4 567c-568b; q 113, a i, rep 2 576a-d; q 114, A 4
584a-585a;  q  119,  a  i,  ans  604c-607b;  part  i-ii, q 5, a 6, REP 2
641a-642a;  q  10,  a 4, rep 2 665d-666a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 51, a 4 15a-d; q 55, a 4, ans and rep 6 28c-29d; Q 58, A 3,
REP  3  43b-44a;  q 62, a i 60a-d; Q 63, A 2, ANS and REP 1-2 64b-65a; q
65,  a  3,  ans  72d-73d;  q  66,  a  2, rep i 76c-77c; q 76, a 2, rep 2
141d-142c;  q  79,  a  3,  ans  158a-d;  Q 81, a 3, rep 3 165d-166b; a 4
166b-167a;  q  85, A 6, ans 182d-184a; q 98, a i, ans 239b240c; q 106, A
I,  ANS  and  rep  1,3 321a-322a; qq 109-114 338a-378a,c esp q 113, a 10
369c370b;  PART  ii-ii,  Q  24,  A  3,  rep  I  491a-d; part III, QQ 7-8
745c-763b; q 61, a i, rep 2 855a-d; Q 62 858b-864c; part hi suppl, q 75,
a 3 938a939d; Q 83, A 3 978c-980d; q 92, a i 1025c1032b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, vii
[16120]
115b-116b; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b; xx
[79-138]
137c-138a;   xxix   [58-66]   150d-151a;  XXXII  [40-87]  155a-c;  xxxii
[i39]-xxxiii [145] 156a-157d

[234a]
176  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (7. The causality of God or the gods. Id. Divine
causality  in the supernatural order: grace, miracles.) 22 Chaucer: Tale
ofMa?: ofLau/236h-255h Gsp
[4869-4924]
242b-243b,
[5247-5253] 249b
/  Prioress's Tj/<? [13,418-620] 392a-395b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
83c;  88c-89a;  PART  II,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c; part hi, 165d-167b;
172a-177c  passim;  183d-187a; 188a-191a; 241c-242a; part iv, 249b-250a;
264a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 212a'd; 267d-268a; 273a-b; 294a-b 30 Bacoxn:
Advancement  of  Learning, 19b-c; 33c-d; 41b-c / New Atlantis, 201d-203c
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies, 125d126a 32 MiLTo:^ : Paradise
Lost, bk ii [1024-1033] 133b; -^ BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134]
138a,
[167-184] 139a-b, [227-238] 140b; bk xi [1-21]
299a-b;  [251-262]  304b-305a;  bk  xii  [173-222]  323a-324a  /  Samson
Agonistes [356-372] 347b;
[652-666] 353b-354a
33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, la-14a; 19a-26b; !g-u: 29b; 154b-159a /
Pensees,  202  211a;  430-435  '  -;'.->245a-251a; 458 254a; 505 261a-b;
508-511  261b;  513-517 262a-263b; 520-524 263b-264a; 643-644 290b-291b;
803-856 328b-341b; 876 345a; 881 345b 35 Locke: Human Understandi7ig, bk
iv,  ch  xvi,  SECT  13  371a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 62-63
425a-c;  sect  84  429b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 54
474b-c;  sect x 488d-497b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 38d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  180b-c;  189b'191a;  206b-d; 295b-296b; 465d-467a; 605b-d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  227d-228a; 232a-c; 398b-399b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  238b 44 Boswe-ll: Johnson, 126b-c; 359a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part hi, 307ab; part iv, 338b-c; 348d-349a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 219b-220a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 11ab; BK
V,  127b-137c  passim;  bk vii, 171a-177b; 189d 190a 8. The operation of
causes in the process of history 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21d-22a; bk
ix,  291b-c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 354d355a; bk iv,
462a-b  7  Plato: Statesman, 587a-589c / Latvs, bk hi, 663d-666d; bk iv,
679a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v 502a-519d passim 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk i [449-482] 6c-7a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8
269d-

[234b]
b  c  270b; BK vii, sect i 279b; sect 49 282d; bk ix, sect 28 293d-294a;
bk  x, sect 27 299d 13 Virgil: Aeneid 103a-379a esp bk i [254-296] llOa-
llla,  bk VI [713-853] 230a-234a 14 Plutarch: Camillus, 107c / Timoleon,
201a203b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49c; bk vi, 91b-d / Histories, bk i,
190a18  Augustine:  City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; CH 36 149c-d; bk ii,
ch  2-3  150c-151c;  bk iv, ch 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i 207d-208c; ch 11-26
216c-230a,c;  bk xi, ch i 322b,d-323a; ch 18 331d-332a; bk xiv, ch 28-BK
xv,  ch  i  397a398c;  BK  XV,  ch  21-22  415b-416c;  bk  xviii, CH 1-2
472b,d-473d 21 Dante: Divijje Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, xvi
[52-114]
77b-78a;  paradise,  VI  [28-1  11] 113d-114d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, en
xiv,  21b;  ch  xxv  35a-36b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 76c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  464b-465c passim 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act
iv, sc hi
[215-224] 590d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning, 34c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 505 261a-b;
619-641  284b290a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 121a-b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vih,  56b57c;  bk  XVII  122a-125a,c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,   348a,   40   Gibbon:   Decline   and   Fall,  456d-457a,c;
609b-c;630b,d-634a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 451cAS3a,c', 590a-b 43
Federalist:   number   3,   33c   43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
327b,d-332d  passim.,  esp 331b-332d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
ii, par 115 42b-c; PART III, par 340-360 110b-114a,c esp par 342 llOc-d,
par   347  lUb-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155c;  156d-170b;
173a-175c;  190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d,  194b-196a;  203a206a,c;  part  i,
235d-237a; 258b-d; part ii, 262c-263d; 274a-275a; 281d-282d; 283c284a,c;
part  hi,  300a-301c;  part  iv, 337d- , 342a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
323a-b;  327a-328d  50  Marx:  Capital,  7b; 8a-lld passim; 377c-378d 50
Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 416c417a,c; 419b,d-425b passim; 428b-d
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b; bk X, 389a-391c; 430b-432c;
447c-448c;  bk  XI,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii, 563a-575a; bk xiv, 588a-590c;
609a-613d; bk xv, 618b-621b; epilogue I, 645a-650c; epilogue ii 675a696d
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-137c 54 Freud: War and
Death,  761a-c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 781a-782d; 787a-788d;
791b-d; 799a-802a,c esp 801d-802a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 834b-c;
882b-884c

[235a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  5a,  5d; Will 5^(3)-5<^)^ 5^(2), 5c, 7c. Astronomy 8d;
God  5a,  ya-ye;  Matter 3d; Nature 3c(4); World 4b, 4d-4e. 4c. idea and
topics  with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two
groups:  L Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this  collection.  Science,  div hi Tract
Concerning   the   First  Principle)  Gibbon.  An  Essay  on  the  Study
ofLiterature, xlviiiBruno. De la causa, principio, e uno 15, 21 25-26

[235b]
Chapter 8: CAUSE 177

[236a]
178  THE GREAT IDEAS Malebranche, Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion,
VII  Leibnitz. Discourse on Metaphysics, xv-xxii . New Essays Concerning
Human  Understandings  BK  II,  CH  26  Voltaire.  Candide  . "Change or
Generation  of Events," "Final Causes," in A Philosophical Dictionary T.
Reid.  Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, I Schopenhauer. On
the  Fourfold  Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason . The World as
Will  and  Idea, vol hi, sup, ch 26; APPENDIX Brown. An Inquiry into the
Relation  of  Cause  and Effect . Lectures on the Philosophy ofthe Human
Mind,  VOL  I,  pp  189-220;  VOL  II,  pp  128-134  CoMTE. The Positive
Philosophy,  intro,  ch  i  ;  bk  hi,  CH  I  W.  Hamilton. Lectures on
Metaphysics  and  Logic,  VOL  I  (38-40)  Whewell. The Philosophy ofthe
Inductive Sciences, VOL I, BK III, CH 1-4; BK IX, CH 6*, BK X, CH 5; VOL
II, BK XI, CH 7 Helmholtz. Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, VIII
WuNDT.   Die   Prinzipien   der  m.echanischen  Naturlehre  Jevons.  The
Principles  of  Science, ch ii LOTZE. Logic, BK I, CH 2 (b) P. A. Janet.
Final  Causes C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 66-87, 393-394
. ^ , DoMET DE VoRGES. Causc efficicntc et cause finale Watts. The Reign
of Causality Venn. Principles ofEmpirical or Inductive Logic, en 2

[236b]
1  Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  i,  ch  3 Pearson. The Grammar of
Science,  ch  4 Bradley. The Principles of Logic, bk hi, part ii, CH 2 .
Appearance  and Reality, bk t, ch 6 BosANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 8
Bergs ON. Creative Evolution Broad. Perception, Physics, and Reality, ch
1-2 Henderson. The Order of Nature W. E. Johnson. Logic, part hi, ch 3-1
Meyerson. Identity and Reality, ch i . De Vexplication dans les sciences
DucAssE.  Causation  and  the  Types  of Necessity Whitehead. An Enquiry
Concerning  the  Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch 16 . Symbolism, Its
Meaning  ai^d Effects Eddington. The Nature of the Physical Worlds CH 14
McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence, ch 2^-26 Santayana. The Realm of
Matter,  ch 7 M. R. Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk i, ch 4(2); bk II, CH 2
Lenzen.  The  Nature  of  Physical Theory, part iv, CH 16 Weyl. The Open
World,  lect  ii  Maritain.  a  Preface to Metaphysics, lect v-vii A. J.
Toynbee.  a  Study  of History Planck. Where Is Science Going?, ch 4-5 .
The  Philosophy of Physics, ch 2 Dewey. Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, ch
22  B.  Russell. Principles of Mathematics, ch 55 . Our Knowledge of the
External  World,  viii  .  Mysticism  and  Logic, ch 9 . The Analysis of
Matter,  ch  30-31, 35 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part IV,
CH 9-10; part VI, ch 5-6

[237a]
INTRODUCTION  ONE  sense  in  which  we  use  the word "chance" does not
exclude the operation of causes. The chance event, in this sense, is not
uncaused. But within this meaning of chance, there is the question oihow
the  chance  event  is  caused.  On  one view, what happens by chance is
distinguished  from  what  happens by nature in terms of a difference in
manner  of  causation  the  difference  between  the  contingent and the
necessary.  On  another  view, the chance event does not differ causally
from  that which happens regularly or uniformly. The difference lies not
in the pattern of causes, but in our knowledge of them. The chance event
is  unpredictable  or  less  predictable because of our ignorance of its
causes, not because ofany real contingency in the order of nature. There
is  still a third sense of "chance" in which it means that which happens
totally  without  cause— the absolutely spontaneous or fortuitous. These
three  meanings of chance at once indicate the basic issues in which the
concept is involved. The third meaning is the most radical. It stands in
opposition  to  the  other  two.  Their opposition to one another can be
considered  after  we  examine  the sense in which chance excludes every
type  of cause. The doctrine of absolute fortuitousness is indeterminism
in  its  most extreme form. The familiar phrase, "a fortuitous concourse
of  atoms,"  indicates  the  classical  statement  of this doctrine, and
identifies it in the great books with the theory of atomism. It would be
more precise to say "with Lucretius' version of that theory," because it
is  with  regard  to  chance  that  he  departs  from  the  teachings of
Democritus  and  Epicurus,  and  adds  an  hypothesis of his own. imitn-
jyjuiii

[237b]
The swerve of the atoms, according to Lucretius, accounts for the origin
of  the  world,  the  motions  of  nature, and the free will of man. But
nothing   accounts  for  the  swerve  of  the  atoms.  It  is  uncaused,
spontaneous,  fortuitous.  "When  the  atoms are being carried downwards
straight  through  the void by their own weight, they push a little from
their  path  at times quite undetermined and at undetermined places, yet
only  just  so much as you would call a change of trend. If they did not
swerve,  all things would fall downward through the deep void like drops
of  rain,  nor  could collision come to be, nor blows be brought to pass
among  the  atoms;  thus  nature  would  never  have brought anything to
being."  Since  the atoms differ in shape, size, and weight, it might be
supposed  that  the  heavier  atoms,  falling straight yet more rapidly,
would  overtake  and  hit  the  lighter atoms, thus bringing about their
grouping  or  interlocking.  But  this  supposition,  says Lucretius, is
contrary to reason. It may hold for things falling through water or thin
air,  but  through  the  empty void "all things, even of unequal weight,
move  with  an  equal  velocity through the unresisting void." Therefore
heavier  things will never be able to fall on the lighter from above nor
of  themselves  bring  about  the blows sufficient to produce the varied
motions   by  which  nature  carries  things  on.  Wherefore,  Lucretius
concludes,  the  atoms  "must  swerve  a  little."  Once  the atoms have
collided,  the  way in which they are locked together in the patterns of
composite things, and all the subsequent mo-' tions of these things, can
be  accounted  for  by reference to the natural properties of the atoms.
The  atomic  sizes, shapes, and weights determine how they behave singly
or  in combination. But the swerve of the atoms is not so determined. It
is completely spontaneous.

[238a]
180  THE  GREAT IDEAS **If each motion is always due to another, and the
new  always springs from the old in a determined order, and if the atoms
do not by swerving break through the decrees of fate, so that cause does
not  follow cause through infinite time"; whence, asks Lucretius, "is it
wrested  from  fate,  this  will  whereby we move fonvard where pleasure
leads  each  one of us, and swerve likewise in our motions, neither at a
fixed time nor at a fixed place, but only when and where the mind itself
has  prompted  us?"  The  answer  he gives is that there must be "in the
atoms  .  .  . another cause of motion besides blows and weights, whence
comes  this  power  born in us, since we see that nothing can come to be
from  nothing." Being absolutely fortuitous, the swerve of the atom.s is
absolutely  unintelligible.  There is no answer to the question why they
chance    to   swerve   at   undetermined   times   and   places.   This
unintelligibility may not, however, make the fortuitous either unreal or
impossible.  It can be argued that chance may exist even though, for our
limited  understanding,  it  remains  mysterious.  The  same  problem of
intelligibility arises with respect to that meaning of chance wherein it
is  identified  with coincidence or contingency. Here, as in the case of
the  absolutely  fortuitous,  chance belongs to reality or nature. "Some
things  always  come  to  pass  in the same way, and others for the most
part,"  writes  Aristotle as an observer of nature, but there is also "a
third  class  of  events  besides these two—events which all say are 'by
chance.'  " Things of this last kind, he goes on to say, are those which
"come to pass incidentally"—or accidentally. According to this theory, a
real  or  objective  indeterminism  exists. Chance or contingency is not
just  an expression of human uncertainty born of insufficient knowledge.
Contingency,  however, differs from the fortuitousness or spontaneity of
the  atom's  swerve,  in that it is a product of causes, not their total
absence.  Of  the  contingent  event,  "there  is no definite cause," in
Aristotle's  opinion,  but there is "a chance cause, i.e., an indefinite
one."  In the chance happening, two lines of action coincide and thereby
produce a single result. This is our ordinary understanding of the way

[238b]
accidents  happen. The chance meeting of old friends who run across each
other  in  a  railroad  station  after  a  separation of many years is a
coincidence—a coinciding of the two quite separate and independent lines
of  action  which  brought  each of them to the same station at the same
time,  coming  from  different  places,  going  to different places, and
proceeding  under  the  influence  of different causes or purposes. That
each is there can be explained by the operation of causes. That both are
there  together  cannot  be  explained  by  the causes determining their
independent  paths.  So  understood,  the  chance event exemplifies what
Aquinas  calls a "clashing of two causes." And what makes it a matter of
chance  is  the fact that "the clashing of these two causes, inasmuch as
it  is  accidental,  has  no cause." Precisely because it is accidental,
"this  clashing of causes is not to be reduced to a further pre-existing
cause  from  which  it  follows  of  necessity." The illustration is not
affected  by  considerations of free will. Whether men have free will or
not, whether free acts are caused or are, as Kant suggests, uncaused and
spontaneous, the event we call a "chance meeting" remains accidental or,
more  precisely,  a  coincidence. Whatever the factors are which control
the  motions of each man, they operate entirely within that single man's
line  of  action.  Prior to the meeting, they do not influence the other
man's  conduct.  If  we could state the cause for the coincidence of the
two  lines  of  motion, it would have to be some factor which influenced
both  lines.  Were  there such a cause and were it known to us, we could
not  say  that  the  meeting  happened  by  chance.  It would still be a
coincidence  in  the  merely  physical  sense of coming together, but it
would  not  be  a  coincidence causally. That free will is irrelevant to
this  meaning  of chance can be seen from the fact that the collision of
particles  which  produces  atomic fission is regarded as resulting from
chance  or  coincidence  in  a  manner  no different from the accidental
meeting  of  friends.  Causes  control  the speeds and directions of the
colliding  particles,  but  no  cause determines their collision; or, in
other words, there is no cause for the coincidence of two separate lines
of   causation.   Contemporary  physics  affirms  a  real  or  objective
indeterminism insofar as it does not merely say

[239a]
that  the  cause  of  the coincidence is unknown to us, but rather holds
that  no  such  cause  exists  to be known. The conckption of the chance
event  as  an  uncaused coincidence of causes is an ancient as well as a
modern  doctrine.  In  his Physics, Aristotle distinguishes between what
happens by nature and what happens by chance in terms of different types
of  causality.  "Chance,"  he  writes,  is  "reckoned among causes; many
things are said both to be and to come to be as a result of chance." But
the  fact  that its effects cannot be "identified with any of the things
that come to pass by necessity and always, or for the most part" at once
distinguishes  the  causality  of chance from that of nature. "The early
physicists,"  Aristotle  observes,  "found no place for chance among the
causes which they recognized . . . Others there are who, indeed, believe
that   chance   is  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  inscrutable  to  human
intelligence,  as  being  a  divine  thing  and full ofmyster^'." But to
Aristotle  himself  "it is clear that chance is an incidental cause" and
"that the causes of what comes to pass by chance are infinite." For this
reason,  he  explains, "chance is supposed to belong to the class of the
indefinite,  and  to  be  inscrutable  to  man." Though he distinguishes
between spontaneity and chance, he says that both "are causes of effects
which,  though  they  might  result from intelligence or nature, have in
fact  been  caused  by  something  incidentally  What  happens by nature
happens  regularly, or for the most part, through causal necessity. This
necessity  results from the operation of essential causes, causes in the
very  nature  of the moving things. When the regularity fails, it is due
to  the  intervention  of some accidental cause. What happens by chance,
then,  or  contingently,  is  always  due  to  an accidental (or better,
incidental)  cause.  As indicated in the chapter on Cause, an accidental
as  opposed  to  an essential cause is, in Aristotle's theory, one which
does  not by itselfproduce the given effect. It does so only through the
conjunction of other causes. But since it does not determine these other
causes to operate, the effect— contingent on their combined activity— is
produced  by  chance,  that is, by the contingency of several incidental
causes working coincidentally.

[239b]
Chaptf.r  9:  CMANCE  181  A  world  in  which  chance  really exists is
remarkably  different from a world in which necessity prevails, in which
everything   is   determined   by  causes  and  there  are  no  uncaused
coincidences.  William  James  vividly  epitomizes  their  difference by
calling  the  world  of  absolute necessity or determinism— the world of
Spinoza  or Hegel—a "block universe" in contrast to what he describes as
a  "concatenated  universe."  Voltaire  before him, in his Philosophical
Dictionary, had used the phrase "the concatenation of events" to express
the meaning of chance. The phrase evokes the right image, the picture of
a  world  in  which  many  concurrent  lines of causality, exercising no
influence  upon  one  another, may nevertheless concatenate or be joined
together  to  produce  a  chance result. The block universe presents the
contrasting  picture  of  a world in which each motion or act determines
and  is  determined  by every other in the fixed structure of the whole.
Spinoza   claims,   for  example,  that  "in  nature  there  is  nothing
contingent,  but  all  things  arc  determined from the necessity of the
divine  nature  to  exist and act in a certain manner." Chance, in other
words,  does  not  exist  in  nature.  A thing is said to be contingent,
Spinoza  writes,  only "with reference to a deficiency in our knowledge.
For  if  we  do  not  know  that  the  essence  of  a  thing  involves a
contradiction, or if we actually know that it involves no contradiction,
and  nevertheless  we  can  affirm  nothing  with  certainty  about  its
existence  because  the order of causes is concealed from us, that thing
can  never appear to us either as necessary or impossible, and therefore
we   call  it  either  contingent  or  possible."  Hence,  for  Spinoza,
contingency  or chance is illusory rather than real —a projection of the
mind's  ignorance  or  of  its inadequate knowledge of causes. The issue
between real indeterminism and absolute determinism—further discussed in
the  chapters  on  Fate and Necessity' and Contingency—inevitably raises
theological  questions. Just as the theologian must reconcile man's free
will  with  God's predestination, so must he, if he accepts its reality,
also  reconcile  chance with divine providence, apart from which nothing
can  happen  either  necessarily or contingently. For Augustine it would
seem that divine

[240a]
182  THE  GREAT IDEAS providence leaves no room for chance among natural
things.   After   noting  that  causes  are  sometimes  divided  into  a
"fortuitous cause, a natural cause, and a voluntary cause," he dismisses
"those  causes which are called fortuitous" by saying that they "are not
a  mere  name  for  the  absence  of causes, but are only latent, and we
attribute them either to the will of the true God, or to that of spirits
of  some kind or other." In certain places Aquinas seems to talk in much
the   same  fashion—as  though  chance  existed  only  for  our  limited
intellects  and  not  for  God. "Nothing," he declares, "hinders certain
things  from happening by luck or chance, if compared to their proximate
causes;  but  not  if  compared to divine providence, according to which
'nothing  happens  at  random  in  the  world,'  as Augustine says." The
example he uses to illustrate his point is that of two servants who have
been  sent  by  their  master to the same place: "the meeting of the two
servants,  although  to  them it appears a chance circumstance, has been
fully  foreseen  by their master, who has purposely sent them to meet at
one  place,  in  such  a way that one has no knowledge of the other." In
such  a  way  also  "all  things  must  of  necessity  come  under God's
ordering,"  from which it follows that God directly causes the action of
even  accidental  causes,  and their coincidence. The chance event would
then be necessitated by God. It would be determined by His will, however
indeterminate  it might appear to us. Yet in other places Aquinas writes
that  "God  wills  some things to be done necessarily, some contingently
....  To  some  effects He has attached unfailing necessary causes, from
which  the  effects  follow  necessarily;  but  to  other defectible and
contingent  causes,  from  which  effects  arise contingently." For some
minds this may only deepen the mystery rather than solve it. At least it
leaves  many  questions unanswered. Does Aquinas mean that a coincidence
of  causes  is  not  itself  uncaused ? Does he mean that God causes the
concatenation   of  events,  and  that  a  suthcient  reason  for  every
contingency  exists  in  God's  will?  If  so,  is chance ^n illusion, a
function  of  our  ignorance  of divine providence } May chance be quite
real on the level of

[240b]
nature  where  no  natural  causes  determine the coincidence, while not
real—at  least not in the same sense—for God? Or does the statement that
what   "divine   providence   plans   to  happen  contingently,  happens
contingently"  mean  that  chance remains a real feature of the universe
even  for  God  ?  One  thing  is  clear.  In one sense of the word, the
Christian   theologians   completely  deny  chance.  If  "chance"  means
something  which  God  does  not  foresee,  something  unplanned  by His
providence,  then according to their faith nothing happens by chance. It
is  in  this  sense  also that what happens by chance is opposed to what
happens on purpose, or has a final as well as an efficient cause. As the
chapter  on  Cause  indicates,  those  who  deny  final causes in nature
sometimes  use  the word "chance" to signify not lack of cause, nor even
contingency,  but only the blindness of causality—working to no end. The
controversy  discussed  in the chapter on World—between those who see in
the  structure  of  the  universe  the grand design of a divine plan and
those  who  attribute  whatever  order  there  is  in  nature  to  blind
chance—further  indicates  the sense in which theologians like Augustine
and Aquinas deny chance. But if "chance" means no more than contingency,
then  to affirm chance excludes, not providence, but fete, at least that
sense  of  "fate" according to which everything is blindly necessitated.
Here  it  is  Spinoza's  statement  that  "in  nature  there  is nothing
contingent,  but  all  things  are  determined from the necessity of the
divine  nature"  which  opposes  the statement of Aquinas that "the mode
both of necessity and contingency falls under the foresight of God." The
theory  of  chance  has  obvious  bearings  on  the theory of knowledge,
especially  with regard to the distinction between knowledge and opinion
and  between certainty and probability. On any view of chance—whether it
is  real  or  illusory—when men call a future event contingent they mean
that  they  cannot predict it with certitude. So far as human prediction
goes,  it  makes  no  difference whether the future event is necessarily
determined  and  we  lack adequate knowledge of its causes, or the event
has a genuine indeterminacy in the way it is caused or

[241a]
uncaused.  Regardless  of what the objective situation is, the assurance
with which we predict anything reflects the state of our knowledge about
it.  The  ancients  who,  for  the  most part, regard chance as real and
objective,  treat  probability  as  subjective.  For them, the different
degrees  of probability which men attach to their statements measure the
inadequacy  of  their  knowledge and the consequent uncertainty of their
opinions  about  matters which cannot be known but only guessed. Holding
different  theories  of  the  distinction between knowledge and opinion,
both  Plato  and  Aristotle  exclude  the accidental and the contingent,
along  with  the particular, from the objects of science. Since in their
view  certitude  belongs  to  the  essence of science—or of knowledge as
contrasted  with  opinion—science  for  them  deals  not  only  with the
universal  but  with  the  necessary.  In  the Republic Socrates assigns
opinion  to  the realm of becoming— the realm of changing and contingent
particulars.  Unlike Plato, Aristotle does not restrict knowledge to the
realm  of  eternal and immutable being, but he does insist that physics,
as  a  science  of changing things, preserve the certitude of science by
concerning  itself  only  with  the essential and the necessary. "That a
science  of  the  accidental  is not even possible," he writes, "will be
evident  if we try to see what the accidental really is." It is a matter
of chance that cold weather occurs during the dog-days, for "this occurs
neither  always and of necessity, nor for the most part, though it might
happen  sometimes.  The accidental, then, is what occurs, but not always
nor of necessity, nor for the most part. Now ... it is obvious why there
is  no  science of such a thing." Though he disagrees with Aristotle and
Aquinas  about the reality of chance or contingency, Spinoza agrees with
them  that  knowledge—at  least adequate knowledge—has the necessary for
its  object.  Of  individual  things,  he says, "we can have no adequate
knowledge  .  .  .  and  this is what is to be understood by us as their
contingency."  To  be true to itself and to the nature of things, reason
must  "perceive things truly, that is to say, as they are in themselves,
that  is  to  say,  not as contingent but as necessary." The position of
Aquinas is worth stating for

[241b]
Chapter 9: CHANCE 183 comparison. To the question "whether our intellect
can know contingent things," he replies that "the contingent, considered
as  such,  is  known  directly by sense and indirectly by the intellect,
while  the  universal  and necessary principles of contingent things are
known  by  the  intellect.  Hence," he goes on, "if we consider knowable
things  in  their universal principles, then all science is of necessary
things. But if we consider the things themselves, thus some sciences are
of  necessary  things, some of contingent things." Among the sciences of
contingent  things,  Aquinas  includes not only "the sciences of nature"
but  also  "the  moral sciences," because the latter, dealing with human
action,  must  reach  down  to  contingent particulars. In the sphere of
morals  as  of  nature,  certainty  can be achieved only on the level of
universal  principles.  Deliberation  about  particular  acts to be done
moves  on  the  level  of  probable  opinion.  In  contrast to the moral
scientist,  the man of action must weigh chances and make decisions with
regard  to future contingencies. It would be as foolish, Aristotle says,
to  expect the certitude of scientific demonstration from an orator or a
judge, as "to accept probable reasoning from a mathematician." It is not
surprising  that  the  modern  theory  of probabiUty—or, as it was later
called by Boole, Venn, and others, the "logic of chance" should have its
origin in the sphere of practical problems. Pascal's correspondence with
Fermat   illustrates  the  early  mathematical  speculations  concerning
formulae  for predicting the outcome in games of pure chance. For Pascal
the  logic  of  chance also has moral implications. If we are willing to
risk money at the gaming table on the basis of calculated probabilities,
how  much  more  willing  should  we be to act decisively in the face of
life's  uncertainties,  even  to  risking  life  itself on the chance of
eternal  salvation.  When we act "on an uncertainty, we act reasonably,"
Pascal writes, "for we ought to work for an uncertainty according to the
doctrine of chance." If the chance of there being an after-life is equal
to  the  chance of there being none— if the equiprobability reflects our
equal ignorance of either alternative—then.

[242a]
184  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Pascal  argues,  we  ought  to wager in favor of
immortality  and  act  accordingly.  "There  is  here the infinity of an
infinitely  happy life to gain, a chance to gain against a finite number
of  chances  of  loss,  and what you stake is finite." Like Pascal, Hume
thinks  that  we  must be content with probabihty as a basis for action.
"The  great  subverter  of  Pyrrhonism  or  the  excessive principles of
skepticism,"  he writes, "is action, and employment, and the occupations
of  common life." But unlike the ancients, Hume also thinks we should be
content  with  probabilities  in  the  sphere  of  the natural sciences.
Certitude  is  attainable  only  by the mathematician who deals with the
relations between ideas. Since the natural sciences deal with matters of
fact  or  real  existence,  and  since  to know such things we must rely
entirely upon our experience of cause and effect, we cannot reach better
than  probable  conclusions.  The  scientist, according to Hume, "weighs
opposite  experiments.  He  considers  which  side  is  supported by the
greater  number of experiments; to that side he inclines, with doubt and
hesitation; and when at last he fixes his judgment, the evidence exceeds
not  what  we properly call probability. All probability, then, supposes
an opposition of experiments and observations ... A hundred instances or
experiments  on  one  side,  and  fifty  on  another,  afford a doubtful
expectation  of  any  event;  though a hundred uniform experiments, with
only  one that is contradictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree
of assurance." Hume applies the logic of chance to weighing the evidence
against  and  the testimony in favor of miracles, as well as to contrary
hypotheses  in  science.  As much as Spinoza, he denies the existence of
chance  or  contingency  in  the  order  of  nature.  Chance is entirely
subjective. It is identical with the probability of our opinions. In the
throw  of  dice,  the  mind,  he says, "considers the turning up of each
particular  side  as  alike  probable;  and  this  is the very nature of
chance,  to  render  all  the  particular  events,  comprehended  in it,
entirely equal." But there may also be "a probability, which arises from
a  superiority of chances on any side; and according as this superiority
increases,  and surpasses the opposite chances, the probability receives
a proportionate increase . . . The case,"

[242b]
Hume  asserts, "is the same with the probability of causes, as with that
of  chance."  Since  Hume's day, the theory of probability has become an
essential   ingredient   of   empirical   science.  The  development  of
thermodynamics  in  the  19th century would have been impossible without
it. This is also true of the quantum mechanics and atomic physics of our
own  time.  But  like  the doctrine of chance, the theory of probability
tends  in  one of two directions: either toward the subjective view that
probability  is only a quality of our judgments, measuring the degree of
our  ignorance  of  the  real  causes  which  leave  nothing  in  nature
undetermined;  or  toward  the  objective  view  that  there  is genuine
indeterminism   in   nature   and   that  mathematical  calculations  of
probability  estimate  the  real  chance  of  an  event's occurring. The
element  of  chance also has a bearing on the general theory of art. The
hypothesis  of the melody which a kitten might compose by walking on the
keyboard,  is  obviously intended to contrast a product of chance with a
work  of art. The competent musician knows with certainty that he can do
what  the meandering kitten has only one chance in many millions of ever
accomplishing.  In  proportion as an art is developed, and to the degree
that  its  rules  represent  a mastery of the medium in which the artist
works, chance is excluded from its productions. This point is strikingly
exemplified in the history of medicine. "If there had been no such thing
as   medicine,"   Hippocrates   suggests,   "and  if  nothing  had  been
investigated  or  found  out  in it," all practitioners "would have been
equally unskilled and ignorant of it, and everything concerning the sick
would  have  been  directed  by  chance."  On  the same principle, Galen
distinguishes  the physician from the empiric, who, "without knowing the
cause,"  pretends that he is "able to rectify the failures of function."
The  empiric  works  by  trial  and  error— the very opposite of art and
science,  for trial and error can succeed only by chance. The physician,
learned and skilled in medicine, works from a knowledge of causes and by
rules  of  art  which  tend  to  eliminate  chance.  Augustine reports a
conversation with the proconsul concerning the relative merits of

[243a]
medicine  and  astrology. When the proconsul tells him that, as compared
with medicine, astrology is a false art, Augustine, at this time himself
"much  given  to  the books of the horoscope-casters," asks how the fact
that  "many things were foretold truly by [astrology]" can be explained.
The  proconsul  "answered, very reasonably, that it was due to the force
of  chance,  which  is always to be allowed for in the order of things."
Thus,  Augustine  says  later,  "I saw it as obvious that such things as
happened  to  be said truly from the casting of horoscopes were true not
by  skill  but  by chance; and such things as were false were not due to
want of skill in the art but merely that luck had fallen the other way."
Neither  art  itself,  nor  skill  in  its practice, can ever be perfect
enough to remove chance entirely, for the artist deals with particulars.
Yet  the  measure  of  an  art  is the certainty which its rules have as
directions for achieving the desired result; and the skill of the artist
is  measured  by  the  extent  to which he succeeds by rule and judgment
rather  than by chance. When Aristotle quotes Agathon's remark that "art
loves  chance  and  chance  loves art," he explains its sense to be that
"chance  and  art  are concerned with the same objects"— that which does
not  come to be by nature nor from necessity. Hence art sometimes fails,
either  from uncontrollable contingencies or from insufficient knowledge
of  causes.  "All  causes," says Hume, "are not conjoined to their usual
effects  with  like  uniformity.  An  artificer,  who  handles only dead
matter,  may  be disappointed of his aim, as well as the politician, who
directs the conduct of sensible and intelligent agents." In the realm of
human affairs— in morals, politics, and history— the factor of chance is
usually   discussed   in  terms  of  good  and  bad  fortune.  The  word
"fortune"—as  may  be seen in the root which it shares with "fortuitous"
has  the  same connotations as "chance." Aristotle treats fortune as the
kind  of  chance that operates in the sphere of human action rather than
natural  change.  Fortune, he thinks, can be attributed properly only to
intelligent  beings  capable  of  deliberate  choice.  The sense of this
distinction  between chance and fortune seems to be borne out in history
by the fact

[243b]
Chapter   9:   CFIANCE   185   that   fortune,  unhke  chance,  receives
personification  in  myth  and legend. Fortune is a goddess or, like the
Fates  whom  she  combats, a power with which even the gods must reckon.
The  doctrine  of chance or fortune occupies an important place in moral
theory.  Aristotle's  classification of goods tends to identify external
gocxls  with  goods  of  fortune—  the goods which, unlike knowledge and
virtue,  we  cannot  obtain  merely  by  the  exercise  of  our will and
faculties.   Considering  the  elements  of  happiness,  Aquinas  groups
together  wealth,  honor,  fame,  and  power  as  goods of the same sort
because  they are "due to external causes and in most cases to fortune."
The  goods  of  fortune,  as  well as its ills, consist in things beyond
man's  power to command and, in consequence, to deserve. Recognizing the
unpredictable  operation  of  fortune, Epictetus, the Stoic, argues that
"we  must  make the best of those things that are in our power, and take
the  rest  as  nature gives it." We have "the power to deal rightly with
our  own  impressions."  Hence  the  Stoics  advise  us  to  control our
reactions to things even though we cannot control the things themselves.
Yet  men  will  always  ask, as Hamlet does, "Whether 'tis nobler in the
mind  to  suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to take
arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them?" The fact that
the goods and ills of fortune are beyond our power to control raises the
further  question  of man's responsibility regarding them. We can hardly
be  held  responsible  for  everything  that happens to us, but only for
those  things  which  are  subject  to  our will. This traditional moral
distinction  between  the  good  or evil which befalls us by fortune and
that  which  we  willfully  obtain  or  accomplish,  parallels the legal
distinction  between accidental and intentional wrongdoing. What is true
of the individual life seems to apply to history— the fife of states and
the  development  of  civilization  generally.  For  the  most part, the
historians—Herodotus  and Thucydides, Plutarch, Tacitus, and Gibbon find
fortune  a  useful  principle  of interpretation. To Machiavelli history
seems  to  be  so  full of accidents and contingencies—"great changes in
affairs  .  . . beyond all human conjecture" that he tries to advise the
prince how to make

[244a]
186  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  other  half,  or  perhaps a Uttle less." table."
involved  in the mass movements of men, "we against fate. I a. Chance as
the  coincidence  of causes lb. Chance as the absolutely fortuitous, the
spontaneous  or uncaused 2b. The relation of chance to fate, providence,
and  predestination  4.  Cause  and  chance in relation to knowledge and
opinion:  the  theory  of  probability  5.  The  control  of  chance  or
contingency by art 6a. Chance and fortune in the life of the individual

[244b]
Hegel,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  admit chance As the contingent is
opposed  to  the  necesPAGE 1. The conception of chance 187 2. The issue
concerning  the existence of chance or fortune 188 3. Chance, necessity,
and  design  or  purpose in the origin and structure of the world 189 6.
Chance  and  fortune  in human affairs: the mythology of Fortune 190 6b.
Chance and fortune in poHtics and history 191

[245a]
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12.  tain  cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  tently  rather than continuously in the work or passage
cited.  1.  The  conception  of  chance la. Chance as the coincidence of
causes  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  455a-b  8  Aristotle:  Interpretation, ch 9
[18^5-9]  28c / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 13 [32^4-14] 48b-c / Posterior
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch ii [95*3-9] 129d/ Topics, BK II, cH 6 [112^1-21]
157d-158a; bk hi, ch I
[116*^1-7] 162d-163a / Physics, bk
ii, CH 4-6 272c-275a; ch 8 275d-277b / Heavens, BK I, CH 12
[283^30-^6] 375a-c; bk
ii, ch 5
[287^22-26] 379b; CH 8 [289^22-28] 381b; bk
IV, CH 3 [310^23-31] 401d / Metaphysics, bk v, CH 30
[1025^13-29]
547a-c; bk vi, ch 2-3 548c-549d; bk xi, ch 8 593a-d; bk xii, ch 3
[1070^4-9] 599b
/  Memory  and Reminiscence, CH 2 [452^30-^6] 694b 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640^12-33] 162b-d
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[1369^31-^5] 612c-d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3 257a-b 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  16, 150c / Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch id, 347c-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk iv, par 4-6 20a-d; bk VII, par 8-10 45d-47a
passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, A 2, rep I 128d-130d;
q 47, a i, ans 256a257b; Q 57, A 3, ANS 297b-298a; q 103, a 5,

[245b]
Chapter  9:  CHANCE  187 REP I 531b-532b; a 7, rep 2 533b-d; q 115, A 6,
ANS  and  rep  3  591d-592d; q 116, a i 592d-593d 23 Hobbes : Leviathan,
part  iv,  272b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, def 1-3 395d396a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  vi  469d470d  passim;  sect  viii,  div  67
480c-481a  42  Kant: Judgement, 566a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix,
342a-344b;  bk xiii, 584d-585b 53 James: Psychology, 71a; 91a-92a; 765b;
857b858a passim lb. Chance as the absolutely fortuitous, the spontaneous
or uncaused 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 4
[196*25-^4]
272d-273a; ch 6 [198^14] 275a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10221029] 13c-d; BK II [184-293] 17b-18d esp [284293] 18c-d; [1048-1066] 28b-c; bk v [181-194]
63b-c;  [416-431]  66c-d  17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3 79b-c 18
Augustine:  Citv  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  18  197c198a  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 16, A I, REP 2 94b-95c: q 22, a 2, ans 128d-130d;
Q 47, A I, ANS 256a-257b

[246a]
(1.  The  conception of chance, lb. Chance as the absolutely fortuitous,
the   spontaneous   or  uncaused.^  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  132d-133a;
140b,d-143a  / Practical Reason, 331c-332a / Judgement, 566a-b 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  454b-c  2. The issue concerning the existence of
chance or fortune 2a. The relation of chance to causality: philosophical
or scientific determinism 7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 438c-439a / Titnaeus,
455c-456a;  465d-466a  /  Statesman,  587a-589c esp 587a-b / Laws, bk x,
759d-765d   8  Aristotle:  hiterpretation,  ch  9  28a-29d  /  Posterior
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [95*3-9]  129d  /  Physics,  BK  II, CH 4-5
272c-274b;  ch  8  [199*33-  ^26]  276c-277a  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch 5
[287*^2226] 379b; cH 8 [289^22-28] 381b; bk iv, ch 3
[310*23-31] 401d / Generation and Corruption,
bk  II,  CH  6 [333*35-^20] 434b-c / Metaphysics, BK V, CH 30 547a-d; bk
vi, ch 2 [1027*8-18] 549b; CH 3 549c-d; bk xi, ch 8
[1065*6-^4]
593b-d; bk xii, ch 3
[1070*4-9]
599b / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[452*30-^^6]
694b 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*12-^4] 162b-163a
/ Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[1112*30-33] 358b
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[1369*31-^5] 612c-d
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk ii [184-307] 17b-19a; [1048-1066]
28b-c; bk v [55-58] 61d;
[181-194] 63b-c; [306-310] 65a; [416-431] 66c-d
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk vii, sect i 279b; sect 49 282d; bk ix, sect
28  293d-294a; sect 35-36 294d-295a; sect 39 295a; bk x, sect 27 299d 17
Plotinus : Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c; TR II, cH I, 82c /
Fourth  Ennead, tr hi, CH 16 150c-d; TR IV, cH 33 176b-d / Sixth Ennead,
tr viii, ch 9-10 347a-348a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A
13,  REP  I  86d-88c;  q 19, a 8 116a-d; q 22, A 2, REP I 128d-130d; a 4
131c-132b;  q  103,  a 5, REP I 531b-532b; a 7, rep 2 533b-d; q 115, A 6
591d-592d;  q  116,  a  i 592d-593d; a 3 594c-595a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  113b-c;  part  iv,  272b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal Generation,
412c-413a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 45b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  def  7 355b; axiom 3 355d; prop 16 362a; prop 21-23 364a-365a;
prop 26-29 365b-366c; prop 33-36 367b369b; part ii, prop 31, corol 385c;
prop  44  389b-390a;  part hi, 395a-d; prop 2, schol 396d-398b; part iv,
pref  422b,d-424a;  def  3-4  424a; appendix, vi 447c-d; part v, prop 6,
DEMONST 454a

[246b]
34  Newton:  Optics,  bk hi, 542a-b 35 Hume : Human Understafiding, sect
vi,  div  46, 469d; DIV 47, 470b; sect viii 478b-487a passim, esp div 67
480c-481a,  div  74  484a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 397a 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 72c-85d esp 74b-76c; 91d-92c; 132d-133a; 140b,d-143a;
153a;  171a172c;  184b-c  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 285c-d /
Practical  Reason, 331c-333a / Judgement, 558b-c; 564a-c; 566a-b; 587a-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 342 llOc-d / Philosophy of
History,  intro, 157b158a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 159a 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species,  37c-d; 65a / Descent ofMan, 593d 50 Marx: Capital, lOb-llb
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b; BK X, 389a-391c; bk xi,
469a-472b;  epilogue I, 646c-650c esp 646c-647b; epilogue ii 675a696d 53
James:  Psychology,  71a;  90b-93a  esp  91a-92a; 377b; 387b-388a; 765b;
823a-825a  passim  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 454b-c; 486c487a /
Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 660c 2b. The relation of chance to fate,
providence,  and  predestination  Old Testament: Proverbs, 16:33 /Jonah,
1:1-10 — (D) Jonas, 1:1-10 New Testament: John, 6:44-45,64-65— (D) John,
6:44-45,65-66  /  Acts, 1:15-26; 13:48 / Romans, 8:28-11:36 esp 8:28-30,
9:15,  10:1314,  11:5  /  Ephesians,  1:4-2:10  4  Homer: Iliad, bk xxiv
[522-551] 176d-177a 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[507-520]
45a-b 5 Sophocles: Trachiniae
[95-140]
171a-b / Philoctetes [169-200] 183d-184a 5 Euripides: Helen
[712-720]
304d-305a  /  Heracles Mad [60-81] 365c-d 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 679a-c 8
Aristotle:  Physics, bk ii, ch 4 [196^5-7] 273a / Metaphysics, bk xii,ch
10 [1075*11-24] 605d606a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[1099^8-24]
345a-b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; CH 12 118d-120b;
ch 16 121d-122d; bk hi, ch 17 191d-192a; bk iv, ch 3 224b-d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b;  sect  ii 258a-b; bk hi, sect ii
262a-b;  bk  iv, SECT 3, 263c; bk ix, sect 28 293d-294a; bk XII, sect 14
308c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [194-209] 108a-b; [595624] 119b-120a; bk
xii  [631-649] 370b-371a 14 Plutarch: Camillus, 107c 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk vi, 91b-d / Histories, bk 1, 194a-c 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii,
ch 1-2 82c83d; TR III, ch 2 93d / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d

[247a]
3/0  5 Chapter 9: CHANCE 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch i 207d208c;
CH 9 213b-215c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 13 86d 88c;
q  15,  a  i, ans 91b-92a; q 16, A I, REP 2 94b-95c; q 19, a 8 116a-d; q
22, A 2, REP I 128d-130d; a 4 131c-132b; q 47, A I, ANS 256a-257b; q 57,
a  3,  ans  297b298a;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d;  q 103, a 5, REP I
531b-532b;  a 7, rep 2 533b-d; q 116, a I 592d-593d; a 3 594c-595a; part
i-ii,  Q  10, a 4 665d-666a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [49-99]
lOa-c; paradise, viii [91-148] 117d-118c; xiii
[52-87] 126a-b
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and Crcssida, bk hi, stanza 89 66a; bk iv, stanza
138-154 106b-108b; BK V, stanza 221 149a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxv,
35a-b  ;'_23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 149d 4-25 Montaigne: Essays,
514d-515a I 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 408c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a; bk vii [170-173] 220b-221a; bk x [613640]
287b-288b   /  Samson  Agonistes  [667-709]  354a-355a  /  Areopagitica,
394b'395b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  205 211a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  93  431b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  75c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  i,  la-b  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 334a-335c / Judgement,
594d  [fn i] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 343 llOd-llla /
Philosophy  ofHistory, intro, 158c159b; 169d-170b; part hi, 300c-301c 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  593d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk ix,
342a-344b;  bk  X,  389a-391c;  447c-448c;  epilogue  i,  646c-650c  esp
646c-647b;  epilogue  ii  675a696d  3.  Chance, necessity, and design or
purpose  in  the  origin  and  structure  of the world 7 Plato: Timaeus,
450b-c  /  Philebus,  618b-619c  /  Laws,  bk  X, 760a-765c 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk ii, ch 4
[196*25-^4]
272d-273a;  ch  6  [198*5-13]  275a / Metaphysics, BK I, CH 3 [984^8-22]
502d 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[641^13-24] 164c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things^ bk i
[1008105 1] 13c-14a; bk
ii
[167-183] 17a-b;
[10481066] 28b-c; BK V [146-194] 63a-c; [416-508]
66c-67c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk iv, sect 27 266a; BK VI, sect 10
274b-c  17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 7 44c-45a / Third Ennead,
tr  i,  ch  3 79b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 15, A I, ans
91b-92a; q 19, a 4, ans 111c-112c; q 22, a 2, ANS and rep 3 128d-130d; a
4  131c132b;  q 47, A I, ans 256a-257b; q 103, a i 528b-529a; a 7, rep 2
533b-d

[247b]
11^^  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part r, prop 33 367b 369a; APPENDIX 369b 372d
34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 369b-370a / Optics, bk hi,
541b-542b   42   Kant:  Judgement,  558b-559d;  560d-562a,c;  562d-567b;
568c-570b;  575b-588a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b;
158c-159b  53  James:  Psychology, 5a 4. Cause and chance in relation to
knowledge  and  opinion: the theory of probability 7 Plato: Meno, 189c /
Crito, 214a 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d / Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 13 [32*^4-23] 48b-d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 [71^8-16]
97d98a; ch 6 l62b-103c; ch 30 119d; ch 33
[88^30-89*10] 121b-c / Metaphysics, bk vi, ch
2 548c-549c; bk vii, ch 15
[1039^31-1040*8]
563d-564a; bk ix, ch 10
[1051^6-17] 577d;
BK XI, ch 8 593a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^^12-27]
339d-340a;  bk  hi, ch 3 [iii2*i9-'^i2] 358a-c; BK VI, ch 3 [1139^18-24]
388b-c; ch 5 389a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1357*14-39]
596d597a 17 Plotinus : Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3 79b-c / Sixth Ennead, tr
viii,  ch 10 347c-348a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 13,
ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  q  16,  a  i,  rep 2 94b-95c; q 57, a 3, ans
297b-298a;  q 79, a 9, REP 3 422b-423d; q 86, aa 3-4 463b-464d; Q 116, A
I,  ans  592d-593d  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv, 272b *- 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11  2a-3b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 29-30 384d385c; PROP
44  389b-390a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  233-241  213b-217b  / Arithmetical
Triangle,  460a-468b  / Correspondence with Fermat, 474a-477b; 479b-486a
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 70 197a-b; bk iv, ch
hi, sect 14 316b-d; sect 29 322c-323a; ch vi, sect 5-16 332b336d passim;
ch   xv-xvi   365a-371c;   ch   xvh,  SECT2  371d-372b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect vi 469d470d; SECT x, div 86-91 488d-491c passim, esp
Div  87  489b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 228c-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  285c-d / Judgement, 603d-604b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 65a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  188a-190c; bk ix, 365a-c; bk x,
441b-d; bk xiii, 584c585b; epilogue i, 646c-647b; epilogue ii, 694d-695c
53  James:  Psychology,  851b esp [fn i] 54 Freud: General Introduction,
454b-c  5.  The  control  of  chance  or  contingency  by  art  7 Plato:
Euthydemus, 69a-71a / Gorgias, 253a / Laws, BK IV, 679a-c; bk x, 760a-b

[248a]
(5. Tbe control of chance or contingency by art.) 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch ii
[95*3-9] 129d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch i
[980^
25-981*5]  499b;  BK  XII,  ch  3  [1070*4-9] 599b 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals , bk i, ch i
[640*25-33] 162d / Ethics, bk i, ch 9 [1099^1824] 345a-b; bk ii, ch 4 [1105*18-26] 350d; bk
III, ch 3
[1112*19-^12] 358a-c; bk
vi, ch 4
[1140*10-23] 388d-389a / Politics, bk
i, ch ii
[1258^35-36] 453b; bk
ii, ch ii [1273^17-24] 470b; BK VII, ch 13 [1332*28-32] 537a / Rhetoric,
bk I, CH I [1354*1-11] 593a; ch 5
[1361*^
39-1362*4] 602c 10 Hippocrates : Ancient Medicine, par i la-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk xii
[391-440]
364b365b  19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  57,  A 3, ANS
297b-298a;  part  i-ii,  q  14, a 4, ans 679b'd 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  xiii  [5284]  126a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 52c-53c; 377a-d 26
Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  hi,  sc  iv  [2966]  340c-d  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  50c-51d;  56b-57b;  85c-86c; 90b-91a / Novum
Organum,  BK I, APH 8 107c-d; aph 82, 121a; aph 108109 128d-129c; bk ii,
aph  31  159d-161a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii, div 67
480c-481a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452a-b  47 Goethe: Faust, prelude
[134-157] 4a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 183b-184a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
iv,  188a-190c;  BK IX, 359a-365c; bk x, 425b-426a; 441b442c; 445d-448c;
456a-459d  esp  458c-459d;  bk  XI,  471c-472b; 505a-507a esp 505d-506a,
507a;  bk  xiii, 563c-575a esp 563c-564d, 570d572a, 573c-575a; 582a-587d
esp 584c-585b; bk xiv, 609a-613d; bk xv, 618b-621b 53 James: Psychology,
673a-b 6. Chance and fortune in human afifairs: the mythology of Fortune
6a.  Chance  and  fortune  in  the life of the individual Old Testament:
Ecclesiastes,  9:11  4  Homer:  Iliad  3a'179d  esp  bk  xxiv  [522-551]
176d-177a  5 Aeschylus: Persians [909-1076] 24d-26d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the King 99a-113a,c esp
[1522-1530] 113c / Antigone [1155-1171] 140d141a
/ Trachiniae
[1-48]
170a-c;
[293-306]
172c-d;  [932-946]  178b  /  Philoctetes  [500-506]  186c  5  Euripides:
Heracleidae  248a-257a,c  esp [853866] 255d / Suppliants [263-270] 260c;
[549557] 263a / Trojan Women 270a-281a,c esp
[1200-1206] 280a-b / Heracles Mfli365a-377d
esp [474-496] 369a

[248b]
190  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6 to 6a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 7b-8a; 46c; bk
III,  91d-92b;  98a-99a;  116a-b;  bk  vii,  225b-d; 252b-c 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  398c-d  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /
Republic, bk x, 439b-440c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 5
[197*25-32]
274a-b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch 9-10 345a-346c; BK VII, CH 13
[1153^^14-24]  405a  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  CH  I [1323^22-36] 527c-d /
Rhetoric,  bk  i, CH 5 [1361^39-1362*11] 602c-d; ch 10 [1368^ 33-1369*7]
612a-b;
[1369*31-^5]
612c-d; bk II, CH 12
[1388^31-1389*1]
636a; ch 15-17 638a-639a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b;
sect  17  259b-d;  bk hi, sect 4 260b-261a; SECT lo-ii 261d-262b; bk iv,
sect  26  265d;  SECT  33-36 266C'd; sect 44 267b; sect 49 268a-c; bk v,
sect  8 269d-270b; sect 24 272c; sect 27 272d; bk vi, sect ii 274c; sect
20  276a; sect 39 277d; sect 58 279d; bk vii, sect 8 280b; sect 34 282a;
sect  54 283b; SECT 57-58 283c-d; sect 68 284c-d; sect 75 285c; bk viii,
sect  17  286d; sect 32 287d-288a; sect 35 288b; sect 44-47 289a-c; sect
51  289d-290a;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d294a; bk x, sect 3 296d; sect 5-6
296d-297b; SECT 25 299c; sect 33 300c-301a; sect 35 301b; BK XII, sect 3
307b-d;  sect  n-14  308b-c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [194-209] 108a-b;
[595624] 119b-120a; bk xii [391-440] 364b-365b;
[631-649] 370b-371a
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d;  74c-75c  /  Sulla, 370c-371b / Sertorius,
457b,d-458b  / Pompey, 535c-d / Demetrius, 739c-740d; 744b-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  vi,  91b-d  /  Histories, bk IV, 281a-b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 10 46a-b / Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b passim /
Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
4-6  20a-d;  BK  VII,  par  8-10  45d-47a / City of God, bk iv, CH 18-19
197c-198b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[49-99]
lOa-c; XV
[22-99]
21b-22a; paradise, viii
[94-148] 118a-c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 120-122 16b-17a; bk ii,
stanza  40-42 26b27a; bk hi, stanza 89 66a; bk iv, stanza 41 94a; stanza
55-56 95b-96a / Words ofthe Host
[12,226-231] 371a /
Tale of Melibeus, par 42 419a-b / Mon}(s T^/<f 434a-448b 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xxv 35a-36b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 79b-80d; 81b-c 24
Rabelais:   Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  144d-156c;  158b-178a;
204c-215c;  bk  iv,  258c259d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 26d-28a; 52c-53c;
100a101c; 169c-170a;'302b-306a passim; 312d-

[249a]
u  Chapter  9: CHANCE 191 314b; 318a-319b; 393b 394a; 451d 452d; 484b-d;
489b-490c;   506d-508a;  514d-515a  26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors
149a-169d  esp  ACT I, sc I [29-159] 149b-150d / Merchant of Venice, act
ii, sc i
[23-46] 411d-412a
/ Henry F, act hi, sc vi
[21-40] 547d-548a /
Julius  Caesar, act i, sc h [135-141] 570d; act IV, sc HI [218-224] 590d
/  As  You  Like It, act I, sc II [29-60] 599b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act i, sc iv [23-37] 36a-b; act hi, sc ii [68-79] 49c-d; [210-223] 51b /
Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc iii [1-54] 108a-c; act hi, sc hi
[74-174] 123b-124b /
Airs  Well  That  Ends Well, act v, sc ii [1-36] 169a-c / King Lear, act
ii, sc ii
[162-180]
257d-258a; act iv, sc i [1-9] 269b-c / Aiitony and Cleopatra, act iv, sc
xii  [19-30]  341b-c  / Timon of Athens, act i, sc i [63-94] 394b-c; ACT
IV, sc hi
[3-18] 410c-d
/ Sonnets, xxv 590a; cxi 603b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part h, 408c 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 76d-77a 32 Milton: On Time 12ah 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect vih, div 67-70 480c-482c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,   194b-195a;  202b208b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  15d;  32a-d;
275d-276a;  283a-b;  310b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 44d-47b 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  347b-c  /  Utilitarianism,  45 2d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  hi, 311a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
158b-159a;  237a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk iv, 188a-190c; BK V,
221b-d;  epilogue i, 646c-650c; epilogue II, 688a-696d passim 6b. Chance
and  fortune  in  politics  and history 5 Aeschylus: Persians [909-1076]
24d-26d  6  Herodotus : HzV/ory, bk i, 2b; bk vii, 225b-d; 252b-c CROSS-
REFERENCES  For:  Other  discussions  of  the  issue  of determinism and
chance, see Fate 3, 5-6; History 43(1); 6d(3); Necessity and Contingency
4a; Opinion i, 3b; Science 4e; Truth 4d. Vice 6c; Wealth loa.

[249b]
6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 368d369a; bk iv, 451a-c; 462a b;
hk  v, 506a-c; bk VII, 560a-b 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 366a-c / Laws, bk
iv,  679a-c  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch ii [i273*'i7-24] 470b; BK
VII, CH 13 [1332*28-32] 537a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [441-495] 115a-116b
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  18d  /  Camillus,  107b-c; 109c 110a / Timoleon
195a-213d   csp   196b,   203b,  205b-c  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  225a-c  /
Philopoemen,  300b-c  /  Phocion,  604b,d-605d  / Demosthenes, 698b-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk iii, 49b-c; bk vi, 91b-d / Histories, bk iv, 281a-b
18  Augustine: City ofGod, bk v, ch i 207d-208c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, vii
[49-99]
lOa-c;  paradise,  xvi [73-87] 131a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
i,  stanza  20  3b; BK V, STANZA 221 149a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi,
8c-9b;  ch  vii,  lOa-c; CH xxi, 32d; ch xxiv-xxv, 34d-36b 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 52c-53c; 136b-139b; 451d-452d 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act
iv, sc hi
[215-224] 590d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect viii, div 70, 481d-482a 40 GihBO^:
Decline and Fall, 609b-c; 615a; 630b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 590a-b
43  Federalist:  number  i, 29a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part hi,
par  323324 107a-d; par 340 llOb-c; par 345 111b / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro, 166b-c; part hi, 300c-301c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [10,849-872]
264a-b  50  Marx:  Capital,  378b-d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk ix,
359a-365c; BK X, 389a-391c; 447c-448c; 449a; 456a-459d esp 458c-459d; bk
xi,  505a-507a  esp  505d506a, 507a; epilogue i, 646c-650c; epilogue II,
688a-696d passim

[250a]
192  THE  GREAT  IDEAS I. Plutarch. "Of Fortune," "Of the TranquiUity of
the Mind," in Moralia F. Bacon. "Of Fortune," in Essays Hume. A Treatise
ofHuman Nature, bk i, part hi, SECT XI-XIII Kant. Introduction to Logic,
x  J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  hi,  ch  17-18  Freud.  The
Psychopathology  ofEveryday  Life,  ch  12  W.  James.  "The  Dilemma of
Determinism,"  in  The Will to Believe . Some Problems of Philosophy, ch
9-13  II.  Boethius. The CoJisolation of Philosophy, bk ii, iv-v SuAREZ.
Disptttationes   Metaphysicae,  xix  (12)  J.  Butler.  The  Analogy  of
Religion,  intro Voltaire. "Change or Generation of Events," "Necessary-
Necessity,"   "Power-Omnipotence,"   in   A   Philosophical   Dictionary
Schopenhauer.  On the Fourfold Root ofthe Principle of Sufficient Reason
Laplace.  A  Philosophical Essay on Probabilities De Morgan. An Essay on
Probabilities  Cournot.  Exposition  de  la  theorie  des chances et des
probabilites Boole. An Investigation ofthe Laws of Thought, ch 16-18, 21
Todhunter. History ofthe Mathematical Theory of Probability

[250b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts  concerning the pubhcation of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibhography  of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of The Great Ideas. Venn. The Logic of Chance Whitworth. Choice
and  Cha?jce BouTRoux. The Contingency oft/ie Laws of Nature Jevons. The
Principles  of  Science,  ch  10-12  Bradley.  The  Principles of Logic,
Terminal  Essays,  VIII  C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers, vol ii, par
645-754;  VOL VI, par 35-65 T. Hardy. Life's Little Ironies Pearson. The
Chances  of Death Meyerson. Identity and Reality, ch 9 PoiNCARE. Science
and  Hypothesis,  part  iv,  ch  ii  .  Science  and  Method, bk i, ch 4
Henderson.  The  Fitness of the Environment N. R. Campbell. Physics; the
Elements,  ch  7  W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic, part hi, ch 2 J. M. Keynes. A
Treatise  on  Probability,  part  i-ii, iv-v G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of
Science,  essay  vi  Dewey. The Questfor Certainty, ch i Heisenberg. The
Physical  Principles  ofthe  Quantum  Theory  Nagel.  On  the  Logic  of
Measurement  M.  R.  Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk i, ch 3(4) Maritain. a
Preface  to  Metaphysics,  lect  vii  Reichenbach. Theory of Probability
Santayana. The Realm of Truth, ch 11 VoN Neumann and Morgenstern. Theory
ofGames  and  Economic  Behavior  Jeffreys.  Theory  of  Probability  B.
Russell. Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part v

[251a]
Chapter lo: CHANGE INTRODUCTION FROM the pre-Socratic physicists and the
ancient  philosophers  to  Darwin,  Marx, and James—and, in our own day,
Dewey  and  Whitehead—  the  fact  of  change  has been a major focus of
speculative and scientific inquiry. Except by Parmenides and his school,
the  existence  of  change  has never been denied. Nor can it be without
rejecting  all  sense-perception  as  illusory,  which is precisely what
Zeno's  paradoxes  seem  to do, according to one interpretation of them.
But  if  argument cannot refute the testimony of the senses, neither can
reasoning  support  it. The fact of change, because it is evident to the
senses, does not need proof. Thai change is, is evident, but what change
is,  is  neither  evident nor easy to define. What principles or factors
are common to every sort of change, how change or becoming is related to
permanence  or  being,  what sort of existence belongs to mutable things
and  to  change  itself  these  are  questions  to which answers are not
obtainable  merely  by observation. Nor will simple observation, without
the  aid  of  experiment,  measurement,  and  mathematical  calculation,
discover  the  laws  and properties of motion. The analysis of change or
motion has been a problem for the philosophers of nature. They have been
concerned  with  the  definition  of  change, its relation to being, the
classification of the kinds of change. The measurement of motion, on the
other  hand,  and the mathematical formulation of its laws have occupied
the experimental natural scientists. Both natural philosophy and natural
science  share  a  common  subject  matter,  though  they approach it by
different methods and with different interests. Both are entitled to use
the name "physics" for their subject matter. The Greek word phiisis from
which "physics" comes has, as its Latin equivalent, the word

[251b]
natura  from  which "nature" comes. In their original significance, both
words  had reference to the sensible world of changing things, or to its
underlying  principle—  to the ultimate source of change. The physics of
the  philosopher  and  the  physics of the empirical scientist are alike
inquiries  concerning  the nature of things, not in every respect but in
regard  to  their  change  and motion. The conclusions of both inquiries
have  metaphysical implications for the nature of the physical world and
for  the  character  of  physical existence. The philosopher draws these
implications  for  being  from  the study of becoming. The scientist, in
turn,  draws  upon  philosophical  distinctions  in  order to define the
objects of his study. Galileo, for example, in separating the problem of
freely  falling  bodies  from  the  motion  of  projectiles, employs the
traditional   philosophical  distinction  between  natural  and  violent
motion.  The  analysis  of  time and space (basic variables in Newtonian
mechanics), the distinction between discontinuous and continuous change,
and  the  problem  of the divisibility of a continuous motion— these are
philosophical  considerations pre-supposed by the scientific measurement
of  motion. We have so far used the words "change" and "motion," as well
as  "becoming," as if all three were interchangeable in meaning. That is
somewhat  inaccurate,  even  for  the ancients who regarded all kinds of
change  except  one as motions; it is much less accurate for the moderns
who  have  tended to restrict the meaning of "motion" to local motion or
change  of  place.  It  is  necessary, therefore, to examine briefly the
kinds  of  change  and  to  indicate the problems which arise with these
distinctions.  In  his  physical treatises, Aristotle distinguishes four
kinds of change. "When the change

[252a]
194  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  from  contrary  to contrary is in quantity,'" he
writes,  "it  is  'growth  and  diminution';  when it is in place, it is
'motion';  when  it  is  .  . . in quality, it is 'alteration'; but when
nothing  persists of which the resultant is a property (or an 'accident'
in any sense of the term), it is 'coming to be,' and the converse change
is  'passing  away.'  "  Aristotle  also  uses  other  pairs  of words —
"generation"  and  "corruption," "becoming" and "perishing"— to name the
last  kind  of change. Of the four kinds of change, only the last is not
called "motion." But in the context of saying that "becoming cannot be a
motion," Aristotle also remarks that "every motion is a kind of change."
He  does not restrict the meaning of motion to change in place, which is
usually   called  "local  motion"  or  "locomotion."  There  are,  then,
according  to  Aristotle's  vocabulary, three kinds of motion: (i) local
motion,  in  which  bodies change from place to place; (2) alteration or
qualitative  motion,  in  which  bodies  change  with  respect  to  such
attributes as color, texture, or temperature; (3) increase and decrease,
or  quantitative  motion,  in  which  bodies  change  in  size.  And, in
addition, there is the one kind of change which is not motion generation
and  corruption.  This consists in the coming to be or passing away of a
body  which,  while it has being, exists as an individual substance of a
certain  sort. Becoming and perishing are most readily exemphfied by the
birth  and  death  of  living  things,  but  Aristotle also includes the
transformation  of water into ice or vapor as examples of generation and
corruption. One distinctive characteristic of generation and corruption,
in   Aristotle's   conception   of   this   type  of  change,  is  their
instantaneity.  He  thinks  that  the  other  three  kinds of change are
continuous  processes,  taking  time,  whereas things come into being or
pass away instantaneously. Aristotle thus applies the word "motion" only
to  the  continuous  changes  which time can measure. He never says that
time  is  the  measure  of  change, but only of motion. But the contrast
between  the  one mode of change which is not motion and the three kinds
of  motion  involves  more  than this difference with regard to time and
continuity. Aristotle's analysis considers the subject of change— that

[252b]
which  undergoes  transformation—and  the  starting-point  and  goal  of
motion.  "Every  motion,"  he  says,  "proceeds  from  something  and to
something,  that which is directly in motion being distinct from that to
which it is in motion and that from which it is in motion; for instance,
we  may  take  the  three things 'wood,' 'hot,' and 'cold,' of which the
first  is that which is in motion, the second is that which to which the
motion  proceeds,  and the third is that from which it proceeds." In the
alteration  which  occurs  when the wood changes quality, just as in the
increase  or  decrease which occurs with a body's change in quantity and
in  the  local  motion  which occurs with a body's change of place, that
which  changes  persists  throughout  the  change  as  the  same kind of
substance.  The  wood  does  not cease to be wood when it becomes hot or
cold;  the stone does not cease to be a stone when it rolls from here to
there,  or  the  organism  an  animal of a certain kind when it grows in
size. In all these cases, "the substratum"— that which is the subject of
change—  "persists  and  changes  in its own properties. . . . The body,
although  persisting  as  the same body, is now healthy and now ill; and
the bronze is now spherical and at another time angular, and yet remains
the  same  bronze."  Because the substance of the changing thing remains
the  same  while  changing in its properties i.e., in such attributes or
accidents  as  quality,  quantity,  and place—Aristotle groups the three
kinds  of  motion together as accidental change. The changing thing does
not  come  to be or pass away absolutely, but only in a certain respect.
In  contrast,  generation  and  corruption  involve a change in the very
substance of a thing. "When nothing perceptible persists in its identity
as  a  substratum, and the thing changes as a whole," then, according to
Aristotle,  "it is a coming-to-be of one substance, and the passing-away
of  another."  In such becoming or perishing, it is matter itself rather
than  a  body  or  a  substance which is transformed. Matter takes on or
loses  the  form  of  a certain kind of substance. For example, when the
nutriment is assimilated to the form of a living body, the bread or corn
becomes  the  flesh  and  blood  of a man. When an animal dies, its body
decomposes into the ele-

[253a]
ments  of  inorganic matter. Because it is a change of substance itself,
Aristotle  calls  the one kind of change which is not motion substantial
change, and speaks of it as "a coming-tobe or passing-away simply"— that
is, not in a certain respect, but absolutely or "without qualification."
These  distinctions  are  involved in a long tradition of discussion and
controversy.  They  cannot  be affirmed or denied without opposite sides
being taken on the fundamental issues concerning substance and accident,
matter  and  form,  and  the causes of change or motion. The adoption or
rejection  of  these  distinctions  affects one's view of the difference
between  inorganic  and  organic  change, and the difference between the
motions  of  matter  and  the  changes  which  take  place  in mind. The
statement  of  certain  problems  is  determined  accordingly;  as,  for
example,  the  problem  of  the  transmutation  of  the  elements, which
persists  in  various  forms  from  the  physics of the ancients through
mediaeval  alchemy  and  the  beginnings  of modern chemistry to present
considerations  of  radioactivity  and  atomic  fission.  Since the 17TH
century,  motion  has been identified with local motion. "I can conceive
no other kind" of motion, Descartes writes, "and do not consider that we
ought  to  conceive  any other in nature." As it is expressed "in common
parlance,"  motion,  he  says, "is nothing more than the action by which
any  body  passes '' from one place to another. This can hardly be taken
to mean that change of place is the only observable type of change. That
other  kinds  of  change are observable cannot be denied. The science of
mechanics  or  dynamics  may  be primarily or exclusively concerned with
local   motions,  but  other  branches  of  natural  science,  certainly
chemistry,  deal  with  qualitative  transformations; and the biological
sciences  study growth and decay, birth and death. The emphasis on local
motion  as  the  only kind of motion, while it does not exclude apparent
changes  of  other sorts, does raise a question about their reality. The
question  can  be  put  in  several  ways.  Are  the  various apparently
different kinds of change really distinct, or can they all be reduced to
aspects of one underlying

[253b]
Chapter  10:  CHANGE  195  mode  of  change which is local motion ? Even
supposing  that the kinds of change are not reducible to one another, is
local motion primary in the sense that it is involved in all the others?
When  mechanics  dominates the physical sciences (as has been so largely
the  case  in  modern  times),  there  is  a  tendency to reduce all the
observable  diversity  of change to various appearances of local motion.
Newton,  for  example, explicitly expresses this desire to formulate all
natural  phenomena in terms of the mechanics of moving particles. In the
Preface  to  the  first  edition  of  his Mathematical Principles, after
recounting  his success in dealing with celestial phenomena, he says, "I
wish  we  could  derive  the rest of the phenomena of Nature by the same
kind  of  reasoning from mechanical principles, for I am induced by many
reasons to suspect that they may all depend upon certain forces by which
the  particles  of  bodies,  by some causes hitherto unknown, are either
mutually impelled towards one another, and cohere in regular figures, or
are  repelled  and  recede from one another." The notion that all change
can be reduced to the results of local motion is not, however, of modern
origin. Lucretius expounds the theory of the Greek atomists that all the
phenomena of change can be explained by reference to the local motion of
indivisible particles coming together and separating. Change of place is
the  only  change  which  occurs  on  the level of the ultimate physical
reality.  The  atoms  neither  come  to  be nor pass away, nor change in
quality or size. But though we find the notion in ancient atomism, it is
only  in  modern  physics  that  the emphasis upon local motion tends to
exclude  all  other  kinds of change. It is characteristic of what James
calls "the modern mechanicophysical philosophy" to begin "by saying that
the  only  facts  are collocations and motions of primordial solids, and
the only laws the changes of motion which changes in collocation bring."
James  quotes  Helmholtz  to  the  effect  that  "the  ultimate  goal of
theoretic physics is to find the last unchanging causes of the processes
of  Nature." If, to this end, "we imagine the world composed of elements
with unalterable qualities," then, Helmholtz continues, "the only

[254a]
196  THE GREAT IDEAS changes that can remain in such a world are spatial
changes,  i.e., movements, and the only outer relations which can modify
the action of the forces are spatial too, or, in other words, the forces
are  motor  forces  dependent for their effect on spatial relations." In
the  history  of physics, Aristotle represents the opposite view. No one
of  the  four kinds of change which he distinguishes has for him greater
physical  reality  than the others. Just as quality cannot be reduced to
quantity,  or  either  of these to place, so in his judgment the motions
associated  with  these  terms  are  irreducible  to  one  another.  Yet
Aristotle  does assign to local motion a certain primacy. "Motion in its
most  general  and primary sense," he writes, "is change of place, which
we  call  locomotion."  He does not mean merely that this is the primary
sense  of  the  word,  but rather that no other kind of motion can occur
without  local motion being somehow involved in the process. Showing how
increase  and  decrease  depends  on  alteration,  and  how that in turn
depends  on  change of place, he says that "of the three kinds of motion
...  it  is  this last, which we call locomotion, that must be primary."
The  shift  in  meaning  of the word "motion" would not by itself mark a
radical  departure  in  the theory of change, but it is accompanied by a
shift  in  thought  which has the most radical consequences. At the same
time  that  motion  is identified with local motion, Descartes conceives
motion  as  something completely actual and thoroughly intelligible. For
the  ancients,  becoming  of  any  sort  had  both less reality and less
intelligibility   than  being.  Aristotle  had  defined  motion  as  the
actuality  of  that which is potential in a respect in which it is still
potential  to  some degree. According to what Descartes calls its strict
as  opposed  to  its popular meaning, motion is "the transference of one
part of matter or one body from the vicinity of those bodies that are in
immediate  contact  with  it, and which we regard as in repose, into the
vicinity  of  others."  This definition—contrasted with the Aristotelian
conception  which it generally supersedes in the subsequent tradition of
natural  science—  is  as  revolutionary  as  the  Cartesian  analytical
geometry is by comparison with the Euclidean. Nor

[254b]
is  it an unconnected fact that the analytical geometry prepares the way
for  the  differential  calculus  that  is  needed  to  measure variable
motions, their velocities, and their accelerations. The central point on
which  the  two  definitions  are  opposed  constitutes  one of the most
fundamental  issues  in  the philosophy of nature. Does motion involve a
transition  from potential to actual existence, or only the substitution
of  one  actual  state for another—only a "transportation," as Descartes
says,  from  one place to another.? While motion is going on, the moving
thing, according to Aristotle's definition, must be partly potential and
partly  actual  in  the  same respect. The leaf turning red, while it is
altering^  has  not yet fully reddened. When it becomes as red as it can
get, it can no longer change in that respect. Before it began to change,
it was actually green; and since it could become red, it was potentially
red. But while the change is in process, the potentiality of the leaf to
become  red is being actualized. This actualization progresses until the
change  is completed. The same analysis would apply to a ball in motion.
Until  it  comes  to  rest  in a given place, its potentiality for being
there is undergoing progressive actualization. In short, motion involves
some  departure  from  pure  potentiality  in a given respect, and never
complete  attainment  of full actuality in that same respect. When there
is  no  departure  from potentiality, motion has not yet begun; when the
attainment  of  actuality  is  complete,  the motion has terminated. The
Aristotelian  definition of motion is the object of much ridicule in the
17th century. Repeating the phrasing which had become traditional in the
schools— "the actuafization of what exists in potentiality, in so far as
it  is potential"—Descartes asks: "Now who understands these words ? And
who  at  the  same  time does not know what motion is? Will not everyone
admit  that  those  philosophers  have  been  trying to find a knot in a
bulrush  .f*"  Locke  also  finds  it  meaningless. "What more exquisite
jargon  could  the  wit  of  man invent than this definition . . . which
would  puzzle  any  rational man to whom it was not already known by its
famous absurdity, to guess what word it could ever be supposed to be the
explication of. If

[255a]
Tully,  asking a Dutchman what beweeginge was," Locke continues, "should
have  received  this  explication in his own language, that it was actus
entis  in  potentia  quatenus  in  potentia\  I  ask whether any one can
imagine   he  could  thereby  have  guessed  what  the  word  beweeginge
signified?"  Locke  does not seem to be satisfied with any definition of
motion. "The atomists, who define motion to be *a passage from one place
to another,' what do they more than put one synonymous word for another?
For  what  is  passage other than motion} . . . Nor will 'the successive
application  of  the superficies of one body to those of another,' which
the  Cartesians  give us, prove a much better definition of motion, when
well  examined." But though Locke rejects the definition of the atomists
and the Cartesians on formal grounds, he accepts their idea of motion as
simply change of place; whereas he dismisses the Aristotelian definition
as   sheer  absurdity  and  rejects  the  idea  that  motion  or  change
necessarily  involves a potentiality capable of progressive fulfillment.
As  we  have  already  remarked,  the  omission of potentiality from the
conception of motion is a theoretical shift of the deepest significance.
It  occurs  not  only  in Descartes' Principles of Philosophy and in the
atomism of Hobbes and Gassendi, but also in the mechanics of Galileo and
New^ton. According to these modern philosophers and scientists, a moving
body  is  always  actually  somewhere.  It occupies a different place at
every  moment in a continuous motion. The motion can be described as the
successive  occupation  by  the  body  of  different places at different
times.  Though  all  the  parts of the motion do not coexist, the moving
particle  is completely actual throughout. It loses no reality and gains
none  in  the course of the motion, since the various positions the body
occupies  lie  totally outside its material nature. It would, of course,
be more difficult to analyze alteration in color or biological growth in
these  terms,  but  it must be remembered that efforts have been made to
apply  such  an  analysis  through  the  reduction of all other modes of
change  to  local  motion.  The principle of inertia, first discerned by
Galileo,   is  critically  relevant  to  the  issue  between  these  two
conceptions of motion. It is

[255b]
Chapter  10:  CHANGE 197 stated by Newton as the first of his "axioms or
laws  of  motion."  "Every body,-" he writes, "continues in its state of
rest,  or  of  uniform motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to
change that state by forces impressed upon it." As applied to the motion
of  projectiles,  the law declares that they "continue in their motions,
so  far  as  they are not retarded by the resistance of air, or impelled
downwards  by  the  force  of  gravity."  In  his experimental reasoning
concerning  the  acceleration  of  bodies  moving  down inclined planes,
Galileo  argues that a body which has achieved a certain velocity on the
descent  would,  if it then proceeded along a horizontal plane, continue
infinitely  at  the  same  velocity  —except  for the retardation of air
resistance  and friction. "Any velocity once imparted to a moving body,"
he maintains, "will be rigidly maintained as long as the external causes
of  acceleration  or  retardation  are  removed."  So  in  the  case  of
projectiles,  they  would  retain the velocity and direction imparted to
them  by  the  cannon,  were  it  not for the factors of gravity and air
resistance. Bodies actually in motion possess their motion in themselves
as a complete actuality. They need no causes acting on them to keep them
in motion, but only to change their direction or bring them to rest. The
motion  of  projectiles  presents  a  difficulty  for  the  theory which
describes  all  motion  as a reduction of potency to act. "If everything
that is in motion, with the exception of things that move themselves, is
moved  by something else, how is it," Aristotle asks, "that some things,
e.g.,  things  thrown,  continue to be in motion when their movent is no
longer in contact with them ?" This is a problem for Aristotle precisely
because  he  supposes  that the moving cause must act on the thing being
moved  throughout  the  period of the motion. For the potentiality to be
progressively reduced to actualit}', it must be continuously acted upon.
Aristotle's  answer postulates a series of causes so that contact can be
maintained  between  the  projectile and the moving cause. "The original
movent,"  he writes, "gives the power of being a movent either to air or
to  water  or  to  something  else  of  the  kind, naturally adapted for
imparting  and  undergoing motion. . . . The motion begins to cease when
the motive force pro-

[256a]
198  THE GREAT IDEAS duced in one member of the consecutive series is at
each  stage  less  than  that possessed by the preceding m.ember, and it
finally  ceases when one member no longer causes the next member to be a
movent but only causes it to be in motion." It follows that inertia must
be  denied by those who hold that a moving body always requires a mover;
or  even  that  a  body  cannot  sustain itself in motion beyond a point
proportionate  to  the  quantity of the impressed force which originally
set it in motion. For the ancients, the basic contrast between being and
becoming  (or  between  the  permanent  and  the changing) is a contrast
between  the  intelligible  and  the  sensible.  This  is  most  sharply
expressed  in Plato's distinction between the sensible realm of material
things  and  the intelligible realm of ideas. "What is that which always
is and has no becoming," Timaeus asks; "and what is that which is always
becoming and never is?" He answers his own question by saying that "that
which  is  apprehended  by intelligence and reason is always in the same
state;  but  that  which  is  conceived  by  opinion  with  the  help of
sensations  and  without  reason, is always in a process of becoming and
perishing,  and  never  really  is."  Even though Aristotle differs from
Plato  in  thinking  that  change  and  the  changing  can be objects of
scientific  knowledge,  he,  too, holds becoming to be less intelligible
than  being,  precisely because change necessarily involves potentiahty.
Yet  becoming  can  be understood to the extent that we can discover the
principles  of  its  being—  the  unchanging  principles  of change. "In
pursuing  the  truth,"  Aristotle  remarks—and this applies to the truth
about  change  as  well  as  every tiling else— "one must start from the
things  that  are  always  in  the same state and suffer no change." For
Aristotle,   change  is  intelligible  through  the  three  elements  of
permanence  which  are  its  principles:  (i) the enduring substratum of
change,  and the contraries— (2) that to which, and (3) that from which,
the  change  takes place. The same principles are sometimes stated to be
(i)  matter, (2) form, and (3) privation; the matter or substratum being
that which both lacks a certain form and has a definite potentiality for
possessing it. Change occurs when

[256b]
the  matter  undergoes  a  transformation in ^vhich it comes to have the
form  of  which  it  was  deprived by the possession of a contrary form.
Neither  of  the  contrary  forms  changes.  Only the thing composite of
matter  and  form changes with respect to the forms of its matter. Hence
these principles of change are themselves unchanging. Change takes place
through,  not  in, them. As constituents of the changing thing, they are
the  principles of its mutable being, principles of its being as well as
of  its  being  mutable.  The explanation of change by reference to what
does  not  change  seems  to  be  common  to  all  theories of becoming.
Lucretius,  as  we  have  already  seen,  explains  the coming to be and
passing  away  of all other things by the motions of atoms which neither
come  to  be  nor  pass  away.  The  eternity of the atoms underlies the
mutability  of  everything  else.  Yet  the  atoms  are  not  completely
immutable.  They  move  forever  through  the  void  which, according to
Lucretius,  is  required  for  their  motion.  Their  local,  motion is,
moreover,  an  actual property of the atoms. For them, to be is to be in
motion.  Here  then,  as  in  the  Cartesian  theory, no potentiality is
involved, and motion is completely real and completely intelligible. The
notions  of  time and eternity are inseparable from the theory of change
or  motion.  As  the  chapters  on Time and Space indicate, local motion
involves  the  dimensions  of  space  as  well  as  time, but all change
requires  time,  and  time  itself is inconceivable apart from change or
motion.  Furthermore,  as  appears in the chapters on Time and Eternity,
the  two  fundamentally opposed meanings of eternity differ according to
whether  they  imply endless change or absolute changelessness. Eternity
is  sometimes  identified  with  infinite time. It is in this sense that
Plato,  in the Timaeus, refers to time as "the moving image of eternity"
and  implies  that  time,  which  belongs  to the realm of ever-changing
things,  resembles the eternal only through its perpetual endurance. The
other  sense of the eternal is also implied— the sense in which eternity
belongs  to the realm of immutable being. TTie eternal in this sense, as
Montaigne  points out, is not merely that "which never had beginning nor
never

[257a]
shall  have  ending,"  but  rather  that  "to  which  time  can bring no
mutation." There are two great problems which use the word "eternity" in
these opposite senses. One is the problem of the eternity of motion: the
question  whether  motion  has or can have either a beginning or an end.
The  other  is the problem of the existence of eternal objects—immutable
things  which  have  their  being  apart  from  time and change. The two
problems  are  connected  in  ancient  thought.  Aristotle, for example,
argues that "it is impossible that movement should either have come into
being  or  cease to be, for it must always have existed." Since "nothing
is  moved  at random, but there must always be something present to move
it,"  a cause is required to sustain the endless motions of nature. This
cause, which Aristotle calls "the prime mover," must be "something which
moves  without  being  moved,  being eternal, substance, and actuality."
Aristotle's  theory  of  a  prime mover sets up a hierarchy of causes to
account  for  the  different kinds of motion observable in the universe.
The perfect circular motion of the heavens serves to mediate between the
prime  mover  which  is  totally ujimoved and the less regular cycles of
terrestrial  change.  The  "constant  cycle"  of  movement  in the stars
differs  from  the  irregular  cycle  of "generation and destruction" on
earth.  For  the  first,  Aristotle  asserts the necessity of "something
which  is  always  moved  with an unceasing motion, which is motion in a
circle."  He  calls this motion of the first heavenly sphere "the simple
spatial  movement  of  the universe" as a whole. Besides this "there are
other  spatial  movements—  those of the planets —which are eternal" but
are "always acting in different ways" and so are able to account for the
other cycle in nature— the irregular cycle of generation and corruption.
In addition, a kind of changelessness is attributed to all the celestial
bodies  which  Aristotle  calls "eternal." Eternally in motion, they are
also  eternally  in being. Though not immovable, they are supposed to be
incorruptible  substances.  They never begin to be and never perish. The
theory  of  a  world  eternally  in  motion  is challenged by Jewish and
Christian theologians

[257b]
Chapter  10:  CHANGE  199  who  affirm, as an article of their religious
faith, that "in the beginning God created heaven and earth." The world's
motions,  like  its  existence, have a beginning in the act of creation.
Creation  itself,  Aquinas insists, is not change or motion of any sort,
"except according to our way of understanding. For change means that the
same  thing  should  be different now from what it was previously. . . .
But  in  creation,  by which the whole substance of a thing is produced,
the  same thing can be taken as different now and before, only according
to  our way of understanding, so that a thing is understood as first not
existing  at  all,  and  afterwards  as  existing." Since creation is an
absolute  coming  to  be from non-being, no pre-existent matter is acted
upon as in generation, in artistic production, or in any of the forms of
motion. The philosophical and theological issues concerning creation and
change,  eternity  and  time,  are  further discussed in the chapters on
Cause,  Eternity, and World. Other problems arising from the analysis of
change must at least be briefly mentioned here. Though less radical than
the  difference  between creation and change, the difference between the
motions of inert or non-living things and the vital activities of plants
and  animals  raises  for  any theory of change the question whether the
same  principles apply to both. The rolling stone and the running animal
both  move  locally, but are both motions locomotion in the same sense.?
Augmentation  occurs both in the growth of a crystal and the growth of a
plant,  but  are  both  of them growing in the same sense ? In addition,
there  seems  to  be  one  kind  of change in living things which has no
parallel  in  the movements of inert bodies. Animals and men learn. They
acquire  knowledge,  form  habits and change them. Can change of mind be
explained  in  the  same  terms  as  change  in  matThe issues raised by
questions  of  this  sort  are  more  fully discussed in the chapters on
Animal,  Habit, and Life. Certain other issues must be entirely reserved
for  discussion  elsewhere. The special problems of local motion—such as
the  properties  of  rectilinear  and  circular  motion, the distinction
between  uniform  and  variable  motion,  and  the  uniform  or variable
accelera-

[258a]
200  THE GREAT IDEAS tion of the latter—are problems which belong to the
chapters  on  Astronomy  and  Mechanics. Change, furthermore, is a basic
fact  not  only  for  the  natural scientist, but for the historian— the
natural   historian   or   the   historian   of  man  and  society.  The
considerations  relevant  to  this aspect of change receive treatment in
the   chapters   on   Evolution,   History,  and  Progress.  Even  these
ramifications  of  discussion do not exhaust the significance of change.
The  cyclical course of the emotions and the alternation of pleasure and
pain have been thought inexplicable without reference to change of state
in  regard to desire and aversion— the motion from want to satisfaction,
or  from  possession  to deprivation. Change is not only a factor in the
analysis  of emotion, but it is also itself an object of man's emotional
attitudes.  It is both loved and hated, sought and avoided. According to
Pascal,  man  tries  desperately  to  avoid  a  state  of  rest. He does
everything  he  can  to  keep  things  in  flux. "Our nature consists in
motion,"  he  writes;  "complete  rest  is  death.  .  . . Nothing is so
insufferable  to  man,"  he  continues,  "as  to  be completely at rest,
without  pas1.  The  nature  and  reality  of  change  or  motion 2. The
unchanging  principles  of  change  2a. The constituents of the changing
thing  2^. The factor of opposites or contraries in change 4. Motion and
rest:  contrary motions 5. The measure of motion 5^. Time or duration as
the  measure  of motion 5^. The divisibility and continuity of motion 6.
The  kinds  of change 6a. The reducibility of all modes of motion to one
kind of change 61?. The primacy of local motion 6c. Comparison of change
in living and non-living things

[258b]
sions, without business, without diversion, without study. He then feels
his  nothingness,  his  foriornness,  his  dependence, his weakness, his
emptiness." Darwin does not think that the desire for change is peculiar
to  man.  "The lower animals," he writes, "are . . . likewise capricious
in  their  affections,  aversions,  and  sense  of beauty. There is also
reason to suspect that they love novelty for its own sake." But men also
wish to avoid change. The old Prince Bolkonski, in War and Peace, "could
not  comprehend  how  anyone  could  wish to alter his life or introduce
anything  new  into  it."  This is not merely an old man's view. For the
most  part, it is permanence rather than transiency, the enduring rather
than  the  novel,  which  the  poets  celebrate  when they express man's
discontent  with  his own mutability. The withering and perishing of all
mortal  things,  the assault of time and change upon all things familiar
and  loved,  have  moved  them  to  elegy  over  the  evanescent and the
ephemeral.  From Virgil's Sunt lacrimae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt
to  Shakespeare's  "Love  is  not  love  which alters when it alteration
finds,"  the  poets have mourned the inevitability of change. OUTLINE OF
TOPICS PAGB 202 203 204 205 206

[259a]
ya.   Space,  place,  and  void  jb.  Natural  and  violent  motion  (i)
Rectilinear and rotary or circular motion (2) Uniform or variable motion
(3) Absolute or relative motion (4) Terrestrial and celestial motion yd.
The  properties of variable motion : the laws of motion 8j. The increase
and  decrease  of  inanimate  bodies  SI?. Growth in living organisms 9.
Change   of   quality  gb.  Biological  change:  vital  alterations  10.
Substantial  change:  generation  and corruption 10b. Plant, animal, and
human  reproduction  I  or.  The incorruptibility of atoms, the heavenly
bodies,  and  spiritual  substances  11.  The apprehension of change: by
sense,  by  reason  212  12.  Em.otional aspects of change 12a. Rest and
motion  in  relation  to  pleasure  and pain 12^. The love and hatred of
change  13.  The problem of the eternity of motion or change 213 14. The
theory  of  the prime mover: the order and hierarchy of movers and moved
214  15.  The immutable i5«. The immutability of the objects of thought:
the realm of truth 15c. The immutability of God ;28£-:b08!:

[259b]
Chapter 10: CHANGE 2&i PAGE

[260a]
202 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. The nature and
reality of change or motion 7 Plato: Cratylus, 86b-89b; 94c-d; 99b-104b;
ll23i-llAsi,c  /  Phaedrus,  124c-126c  / Symposium, 165c-166b / Phaedo,
231c-232b  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  322d-323a;  bk v, 370a-373c / Timaeus,
447b-d;  455c-458b  passim; 460c-d / Parmenides, 504c-505c / Theaetetus,
517d-534b  esp  517d-518b,  532a-534b  /  Sophist, 564d574c / Statesman,
587a-b  /  Philebus,  632a-d  /  Laws,  bk  X, 760a-765d esp 762b-765d 8
Aristotle:   Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [184*^15-185*14]  259b-d;  ch  4-9
262a-268d; bk hi, ch 1-3 278a-280c; bk iv, ch ii
[219^9-31] 299b-d;
bk VI, CH 6 319c-321a / Heavens, bk iv, ch 3
[310^22-311*12] 402b-c; CH 4 [311^29-33] 403c
/ Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10
[336^25-34] 438d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 3-10 501c-511d passim; bk iv, ch 2
[1004^27-29]
523d; CH 5
[1010*6-38]
529c-530a; ch 8
[1012^22-33] 532d; BK IX, ch 3
[1047*10-29]
572b-c; ch 6 573c-574c; ch 8 [1049^29-1050*3] 575c-d; ch 10 [1051^28-30]
578a;  bk xi, ch 6 590d-592b; ch 9 593d-594d; ch 11-12 596a598a,c esp ch
ii  [1067^15-1068*7]  596b-d,  ch  12  [1068^20-25] 597c-d; bk xii, ch 5
[1070^361071*4] 600b-c / Soul, BK I, ch 7, [406^11-14! 636a; bk hi, ch 7
[431*1-8] 663c

[260b]
Symbols:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's attention to one or
more especially 9 Aristotle : Generation ofAnimals, bk v, ch i
[778^2-7] 320c-d / Ethics, bk x, ch 4 [1174*13-
^14]  428b-429a  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 2 167b168c 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic, bk i, 811b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
i [146-448] 2d-6c; BK II
[62-332]
15d-19b;
[1105-1174]
29a-30a,c;  bk v [235-415] 64a-66c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect
35-36  266d;  sect  42-43 267b; sect 46 267c; bk v, sect 23 272b; bk vi,
sect  15  275a-b;  bk  vii,  sect 18 281a; sect 50 283a; bk viii, sect 6
285d-286a;  bk  ix, sect 19 293b; sect 28 293d-294a 16 Kepler: Harmonies
ofthe World, 1051b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 3-4 36b37b; tr v
57d-60c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  15-22 260c-264c; tr hi, ch 21-28
293a-297b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 15-17 23a-c; bk vii, par
17-18  49a-b; bk xi, par 6 90c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
2,  A  3,  ANs 12c-14a; q 9, a i, ans and rep i 38c39c; Q 10, A 4, rep 3
43b-44b;  a  5,  ans  44b45c;  Q  18,  a  I,  ans  104c-105c; a 3, rep i
106b-107c;  q  23, a i, rep 3 132c-133b; q 53, A I, rep 2-3 280d-282a; a
3, ans 283b-284d;

[261a]
2  to  la  Chapter  10: CHANGE 203 Q 65, A 4 342b-343c; q 67, a 3, rep i
351b352a;  a  4,  ans  352a-354a;  q  7^, a i, rep 2 370a-371a; a 2, ans
371b-d;  q  79,  a  9,  ans 422b-423d; q 103, a 5, rep 2 531b 532b; PART
i-ii,  Q  10, A I, REP 2 662ci-663d; q 2:^, AA 3-4 725c-727a; q 25, a i,
ans  and  rep  2  730b-731b;  q  31, a 3, rep 2 754a-d; a 8 758b-759a 20
Aquinas:  Sunmia Theologica, part hi, q 15, A 10, rep I 795b-796a; q 62,
a  4 861a-862a; part III suppL, Q 91, A 3, rep 2 1020d-1022c 22 Chaucer:
Knight's Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a 25 Montaigne: fj/fljV^, 292d-294b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
third  dayfourth  DAY  197a-260a,c  esp  third day, 224d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph 66 114d115c; BK II, aph 48 179d-188b 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xii,  24a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, lemma 3 378d-379a 33
Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  433b434a  34  Newton:  Principles,
definitions-bk  ii  5a267a  esp  definitions, schol 8b-13a, law i 14a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  iv,  sect  8-9  260d-261b 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 102 432d-433a; sect 110-115 434b-435c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  27a;  28b-c;  29c-d;  31d32a; 55c-56a; 72c-85d esp
74b-76c, 82a-83b; 91d-93c; 95a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
178a179d;  186d-190b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 608a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  882a-884b  2.  The unchanging principles of change 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  124b-c/  Trmaens,  455c-458a / Sophist, 564d-574c / Philebus,
610d-619d  /  Laws,  bk  X,  760a-765d  8  Aristotle  : F^jV-^/ci-, bk i
259a-268d / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270^12-17] 361b
/ Metaphysics, bk III, ch 4 [999^24-^24] 518a-c; bk xii, ch 10
[1075^25-34] 606a
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2 167b168c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [146-920] 2d-12b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4
264a;  bk  VI,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk ix, sect 28 293d294a; bk x, sect 7
297b-c  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 854b 17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr
i,  ch  1-4  35a37b;  TR  iv-v  50a-60c  /  Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 7-19
110d-119a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19,  A  I, ANS
108d-109c; q 84, a i, rep 3 440d442a; q 86, a 3 463 b-d; q 113, a i, ans
576a-d;  Q  115,  A  3,  ANS  and  rep 2 588c-589c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
23a-33d esp 27a, 29c-d; 49c-51d esp 51c-d; 72c-76c; 82a-83b; 91d-

[261b]
93c;  120c 129c esp 121a 124d. 126a 128b; 141b,d-145c; 200c-204c 2a. The
constituents  of  the  changing  thing  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  458a-460d /
Philebus,  610d619d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; ch 6-9 264c
268d; bk hi, ch 1-3 278a-280c; bk iv, CH 9 [2i7"2o-^27] 297a-c; bk v, ch
i 1225*1229] 305b-c; bk vi, ch 10 [240^8-24 1'*26] 324c3Mb / Heavens, bk
i,  ch  3  [270*12-17) 361b; BK IV, ch 4 [312^*3-22] 403c-d / Generation
and  Corruption,  bk i, ch i [3i4'^26-:5i5*^) 410a-b; CH 3 413c-416c esp
[318*1-319^4] 414b-416c; CH 4 [320*2-6] 417a; bk ii, ch i
[329*24-''2]
429a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987^30988^8] 506a; ch 8 [988^22-989^24] 506d-508a;
bk III, ch 4 [999=^24-^24] 518a-c; bk iv, ch 5
[1009*22-38] 528d; bk v, ch i [1013=^:5-71 533a;
ch 2 [1013*24-27] 533b; ch 4 534d-535c; bk VII, CH 8-10 556b-559d; ch 15
[1039^201040*8]
563c-564a;  bk  viii-ix  566a-578a,c; BKxi, CH 9 [1065^25-31] 594b; chi2
[1068^1014] 597c; BK XII, CH 1-5 598a-601a; ch 10
[1075*25-34] 606a
9 Aristotle: Generation ofAnimals, bk i, ch 18
[724*20-^13]
264b-d; ch 20
[729*6]-ch
22
[730^33] 269b-271a
10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2-3 167b169a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk  i [146-634] 2d-8d; bk ii [62-1022] 15d-28a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii,
ch  8  30d-31c  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  i, ch 1-4 35a-37b; tr iv, CH 6-8
51d-53a;  tr  v,  ch i-tr vi, ch 2 57d62b / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-19
lllc-119a  /  Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 22 293d-294c; tr v, ch 8 307d-308c
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xii, par 3-16 99d103a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 9, A I, ans 38c-39c; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; q
29,  A  I,  rep  4 162a-163b; q 45, a 2, rep 2 242d-244a; q 48, a 3, ans
261b-262a;  q 58, A 7, rep 3 305c-306b; q 62, a 7, rep i 322d323b; Q 66,
a  2,  ans  345d-347b;  q  75,  a  5,  rep 2 382a-383b; q 92, a 2, rep 2
489d-490c;  A 3, rep i 490c-491b; a 4, ans and rep i 491b-d; q 104, a i,
ans and rep 1-2 534c536c; PART i-ii, q I, A 3, ANS 611b-612a; q 10, a I,
REP  2  662d-663d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 24, A II,
ans  498b-499c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 172b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  494a-496d  esp  494b, 495c-496a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
ii,  aph  6  139b-c 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
74b-76c

[262a]
(2.  The unchanging principles of change^ 2b. The factor of opposites or
contraries  in change 7 Plato: Symposium, 165c-l66h / Phaedo,226d' 228a;
243c-246c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350d-351b  /  Theaetetus,  519d-520b /
Sophist, 565a-c / Laws, BK X, 760a-c; 762b-764c 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 5 [4'*io-^i9] 8b-9a; CH 10
[13^17-37]
18d-19a; ch 14
[15^1-16]
21b-c  /  Physics, bk i, ch 5-9 263c-268d; bk ii, CH I [193^19-22] 270a;
bk hi, ch i [201^4-8] 278c; bk iv, ch 9 [217=^20-^26] 297a-c; bk v, CH I
[224^27-225*12] 304d-305a; [225*34-^9]
305d; CH 2
[226^23-^9]
306d-307a; ch 3
[226^24-34]
307c; CH 5 310a-311a; ch 6
[230^27-231^*2] 312b-c; BK VI, ch 4 [234^10-21]
316d-317a; bk viii, ch 2
[252^9-11] 336b-c;
- CH 7 [260^29-^1] 346b'C / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270*13-23] 361b-c; ch 4 362a-c; ch 8 [277*1334] 368b-c; ch 12 [283^17-23] 375c-d; bk iv,
ch 3 401c-402c; ch 4 [311^29-312^22] 403c-d / Generation and Corruption,
bk i, ch 4 416c417a; ch 7 421d-423b; bk ii, ch 1-5 428b,d433d esp ch 4-5
431b-433d / Metaphysics, bk I, CH 8
[989*18-29]
507b-c; bk ii, ch 2
[994*19-^6] 512c-d; bk
iv, ch 7 [1011^29-38] 531d; bk viii, ch 5 569b-d; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*4-13]
577a; bk x, ch 7
[1057*18-34]
584c-d; bk xi, ch 9
[io65''5-i4] 593d-594a;
ch II 596a-d; bk xii, ch 2 598c-599a; ch 10
[1075*25-34] 606a / Soul, bk ii, ch 4 [416*18-
^8]   646c-d  /  Longevity,  ch  3  710d-711b  9  Aristotle:  Generation
ofAnimals, bk i, ch 18
[724*20-^13] 264b-d; bk
iv, ch 3
[768*2-7]
309c  /  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  8  [1159^19-23]  411d 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2, 167b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8
lllc-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  22 293d-294c; ch 27 296b-297a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, A I, ANS 108d-109c; q 23, a i,
rep  3  132c-133b; Q 26, A I, REP 2 150b-C; Q 58, A J, REP 3 305c306b; Q
62, A 7, REP I 322d-323b; part i-ii, Q 18, A 8, REP I 699d-700b; q 23, a
2  724c725c  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 408c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part hi, prop 4-6 398d399a; part iv, prop 29-35 431d-434a; part V, axiom
I  452c  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 27a; 76c-83b esp 76c-d; 91d-93c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 160c-d; 165a-b; 178a-d; 179b-d 3. Cause
and  eflfect  in  motion: the relation of mover and moved, or action and
passion 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-c / Gorgias, 267c-268a / Timaeus, 460c-d
/  Laws,  bk  x,  760a-765d  esp 761b-765d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 9
[11^1-7] 16c-d / Physics, bk hi, ch i [200^29-32] 278b; ch 2

[262b]
204 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to I
[202*2]-cH3[ 202^29] 279c-280c; bk vii, ch 1-2
326a-329a; bk viii, ch 10
[266^27-267*21]
354b-d / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [270*12-17] 361b; CH 7
[275*1-^29] 366a-367a; ch
8
[277^1-8]
368c-d; bk hi, ch 2 [300^8-301*12] 391d-392c;
[301^2-32] 392d-393b; bk iv, ch 3 401c-402c /
Genei-ation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  6  [323*1234]  421b-c; CH 7-9
421d-426c;  bk  ii,  ch  9-10  436d-439c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6
[987''3o988*8] 506a; ch 7 [988*31-^16] 506c-d; bk v, ch 2
[1013^3-16]
533c-d; bk ix, ch 1-5 570b,d-573c; ch 7 [1048^35-1049*18] 574c-d; BK XI,
CH 9 [1066*27-34] 594d; bk xii, ch 3
[1069^35-1070*9] 599a-b; [1070*21-30] 599c-d;
CH 4 [io7o^22]-cH 8 [1074^14] 600b-605a; ch 10
[1075^1-37] 606b-d
/  Soul,  BK  II,  CH  5  647b-648d;  bk  iii,  ch  2 [426*2-6] 658a-b 9
Aristotle:  Motion  of  Atiimals,  ch  8  [702*522]  237b-c / Generation
ofAnimals, bk i, ch 20
[729*9]-cH 21 [729^21] 269b-270a; bk ii, ch 4
[740^18-26] 281c-d; bk
iv, ch 3
[768*^16-24]
310b-c  10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 168b-c; BK III, CH 7,
203b-c  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [80-141] 16a-d; [184-293]
17b-18d  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 854b; 855b; 940b941a; 959a-960a 17
Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 15-22 260c264c; TR III, CH 23 294d-295a
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a i, ANS and rep 2 34d-35c; q
41,  a  i,  rep 2 217d218c; Q 44, A 2, REP 2 239b-240a; q 48, a i, REP 4
259b-260c; q 60, a i, rep 2 310b-311a; q 75, A I, rep 3 378b-379c; q 80,
a  2, ans 428a-d; q 115, a i 585d-587c; part i-ii, q i, A 3, ANS and rep
i  611b-612a; a 6, ans 614a-c; q 9, A 4, ANS 660a-d; q 22 720b,d-723b; q
23,  a  4 726a-727a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 113, A 8
367d-368c  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-40b passim; bk VI, 109a-b;
112d  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, third day, 202a-203a 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  423d  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  in,  87c-88a  /
Objections and Replies, AXIOM II 131d; 212a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
axiom 1-5 373c-d; LEMMA 3 378d-379a; part hi, def 1-3 395d396a; prop 1-4
396a-398d;  part  iv,  axiomprop 7 424c-426b; part v, axiom 2 452c; PROP
3-4  453a-d  34 Newton: Principles^ def iii-iv 5b-6a; law i-iii 14a-b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 1-5 178b-179d; sect 74,
199d-200b;  ch  xxii,  SECT II 203c-d; ch xxiii, sect 28-29 211b-212a 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect hi, div 18-SECT VIII, div 74 457c-484c
passim, esp sect VII, div 60 477a-c

[263a]
4/0  6  Chapter  10:  CHANGE  205  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 15a-b; 43a-b;
76c-83b; 91d93c 4. Motion and rest: contrary motions 7 Plato: Cratyliis,
112b/  Republic,  hk  i\-, 350d351b / Timaeus, 453b-c; 460c-d / Sophist,
567a-574c  / Statesman, 587a-589c csp 587a-b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch
14
[i5*'i-i()] 21b-c
/  Physics,  BK  V,  ch  5-6  310a-312d  /  Heavens, BK I, CH 4 362a-c /
Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[1004^27-29] 523d; BK XI, ch 12 [1068*^20-25]
597c-d  / Soul, BK I, CH 3 [4o6"22-27] 635c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk i, ch 2, 167b-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 517b-518a; 519b-520b 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  931b 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 24
295b-c; ch 27 296b-297a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, A 4,
rep  3  43b-44b; q 18, a i, rep 2 104c-105c; Q 53, A 3, ans 283b-284d; q
73,  a 2, ans 371b-d; part i-ii, q 6, a i 644d-646a; a 4 647b-648a; q 9,
a  4,  rep  2  660a-d; q 41, a 3 799c-800b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  Q 75, A 3, ans and rep 3-5 938a-939d; q 84, a 3, REP 2
985d-989b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 50a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk
ii,  26a-b; bk vi, '^ 1101} 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 163a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  i  378c; lemma 1-3 378c-379a 34
Newton:  Principles,  def  hi 5b; law i 14a 5. The measure of motion 5a.
Time  or duration as the measure of motion 7 Plato: Timaeus, 450c-451d /
Parmenides^  504c-505c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 10-14 297c304a,c;
bk vi 312b,d-325d esp ch 2 314a-315d / Generation and Corruption, bk ii,
ch 10
[337*22-34] 439b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 13
[1020*25-33]
541c; bk X, ch i
[1053*^9-12]
579c;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [1071^6-12] 601b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[1174^12-^14]  428b-429a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 15 275a-b
17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 7-13 122d-129a / Fourth Ennead, tr
iv, ch 15 165c-d / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 5, 254C'd; ch 16 260d-261c; tr
hi,  ch 22, 294c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 12-40 92b-99a; bk
xii,  par  9  lOlb-c  /  City  of God, bk xi, ch 6 325c-d; bk xii, ch 15
351b352d  1-9  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 7, a 3, rep 4
32c-33c;  q 10, a i, ans 40d-41d; aa 4-6 43b-46d: Q 53, a 3 283b-284d; q
57, a 3, REP 2 297b-298a; q 63, a 5, ans 329a-330c;

[263b]
A  6, REP 4 330c 331c; q (i(>, a 4, rep 4 348d349d; PARI- in, g 31, a 2,
ans  and ri i1 753c 754a 20 AqivInas: Summa Theologica, part in, ^} \\\,
A  7,  REP  5 366a-367c; part \\\ slpi'l, <^ 84, A 3 985d 989b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradisi:, xxvh
[106-120] 148b-c
28  Galileo:  'Tivo  New  Sciences, ihiko day, 201a-202a 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  \i'n  46  177c179a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, def 5
373b-c  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [580-582]  188a  33 Pascal:
Geometrical   Demonstration,   432b433b;  434a-439b  passim  34  Newton:
Principles,   definitions,   schol,   8b10a;   12a-b   35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiv, sect 22 159d; ch xviii, sect 2 174a-b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 27a; 29c-d;
72c-76c  45  Fourier: Theory ofHeat, 249a-251b 'yh. The divisibility and
continuity of motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[219*10-13]
298d-299a;  bk  v,  ch  4  308b-310a;  bk  vi  312b,d-325d; bk vii, ch i
[242'>32-^4]  326c-d;  bk  viii, ch 7 [26i*28]-cH 8 [265*12] 347c-352a /
Metaphysics,  bk  v, ch 6 [1016*4-7] 536b-c; CH 13 [1020*25-33] 541c; bk
x,  ch  i  [1052*1521] 578b; bk xii, ch 6 [io7i''8-ii] 601b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[1174^9-14]
428d-429a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tR vii, ch 8-9 123b125d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 7, a 3, rep 4 32c-33c; q 53 280d-284d 20
\q\jinas:  Summa  Theologica, parti-ii, q 113, A 7 366a-367c 28 Galileo:
Two New Sciences, third day, 2013202a 30 B ACQ'S '.Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  6  139b-c;  aph 41 173d-174b 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 87c-d /
Objections  and  Replies,  213b-c  33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
434a439b 34 Newton: Prificiples, bk i, lemma ii, schol, 31b-32a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  26b-27a; 74b-76c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d
6.  The  kinds  of  change  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  449b-450c  esp  450a  /
Parmenides,  492a-493b  esp  492d-493b; 504c-505a / Theaetetus, 533a-b /
Laws,  bk x, 762b-763b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 14 20d-21c / Physics,
bk  III,  CH  I  [200^32-201*14]  278b-c;  bk  v, ch 1-2 304a-307b; ch 5
310a-311a;  bk  vii, CH 4 330d-333a / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 [268*^15269*8]
359d-360a; bk iv, ch 3 401c-402c /

[264a]
(6.  The  kinds  of  change.)  Generation  and  Corruption, bk i, ch 1-5
409a420b esp CH 4 [319^32-320*2] 417a / Metaphysics, BK II, CH 2
[994*19-^6]
512c-d; BK VII, CH 9
[1034^8-19]
557d-558a; bk xi, ch 9
[1065^7-14] 593d-594a; ch
ii [io67^i]-ch 12
[1068^25] 596a-597d; bk xii, ch 2 [1069^8-14]
598d  /  Soul,  BK  I,  CH  3  [406*12-21] 635c 9 Aristotle: Ge?jeration
ofAnimals, bk i, ch 18
[724*20-^13] 264b-d
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167b-d;  CH 5 169b-c 17
Plotixus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 21-27 293a-297a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 44, A 2, ans 239b-240a; q 45, a i, rep 2 242a-d; Q
66,  A  I, ans 343d-345c; q 118, a 2, rep 2 601c-603b; part i-ii, q i, a
3,  ans  611b-612a;  Q  23,  A  2,  ANS  724C'725c  20  Aquinas  : Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 107, A I, ANS 325c-327b; part hi suppl, q 84, a
2,  REP  1,4  984c-985d;  a  3,  ans  985d-989b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  407c-409b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 66 114d115c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxii, SECT II 203c-d 6a. The
reducibility  of  all modes of motion to one kind of change 8 Aristotle:
P/^jy^/Vj,   bk  viii,  ch  7  [26o*26-''i4]  346b-c  /  Generation  and
Corruption,  bk  i, ch 1-5 409a-420b 10 Galen: Natur^al Faculties, bk i,
ch  2,  167b168b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c; bk
II  [730-1022]  24b-28a; bk hi [417869] 35c-41a; bk iv [522-817] 51a-54d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 61a-c; part hi, 173a; part iv, 271a-b 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 50 111b 34 Newton: Principles, lb-2a /
Optics,  bk  hi,  541b  34  Huygens:  Light, ch i, 553b-554a 45 Fourier:
Theory  of Heat, 169a-b; 182a-b 53 James : Psychology, 882a-884b 6b. The
primacy of local motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch i
[208*28-33]
287a; bk viii, ch i
[250^15-18] 334a; ch 7
346b-348a  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  [268^15-17]  359d;  bk  iv,  ch 3
[310^22-34]  402b  / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10 437d-439c /
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6
[1071^2-11] 601b;
[1071^32-38] 601d; ch 7 [1072^4-10] 602c; ch
8  [1073*24-39]  603c  9  Aristotle:  Motion  of Animals, ch 5 235c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 67, A 2, rep 3 350b-351a; q 78, a
3, ans 410a411d; Q no, A 3, ANS 566d-567b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part hi suppl, Q 84, A 2, rep 1,4 984c-985d

[264b]
206  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6a  to 6d 6c. Comparison of change in living and
nonliving things 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vh, ch 2
[244^1245*12] 328b-d; bk viii, ch 4 338d-340d; ch
6
[259*20-^31] 345a-d / Heavens, bk
i, ch 7
[275^26-28] 367a; bk
ii,  ch  2  [284^30-285*1]  376c  /  Soul,  bk II, ch 4 [415*^22-416^31]
646a647b  9  Aristotle:  Motion  ofAnimals,  ch  i [698*1521] 233b; ch 4
[700*5-27] 235b-c; ch 6 235d236b; CH 7 [7oi^i]-ch 8 [702^12] 236d-238a /
Generation   of   Animals,  bk  i,  ch  21-22  269c271a;  bk  ii,  ch  i
[734*17-735*15]  274c-275d;  CH  4  [740*13-18]  281a  10 Galen: Natural
Faculties, bk i, ch 7 170c171a; BK II, CH 3, 186c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk  ii [700-729] 23d-24b; [1105-1174] 29a-30a,c 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A I 104c-105c; Q 27, A 2, ANS 154c-155b;
part I-II, Q 17, A 9, REP 2 692d-693d 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act v, sc
ii
[7-15]
239a   28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  hi,  67b-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 412b-415b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27 157b158d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part v, 59a-60c / Objections and Replies, 156a-d
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, sect ii 140b-c; ch xxiii,
sect  22  209d;  sect 28-29 211b-212a; ch xxvi, sect 2 217b-d; CH xxvii,
sect  5  220b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect 19 354a-c 42 YJ^tiT-. Judgement,
579d-580a;  582b-c  45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity, 836d 49
Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 62a-b 53 James: Psychology, 4a-6b; 68a-69b;
71a 6d. Comparison of the motions of matter with changes in the order of
mind 7 Plato: Laws, bk x, 764c-765a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vh, ch 3
[247^1248*8] 330b-d / Generation and Corruption, bk
II,  CH  6 [334*10-15] 435a / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 2 571c-572a / Soul,
bk  i,  ch  3  635b-637b; CH 4 [408*29-^31] 638a-d; bk ii, ch 5 [417*21-
^21] 647d-648b; bk hi, ch ii
[434*16-22]
667a 12 Lucretius: iVfl/«r^ of Things, bk hi [177-207] 32b-d 17 Plotinus
:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi, ch 1-3 106b108c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  14,  A  15  89b-90b;  q  18, a i, ans 104c-105c; a 3, rep I
106b-107c; q 19, a 7 114d-115d; q 27, aa 1-2 153b-155b; q 34, a i, rep 2
185b-187b; Q 46, A 2, REP 3 253a'255a; q 50, a i, rep 2 269b-270a; q 73,
a  2, ans 371b-d; q 75, a 5, REP 2 382a-383b; q 78, a 3, ans 410a411d; Q
82, A 2, REP 2-3 432d-433c; q 94, A 2, ANS 503a-504a; part i-ii, q 22, a
i, ans

[265a]
1 tolb Chapter 10: CHANGE 207 and REP I 720d-721c; a 2, rep 3 721c-722c;
Q  35,  A 6, REP 2 777b-778c; q 36, a i, ans 780c-781b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 52, a I, ANS and rep 3 15d-18a; q 72, a 3, ans
and  REP  1-2 113b-114a; q 113, a 7, ans and rep 1,4 366a-367c; part ii-
ii,  q  180,  a  6  613a  614d; part III SUPPL, Q 82, A 3, ans and rep 2
971a-972d;  q  84, a 3, ans and rep i 985d989b 21 Dante: Divltie Comedy,
purgatory, xviii
[10-33] 80a
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 49a-d; 61a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop  7  375a-c;  part  III, 395a-d; prop 1-3 396a-398c; part iv, prop 7
426a-b;  part  v,  prop  i 452d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xii,  sect  I  147b-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  74  199c-200b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  144  441d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
160c161a;  178a-179c;  i86d-190b  53  James:  Psychology, 95b-97a 7. The
analysis  of  local  motion 7a. Space, place, and void 7 Plato: Timaeus,
460c-d; 471b-c / Latvs, bk X, 762b-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 5
[205^10206*8] 283b-284b; bk iv, ch 1-9 287a-297c /
Heavens, bk i, ch 7 [274^30-33] 366a; [275^30276^18] 367a-b; ch 8
[276*22-27]
367b-c;
[277^14-23] 368d-369a; bk ii, ch 2 376b-377c;
BK III, CH 6 [305*27-28] 396c; bk iv, ch 1-5 399a-404d / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 13 [1020* 25-33] 541c; bk IX, CH 6 [1048^9-17] 574a; BK XI, CH 10
[1067*8-33] 595c-596a
/ Soul, bk I, CH 3 [406*12-21] 635c 10 GAi.Ei<: Natural Faculties, bk i,
ch  16,  181a-d;  BK II, ch 1-2, 183b,d-184c; ch 6 188c-191a; BK III, CH
14-15,  213b-214c  11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c 12 Lucretius :
Nature  of Things, bk i [329-448] 5b-6c; [958-1007] 12d-13b; [1052-1082]
14a-c; bk II [80-250] 16a-18a; bk vi [830-839] 91b-c;
[998-1041] 93c-94a
16  Ptoi^emy:  Almagest, bk i, lOb-llb 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 517b-518a; 519a-520b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
855b; 900b-903a; 922a-b; 931b-932a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch
8,  123d124a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 8, A I, rep 3
34d-35c;  a 4 37c-38c; q 52, aa 1-2 278d-280a; q 53, aa 1-2 280d-283b 20
Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 83, AA 2-5 976c-982c; q 84,
a  2,  rep  i  984c985d; A 3 985d-989b 23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a;
61b; part III, 173a; part iv, 271d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 32c; bk
vi, llOb-c

[265b]
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, first day, 157b160a passim; third day,
202d  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 37 168d169c; APH 45 176a-177c;
aph  48, 180a 31 Descartes: Rules, ix, 15c 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 366a-367a;
370a   /   Weight  of  Air,  405b-415b  passim  34  Newton:  Principles,
definitions,  schol  8b13a; bk hi, general schol, 370a-372a / Optics, bk
III, 520a-522b; 542a 543a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, kk ii, ch xiii,
sect  23  153c-d;  ch  xvii, sect 4 168b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  110-117  434b-436a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 29c-d; 31d-32a; 55c-56a;
84b-c;135d[fn2]   45   Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity  513d-514c;
685d-686c;  816b,d-819a,c; 824a-b; 855a,c Ih. Natural and violent motion
7 Plato: Timaeus, 463d-464b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch i
[208^9-22]
287b; ch 8
[215*1-13]
294c-d; bk v, ch 6
[230*18-231*19]
311c-312d; bk viii, ch 4 338d-340d / Heavens, bk i, ch 2
[268^12]-
CH 3
[270*13] 359d-361b; ch 7
[274^30-33]
366a;
[275^12-29] 366d-367a; ch 7
[276*8]-
CH 8
[277^25]
367b-369a; ch 9
[278^22279*8] 370a-b; bk
ii, ch 13
[294^31-295*29]
386b-d; bk hi, ch 2 391c-393b; ch 5
[304*^
11-23] 395d-396a; ch 6
[305*22-28] 396c
/ Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6
[333**
22-33] 434c-d / Soul, BK I, CH 3
[406*12-29]
635c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10521094] 14a-c; BK
II [184-215] 17b-d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, lla-b; bk hi, 86b; BK IX,
270b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 517b-520b
passim  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 929b-930b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead,
tr  i,  ch 8, 39d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, A I, rep 2
104c-105c;  q 105, a 4, rep i 541c542a; a 6, rep i 543b-544a; part i-ii,
q  6,  A I, ans and rep 3 644d-646a; a 4 647b-648a; A 5, ans and rep 2-3
648b-649a;  q  41,  a  3 799c-800b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q  75,  A 3, ans and rep 3-5 938a-939d; q 91, A 2, ANS and rep 6
1017c-1020c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 50a; part iv, 271d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk
vi,  109a-b;  llOb-d  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 157d158a;
third  day, 200a-d; 203d; fourth day, 238a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
i, aph ^d, 115bc; BK II, aph 36 164a-168d passim; aph 48 179d-188b

[266a]
208  Ic.  Kinds of local motion 7c(l) Rectilinear and rotary or circular
motion  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk iv, 350d-351b / Parmenides, 492d-493b /
Laws, bk x, 762 b-d; 764b765a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 5
[2x2^*31-^2]
291d;  BK  VII,  CH  4 [248*10-^6] 330d-331b; bk VIII, CH 8-9 348b-353b/
Heavens, bk i, ch 26 359d-365c; ch 7
[274^22-29]
365d-366a;
[275^12-18] 366d; ch
8
[277^12-26] 368b-c;
[277^8-18] 368d / Metaphysics, bk
xii, ch 6
[io7i''io-ii]
601b; ch 7
[1072*20-22]
602b / Soul, bk I, ch 3
[406^^26-407^13]
636b637b  16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 6a; 7a-8b; bk hi, 86b; BK IX, 270b
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  514a;
517b-518a;  519b-520b 16 Ketler: Epitome, bk iv, 887a; 913a; 931b933a 17
Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i, ch 3, 36b-c; CH 8 39c-d; tr ii, ch i,
40b-c; ch 2, 41b-c / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 24 295b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 7, A 3, ANs 32c-33c; q 66, a 2, ans 345d-347b 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk vi, llOb-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth
day,  240d;  245b-c  30 Bacon: Novum Orgamim, bk ii, aph 35, 163a-d; aph
48,  186b-d  34 Newton: Principles, def hi 5b; def v 6a-7a; definitions,
schol,  llb-12a;  law  i 14a; laws of motion, schol, 19b-20a; bk i, prop
1-3  and schol 32b-35b; bk ii, prop 53, schol 266a-267a 7c(2) Uniform or
variable motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[215^242i6**2i]
295a-d; bk v, ch 4
[228^15-229*7]
309d-310a  12  Licretius:  Nature  of Things, bk ii [225-242] 17d-18a 28
Galileo:  Tivo  New Sciences, first day, 157b160a; THIRD DAY, 197b-198b;
200a-d:  203d:  205b-d: 209a-c; 224d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
48,  186b-d  34  Nev/ton:  Principles, def iii-iv 5b-6a; law i-ii 14a-b;
corol  iv-vi  18a-19b  7r(3)  Absolute  or relative motion 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of Things, bk iv [387-390] 49b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  514b-515a;  519a;  bk  ii, 557a-b 16 Kepler:
Harynoniesofthe  World,  1015a-b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 115a-d 30
Bacox: Novum Organum, bkii, aph 36, 165c166b

[266b]
THE GREAT IDEAS Ic to Id 34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol 8b13a
esp  9a-b;  corol v-vi 19a-b; bk i, prop 57-61 lllb-114b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiii, SECT 7-10 149d-150d passim 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, sect 110-115 434b-435c 53 James: Psychology, 511b-512a
7c(4)  Terrestrial  and  celestial  motion  7 Plato: Statesman, 587a-b /
Laws,   bk   vii,  729d-730d;  bk  x,  763d-765c  8  Aristotle:  Heavens
359a-405a,c esp bk i, CH 2-3 359d-362a / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8
[1050^20-28] 576c-d; bk
xii,  ch  2  [1069^2427]  599a; ch 6 [io7i^32]-ch 7 [1072*22] 601d602b /
Soul,  BK  I,  CH  3  [406^26-407^13]  636b637b  9  Aristotle: Motion of
Animals,  ch  3 234a-c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a; 7a-8b; 12a; BK
III, 86b-87a; bk ix, 270b; bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i, 513b-514b; 517b-518a; 519b520b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-895b; 897a905a passim, esp 904b-905a; 929a-933a;
934b935b;  940b-941a; 959a-960a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 1-4
35a37b;  tr  I,  ch  8-tr ii, ch 2 39c-41c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 66, A 2, ans 345d-347b; q 70, a 3 365b-367a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 49, A 4, ANS 5a-6a; part hi suppl, q 84, a 3,
rep 2 985d-989b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, llOb-c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  fourth  day,  245b-d  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35,
163a-b;  aph 36, 165d-166a; aph 48, 186b-d 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a;
bk  hi  269a-372a  passim, esp rule i-iii 270a-271a, prop 1-7 276a-282b,
prop  35,  schol  320b-324a.  general  schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk hi,
540a541b  Id.  The  properties  of variable motion: the laws of motion 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[215*24216*21] 295a-d: bk vii, ch 4 330d-333a
9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Anitnals,  ch  1-4  233a235c  passim  /  Gait
ofAnimals,  ch  3  243d-244a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch 3
[768^1624]310b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[80-99]
16a-b:  [184-250]  17b-18b  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 894a; 899a-900a;
905a-906b;  933b-934b;  936a-937a;  938b-939a  23  Ho-Q-Q-Es: Leviathan,
parti.  50a;  part  iv,  271d  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk ii, 56b-c 28
Galileo:  Two New Sciences, first day, 157b172d passim; third day-fourth
day 197a260a,c ^

[267a]
8/0  9  Chapter  10: CHANGE 209 30 Bacon: Novum Orgamim, bk ii, ai»h ^5,
163c-d; APH 36, 166b-c; 167b-c; aph 48 179d188b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii, axiom i li-mma 7 378c 380b 34 Nkwton: Principles, def hi 5b; laws of
MOTION  14a-24a; bk i, prop 1-17 and schol 32b-50a; prop 30-69 and schol
76a-  131a;  prop  94-98  and  schol 152b-157b; bk ii 159a-267a passim /
Optics,  bk  hi,  540a-542a 34 HuYGENs: Light, ch i, 558b-563b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, hk h, ch xxi, SECT 4 178d-179c; cii xxiii, sect 17
209a;  SECT 22 209d; sect 28-29 211b-212a 35 Berkeley: Human Kjiowledge,
sect  50  422c; sect 102 432d-433a I 35 Hl'mr: Human Understanding, sect
iv, div 27, 460c; SECT VII, div 57, 475d-476b
[in
2]  38  Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk i, lb 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
169a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue 11, 694d695c 8. Change of
size 8a. The increase and decrease of inanimate bodies 7 Plato: Timaeus,
460c-d / Laws, bk x, 762b-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch i
[209*27-29]
288a;  ch  6  [213^19-22] 293b; ch 9 296b'297c; bk VII, CH 2 [245*12-18]
328d-329a; bk viii, CH 3 [233^12-23] 337d / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270*23-36] 361c / Generation and Corruption,
BK II, CH 6 [333*35-'^3] 434b / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[415^28-416*18] 646a-c
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 7 170c171a; BK II, CH 3, 186c-d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [311-328] 5a; BK II
[62-79]
15d-16a;
[1105-1174]
29a30a,c; bk v [235-323] 64a-65b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
119,  A  I, ans 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 52,
AA 1-2 15d-19a; part ii-ii, q 24, a 5 492b493d; A 6, ans 493d-494b; part
hi,  q 7, a 12, rep I 754c-755c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv, 271d-272a
28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 139b-141d; 151c-154b 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  412b  30  Bacon: Novian Organum, bk ii, aph 40,
171a172d;  aph  48, 180a-181a; 184a-c 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop
6,  corol  iv  281b  /  Optics,  BK  III, 539b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  part  i,  9a15c  esp  9a-10b  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat,
184a-185b;  192a-b  8^.  Growth  in  living  organisms 7 Plato: Timaeus,
471d-472a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[19^^13-19]
269d-270a; bk Vi, ch 10 [241*32-^2] 325c; bk

[267b]
vHi,  CM  7  [260*29  ^\] 346b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, cm 2
(^15*26 ''^| 410d 411a; ch 5 417b 420b: hk h. cm 6 [:{^V'^5 *'^l434b; ch
8 14] 436c / Metaphysics, bk v, CH 4
[1014^20-26! 535a
/ Soul, bk h, ch 4
[4i5*'28-4i6*i8] 646a-c
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, cm 19
[550^26-31] 77d; CM
^? [558"i7-24] 84d-85a; BK VH, CH I
[582*21-25] 107d
/  Motion  of  Animals,  cm 5 235c d / Generation <fAnimals, BK I, CH 18
[723*9-2^) 263a-b; cii 22 [730^:5:^- ^9] 270d; BK II, CM I
[7:5^^1-4] 273d; [735*1^-
26] 275d-276a; cm 4
[739^34-741^^2]
280d281d;  CM  6 [744»'28-745»'9] 286a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i.  ch 2, 167b-d) CH 5 169b-c; CH 7 170c-171a; ch ii 172b-d; BK II, CH 3
185a-186d  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, hk i [146-264] 2d-4b: bk ii
[1105-1174]  29a-30a,c; bkiv[858876] 55b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
second  day,  187b-d  28  Harvey:  Circulation  ofthe Blood, 320a-b / On
Animal  Generation,  353b-354a;  388c-d;  408c409b:  412b-415b esp 415a;
441a-443b;  494a-d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 71a-c 9. Change of
quality  7  Plato:  Parmenides,  509a-510a  /  Theaetetus,  533a-534a  8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5 [4*10-^19] 8b-9a; CH 14 [15*14-32] 20d-21a /
Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[145*2-13] 198c-d / Physics, bk
i,  ch  7 [i9o'*59] 266b; BK V, ch 2 [226*26-29] 306d; [226^19] 307a; bk
vi, ch 10
[241*26-32]
325b-c; BK VII, CH 2
[244^1-245*12] 328b-d; ch
3  329a-330d;  bk  viii,  ch 7 [260*26-^14] 346b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270*26-36] 361c; ch 12
[283^17-23] 375c-d / Generation
aiid Corruption, bk I, ch 1-4 409a-417a esp ch 4 416c417a / Metaphysics,
bk i, ch 8
[989*18-29]
507b-c; BK V, ch 21 544a-b; bk xi, ch 12
[1068^^x5-19] 597c / Sense and the Sensible, ch 6
[446''27-447*9] 685b-c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 2, 167b168b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-10 111c113a 19 Aquinas: Sumtna Theologica, part i, q
48,  A  4,  ans  and  rep 3 262a-263a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 50, A I, rep 3 6a-7b; q 52, a i, ans and rep 3 15d-18a; part hi
suppl, q 82, a 3, ans and REP 2 971a-972d; q 91, a i, rep 2,4 1016b1017c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part hi, 172b 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvi, SECT 1-2 217a-d 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, sect 2533 417d-419a passim, esp sect 25-26 41 7d418a

[268a]
210  (9. Change of quality^ 9<*. Physical and chemical change: compounds
and mixtures 7 Plato: Timaens, 448b-d; 459d-462b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
vi, ch 14
[1^1^20-7,2.]
206a / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [270*^26-36] 361c; CH 5
[271^18-23]
362d'363a; bk hi, ch 3 393c-d; ch 8
[3o6''22-29] 398a
/ Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[315*^28-33] 410d;
CH  10  426c-428d;  bk  ii,  ch 6-8 433d-436d / Meteorology, bk hi, ch 6
[378^i3]-bk iv, ch 12
[390^21] 482c-494d / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch
17
[1041^12-33] 565d-566a,c
/ Sense and the Sensible, ch 3 [440^33-^13] 677d-678a 9 Aristotle: Parts
of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[646*^12-24] 170a-b
12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [635-920] 8d-12b; bk ii [730-864]
24b-26a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  x,  sect 7 297b-c 17 Plotinus:
Second  Ennead, tr i, ch 6-8 37d39d; TR VII, CH 1-2 62d-64b 19 Aquinas :
iSwmma  Theologica, part i, q 71, A I, rep 1-2 367a-368b; q 76, a 4, rep
4  393a-394c;  q  91,  a i 484a-485b 20 Aquinas: Sumina Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 50, a I, REP 3 6a-7b; part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a711c; PART III
SUPPL,  Q  74,  A  I,  REP  3  925c926c; A 5 929d-931b; q 8o, a 3, rep 3
958b959c; q 82, A I, ANS 968a-970c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 13b-14d;
bk  ii,  29c-30a  28  Galileo:  Two  Netv Sciences, first day, 148c-d 28
Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 495c-496d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  50  111b;  bk  II,  APH  7  139c-140a; aph 48, 181a-183a 34 Newton:
Optics,   bk   hi,   517b-518a;   531b542a  esp  541b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvi, sect 1-2 217a-d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry, part i-ii, 22c-86a,c; part hi, 87c-d; 103b-c; 105d; 117a-128c
esp 117a-118a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169b 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  309a-312a;  312c-313d; 314a-b; 315a-b; 327a-422a,c passim;
541b,d-584a,c  passim  53  James: Psychology, 68a-b; 104a-105a; 876a 9^.
Biological  change:  vital  alterations 7 Plato: Laws, bk ii, 659c-d; bk
vii,  713d  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246^10329c330a  9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch 19
[551*13-552^5] 78a-79b; ch 30 [556^5-9] 83b;
BK VII, CH I 106b,d-108a; bk ix, ch 50
[631^19-632^32]
r57a-c; ch 49B
[632^14633^*29] 157d-158c / Motion of Animals, ch 5
235c-d; ch 7 [7oi^i]-ch 8 [702*^22] 236d-237c; ch II
[703^8-21] 239b-c / Generation of Animals, BK
I, ch 18 [724*^20-^13] 264b-d; bk ii,

[268b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 9« to 10 CH I CH 5
[741^5-15]
[733^1-17] 273d-274a;
282c; CH 6 [742*^8-16] 283a; bk v, ch i
[778
15-20] 320a-b; ch 3 [782^1-20] 324a-b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i,
ch  5,  169b; CH 8 171a; bk hi, ch 7, 203c-204c 12 Lucretius : Nature of
Thi7jgs, bk iv
[10301057] 57c-d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-293d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,
412a-415b;  450b-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 38-39 436b437a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lOa-c;  61d-62a; 219d-222a esp 221b-222a;
224b-c  /  Descent of Man, 354c-355a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
i,  665a-d  53  James: Psychology, 68b-73b 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,   655a657d   esp  655b,  656b-657c  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  770b  10.  Substantial change: generation and corruption 7
Plato:  Symposium,  165c-166b  /  Phaedo,226d' 228a / Republic, bk viii,
403a-b;  bk  x,  434c436a  /  Parmenides,  504c-d;  509a-d / Laws, bk X,
761b-762c  8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vii, ch 3 [153^31-34] 209a / Physics,
bk  ii,  ch i [193^19-22] 270a / Generation and Corruption 409a-441a,c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3 [983^8-19] 501d; ch 8
[988^22-989^24]
506d-508a; bk ii, ch 2
[994*19-^8] 512c-d; bk vii, ch 7-9 555a-558a;
BK  XI,  CH  II  596a-d;  bk  xii,  ch 2-3 598c-599d / Soul, BK II, CH 4
[416^8-17]  646d-647a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167d168b;
ch  5  169b-c;  ch  12  172d-173c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[569-580] 22b;
[865-1022]
26a-28a; bk hi
[117-129]
31c-d;
[203-230]
32c-33a;
[323-349]
34b-c;
[417-869] 35c-41a; bk v [783-836] 71b-72a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b;  sect  25 281c 18
Augustine:   Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  18  49a-b  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 15, A I, ANS 91b-92a; q 19, a 9, ans 116d-117d; q
27,  a  2 154c-155b; q 33, a 2, rep 4 181c182b; q 41, A 5, ANS and rep i
222b-223b; q 44, A 2, ANS 239b-240a; q 45, a 2, rep 2 242d-244a; q 50, a
5, rep 3 274b-275a; q 53, A3, ANS 283b-284d; q 65, a 4, ans 342b-343c; q
66,  A I, ANS 343d-345c; a 2, ans 345d-347b; Q 67, A 3, REP I 351b-352a;
q  71,  a i, rep i 367a-368b; q 72, a i, rep 5 368b-369d; q 75, a 6, ANS
383c-384c;  q  90,  a  2, ans 481d-482c; q 96, A I, ans 510b-511b; q 119
604c-608d;  part  i-ii,  q 22, A I, ans and rep 3 720d-721c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 53, A I 19d-21a; a 3 21d-22d; q 85, a 6
182d-184a;  Q  no,  A  2,  rep  3  349a-d;  part  ii-ii, q i, a 7, rep 3
385c-387a;  part  hi suppl, q 75, a 3, ans 938a-939d; q 79, a i, rep 3-4
951b-953b;

[269a]
10^ to lOr Chapter 10: CHANGE 211 A 2, REP I 953b-955c; q 8o, a 5, rhp 3
963a964b;  Q  82,  A  I,  REi>  2  968a-970c; q 86, a 2, ANs and REP 1-2
993c-994d   22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [3011-3034]  209b  23  HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part iv, 249b-250a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 104d-105d 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 162c 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  127c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, prop 6 356b-c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk 11, ch xxvi, SECT 1-2 217a-d passim; bk hi, ch
hi,  sect  19  259c-260a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  74b- 76c; 82a-83b 45
Lavoisier:  Elements of Chemistry, part i, 41b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  187a-b; 189b-190a 53 James: Psychology, 95b-98a passim
54   Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  652b653c;655a-657d  10a.
Substantial  change  in  the  realm  of bodies: the transmutation of the
elements 7 Plato: Timaeus, 456b-c; 458b-460b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i,
ch 3 360d-362a; bk hi, ch I [298^24-299*1] 389b,d-390b; ch 2
[301^33-302*9]
393b; ch 6
[304''23]-ch
8
[306^29] 396a-398a/ Generation and Corruption
409a-441a,c esp bk i, ch 1-3 409a-416c, ch 6
[322^1-21] 420b-d, bk II, CH 4-1 1 431b-441a,c
/  Meteorology,  bk  i, ch 3 [339^36-^3] 445d; bk IV, CH I 482b,d-483c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[983V984^i6] 501d-502b; ch
8
[989*18-29]
507b-c  10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167d168b; BK II, CH 3,
185c-d; ch 4, 187a-b; bk III, CH 7, 203c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  i  [635-920]  8d-12b;  bk ii [80-108] 16a-b; bk v [235-305] 64a-65a;
[380-415]  66a-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  13,  189a 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; bk IV, sect 21 265b-c; sect
46 267c; bk v, SECT 13 271b; BK VII, sect 18 281a; sect 23 281b; SECT 25
281c;  sect  50 283a; bk x, sect 7 297b-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
i, ch 3-4 36b37b; TR IV, CH 6 51d-52a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 66, a 2, ANS 345d-347b; q 67, a 2, ans 350b351a; q 91, a i, ans and
rep 3 484a-485b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 74, A I,
ANS  and  rep  3 925c-926c; a 5, ans 929d-931b; q 91, a 5, ans and rep 4
1024a1025b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c
22  Chaucer:  Canon's Yeoman's Prologue 471b474a / Canon's Yeoman's Tale
474b-487a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 14b-c / Novum Organum, bk
i, aph 66 114d-115c; bk II, aph 35, 162c

[269b]
34  Newton:  Optics, bk hi, 531a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
cm ii, SECT 2 128a-b; ch xxvi, sect 1-2 217a d passim 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Tall,  148a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  I'all, 299d-300a 42 Kant:
Judgement,  582b-c  44  Boswell: Johnson, 262c 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  part  i,  41b-c 10^. Plant, animal, and human reproduction 7
Plato:  Timaeus,  476b-d / Statesman, 586c588a 8 Aristotle: Meteorology,
bk  iv, ch i [379*^6-8] 483c; ch 3 [381V13] 485d; ch ii [389*28-^7] 493c
/ Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 9 [1034*32-^8] 557c-d; bk ix, ch 7
[1049*12-18] 574d; bk
XII, CH 6
[1071*^29-31] 601c; CH 7
[1072*^301073*2] 603a
9  Aristotle:  Generation ofAnimals 25Sa-331a,c passim, esp bk i, ch 1-2
255a-256c,  ch  17-22  261b-271a,  bk  ii,  ch i [733^23]-ch 5 [74i''24]
274a-282d  10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 5-6 169b170c; BK II, ch
3  185a-186d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 25 358b359a; bk xxii,
ch  24,  609c-610a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 41, A 5, ANS
and  REP  I  222b-223b;  q  72,  a  i,  rep  4 368b-369d; q 73, a 3, ans
371d-372c;  q 78, A 2, REP 2-3 409a-410a; q 90, a 2, ans 481d482c; Q 92,
A  I, ANS 488d-489d; a 4, ans and REP I 491b-d; q 98 516d-519a; q 115, a
2,  REP  3-4  587c-588c;  a  3  588c-589c;  q  118, a i 600a-601c: q 119
604c-608d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-78]
91d-92a; paradise, vii
[121-141]
116b-c  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  14b-c; bk v, 105a-b 28 Harvey:
Motion  ofthe  Heart,  278a / On Animal Generation 329a-496d passim, esp
331a-b, 383d-396a, 400c-429c, 496b-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
50,  192a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [660-673] 166b167a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxvi, SECT2 217b-d 42 Kant: Judgement,
582b-c  54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 654c656d;659d-660b lOc.
The  incorruptibility  of  atoms,  the  heavenly  bodies,  and spiritual
substances 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270*12-36]
361b-c; CH 9
[279*i2]-CH
12
[283^24] 370b375d / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8 [1050^20-28]
576c-d;  bk  xii,  ch 2 [1069^24-27] 599a; ch 6-8 601b-605a 9 Aristotle:
Motion of Animals, ch 4 [699^12700*6] 234d-235b

[270a]
212  THE GREAT IDEAS (10. Substantial change: generation and corruption.
lOc.  The  incorruptibility of atoms, the heavenly bodies, and spiritual
substances.)  10 CjALEyi: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-b; BK II,
CH 6, 189c-190a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [483-634] 7a-8d; bk
ii  [842-864J 25c-26a 16 Ptolemy: Abnagest, bk i, 5a-6a; bk xiii, 429a-b
16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 929b-930b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i,
ch 1-4 35a37b; cH 8 39c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 9, A 2
39c-40d;  q  10,  a 2, rep 1-2 41d-42c; a 3, ANs 42c-43b; a 5 44b-45c; q
46,  a  i,  rep  2-3,5  250a-252d;  q  50, a 5 274b-275a; q 58, A 3, ANS
301d-302d;  q  63,  a i, rep 2 325c326c; Q 66, A 2 345d-347b; q 68, a i,
ans  354a-355c;  q 70, a 3 365b-367a; q 97, a i, ans 513c-514c; q 104, a
i,  rep  1,3 534c-536c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A
4, ans 5a-6a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148J 116b-c; XIII [52-60] 126a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i 355a-372d passim, esp def i 355a, def 3,6
355b, axiom 1-2 355c-d, PROP 1-15 355d-361d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
i  [128-142]  96a-b; BK II [81-105] 113a-b; bk vi [296-353] 202b204a esp
[320-353]  203a-204a;  [430-436] 205b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a 34 Newton:
Optics,   bk  hi,  541b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  137a-140c  53  James:
Psychology,  68a-b 11. The apprehension of change: by sense, by reason 7
Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedo,  231c232a  / Timaeus, 447b-d;
457c-d  /  Sophist,  565a-569a  esp  568a-569a/  Laivs,  bk  x, 765a-b 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch ii 298c-300a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987''29-^i8]  505b-d;  CH  9  [990^9-15] 508d; bk hi, ch 2 [996*18-^26]
514d-515b;  bk  iv,  ch 5 528c-530c; ch 8 [1012^ 23-32] 532d; BKxi, ch 6
[1063*10-^8]  591b-d  /  Soul,  BK  III,  CH  I  [425*14-^10]  657b-d 12
Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [311-328] 5a; bk ii [62-141] 15d-16d;
[308-332]  19a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 23 50b-c; bk XI,
PAR  17-41  93b-99b / Christian Doctrine, bk I, CH 8-9 626c-627a; bk ii,
ch  38  654b-c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 15, rep 2
89b-90b; q 78, a 3, rep 2 410a411d; q 84, A I esp rep 3 440d-442a; q 86,
A  3  463b-d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part hi, 172b; part iv, 249c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  291b-294b  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 5-6
138b-139c; aph 23 153d-154c; aph 40-41 170c174b

[270b]
11  to  lib 31 Descartes: Rides, xii, 24a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch v 131b; ch vii, sect 8-9 132d-133a; ch viii, sect 18 136a-b;
ch  xiv,  sect  6-12 156b-157c; CH xxiii, sect 28-29 211b-212a; ch xxvi,
SECT  1-2  217a-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 27a-33d esp 28b-c, 29cd; 43a-b;
55c-56a;  76c-83b  esp  76c-d;  91d93c 53 James : Psychology, 405b-406b;
418b-419b;  510a  512a;  563a-567a;  612a-616b  esp  616a; 634b-635a 12.
Emotional aspects of change 12^. Rest and motion in relation to pleasure
and  pain  7  Plato:  Gorgias, 275c-277c / Timaeus, 463d464b / Philebus,
619d-620b;  626a-c;  631d632d  /  Latus,  bk vii, 713c-715a 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk iv, ch i
[121*27-39]
169b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch ii [ii52^8]-ch 12
[1153*17] 403c-404b; ch
14
[1154^20-30]
406c; bk X, ch 3
[1173*29-^7] 427c-d; ch 4
[1174*13-^14] 428b-429a
/ Politics, bk viii, CH 5 [1340*1-^19] 545c-546a / Rhetoric, bk i, CH II
[1369^33-1370*17]  613a-c; [1371*26-30] 614d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead,
tr  iv,  ch  18-21, 167a-168c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
32,  A 2 759d-760d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  hi  395a-422a,c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, SECT
29-48  184d-190d  passim 50 Marx: Capital, 166b-c 53 James : Psychology,
410a 54 Freud: Narcissism, 403d-404a / General Introduction, 592c-593a /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Pri7iciple,  639b-640a;  648d-649c  / Ego and Idy
701a-b  12^.  The  love  and  hatred  of  change 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at
Colonus
[1211-1248]
125b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 224d-225a 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv,
344b-d  /  Latvs,  bk  vii, 717d-718d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14
[1154^20-30]   406c   10  Hippocrates:  Fractures,  par  i  74b,d-75a  /
Aphorisms, sect ii, par 50 133d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[11051174]
29a-30a,c; bk hi
[912-977]
41d-42c;
[1053-1084] 43c-44a; bk v
[156-173] 63a-b;
[1379-1435] 79a-d
12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect 14 258d; sect 17 259b-d; bk iv,
sect  3 263b-264a; sect 5 264b; sect 12 264c; sect 33 266c-d; sect 35-36
266d; sect 42-43 267b; bk v,

[271a]
Ubto  13  Chaptkr  10: change 211 SECT lo 270c-cl; sect 13 271b; sect 23
272b;  SECT  T^Ti^  273b-c; bk vi, sect 15 275a-b; sect 36 277c; BK VII,
SECT  18-19  281a; sect 35 282a; sect 49 282d; bk viii, sect 6 285d286a;
sect  16,18 286d; bk ix, sect 21 293b-c; SECT 28 293d-294a; bk x, sect 7
297b-c; SECT 31 SOOa-b; sect 34 301a 13 V^irgil: Anieidy bk i
[441-462]
115a-b csp
[462I 115b
14  Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 225b-c; 229a-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  iv  12b-19b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 18 57d58a; par
25-26  60a-  b  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk I, CH 9 627a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c;  XIV  [94-120]  20c-d; xxvi [90-142] 39ac; purgatory, xi [73-117]
69c-70a;  xiv [91126] 74c-75a; xxviii [76-148J 96d-97c; paradise, xv-xvi
128b-132a  22  Chaucer: Wife of Bath's Prologue ['^<^S^-6j{io] 256a-269b
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  cii  vi,  9b-c  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
79c-d;  part  ii,  150c;  154b-c;  part  iv,  271d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
33b-36a;  47a-51a;  131b132a;  281a-282a;  292d-294b; 318c-319b; 458b-c;
462c-465c;  478c-479c; 540d-541c 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Iletiry IV, act hi,
sc i
[45-56] 483b
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii
[68-73]
32b;  ACT  V, sc i [202-240] 66c-d / Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc hi
[145-189] 124a-c; act IV, sc IV [26-50] 128c / Ki7ig Lear, act iv, sc i
[10-12] 269c / Sonnets, xv 588b-c; xxv 590a;
xlix  593d;  lx  595b-c;  lxiv-lxv  596a-b;  cxvi  604a;  cxxiii 605a 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, 2a 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 274a; 285b-c
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 14c-15c esp 15a-b; 16c-d; 61b; 65b-c;
90b-d  /  Novum Orgaman, bk i, aph 90 124d-125a 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  ii,  45d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 4-11 398d400b; part v,
prop  6,  schol 454a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 129-131 195b; 135 196a; 139-143
196b-200a;  164-172  202b-203b;  181  204b / Vacuum, 355a-358b 35 Locke:
Civil Government, ch xix, sect 223 76c-d / Human Understanding, 85a-c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  105a-106b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 335c 43
Declaration  of Independence: [15-20] lb 43 Federalist: number 14, 62a-d
43  Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim / Representative Government, 336b-c;
350c;  377d378a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 178a-c; part i,
209b; 258b 47 Goethe: Faust, dedication la-b; part ii
[11,573-586]
281b-282a;
[11,612-622]
282b283a 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 302b; 577c-d

[271b]
51  ToLsrov: War and Peace, bk v, 221b d; bk vi, 238c-243d passim; 267c:
bk vii, 275a 276b; 294a b; bk viii, 305b d; 307d 309c; kk ix, 356b d: BK
x,  394d;  403a  405a;  i.k  \ii,  538a539c;  556d-557a;  bk  xv,  639c;
eimi.O(;ue  i,  645a  646c;  668a 669c 53 Jami:s: Psychology, 524a-525a;
707b  708a  54  I'^riu'd:  Ikyond the Pleasure Principle, 651b d 13. The
problem  of  the eternity of motion or change 7 Plmo: Phacdrus, 124b-c /
Timaeus, 450c451a; 460c-d 8 Aristoile: Physics, bk iv, ch it,
[222**29
''S] 302b; BK viii, ch 1-4 334a-340d; cii 8 348b352a / Heavens, bk i, ch
2 [269^2- h)] 360c-d; CH3 [270*^1-24] 361c-362a; bk i, ch 9 [279*12]- BK
II, CH I
[284^6] 370b-376a; bk
ii,  cii  6  379c-380c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk 11, CH lo-ii
437d-441a,c  /  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch 14 [352''i6-353"27] 458b-459a,c
passim; bk ii, CH 3 [356^2-357''4] 462b-c / Metaphysics, bk IX, CH 8
[1050*^20-28] 576c-d; bk
xii, ch 6
[io7i'^3]-cH
7
[1072*22]
601b-602b; ch 7
[1073*2-34] 603a-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [951-1051] 12d-14a csp
[988-1007]
13b; bk ii
[80-141]
16a-d; [294-302] 18d; [569-580] 22b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect
13  271b; SECT 23 272b; bk vi, sect 15 275a-b; bk ix, SECT 28 293d-294a;
bk  xi,  sect  27  306b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-891a  17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 7-8
122d124c; CH 11-13 126a-129a / Fourth Ennead, tr IV, CH 7-8 161d-162d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  10-17  91d-93c;  bk xii, par 8-9
lOla-c;  par 12-16 101d-103a; par 29 105d-106a; par 33 107b-c; par 39-40
109a-110a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi, CH 4-6 324a-325d; bk xii, ch 10-20
348b357a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, A 2, REP 2 41d-42c;
a 4, ans 43b-44b; q 14, A 12, ANS 85d-86d; q 46, aa 1-2 250a-255a; Q 75,
a  I, REP I 378b-379c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 77,
A  2,  ans 945a-946b; q 91, a 2 1017c1020c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii,
56b-c  28  Galileo:  Ttvo  New Sciences, third day, 224d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk ii, aph 35, 163a; aph 48, 186b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, xiii,
27b-c  34  Newton:  Principles,  law  i  14a; bk hi, prop 10 284a-285a /
Optics,  bk  hi, 540a-541b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk it, ch xiv,
sect  26  160c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 135a-137a,c; 152a-d; 160b-161d 53
James: Psychology, 882a

[272a]
14. The theory of the prime mover: the order and hierarchy of movers and
moved  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  / Statesman, 587a589c / Laws, bk x,
758d-765c  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  1-2 326a-329a; BK VIII
334a-355d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2
[300^8-301*12]
391d-392c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 7 421d-423b; bk ii, ch 6
[334*6-9] 435a
/ Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 8
[1012^22-32] 532d; bk v, ch
ii
[1018^19-22]
539c-d; bk ix, ch 8
[1049^17-28]
575b-c;
[1050*3-^6] 575d-576b; bk xii, ch 4 [1070^2235] 600b; CH
5
[1071*30-36]
601a;  ch  6-8 601b'605a 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch i [698*1015]
233a;  ch 7,-6 234a-236b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 14, 120d121a
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
2,  A  3, ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; q 9, A I, rep I 38c-39c; q
19,  a  i, rep 3 108d-109c; Q 25, A 2, rep 3 144c-145b; q 46, a i, rep 5
250a-252d; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-278c; q 60, a I, rep 2 310b-311a; q 75,
a i, rep i 378b379c; QQio5-ii9538d-608d passim; part i-ii, Q I, a 4, ANS
612a-613a;  a 6, ans 614a-c; q 6, A I, rep 3 644d-646a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 109, A I, ANS 338b-339c; part hi suppl, q 91, a
I,  REP  2  1016b-1017c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-142]
107b-d; XIII [52-84] 126a-b; xxvii
[106-120]
148b-c; xxviii [1-78] 148d-149c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 79d-80a 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi, 107c-110d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
415b-417a esp 416b-c; 426a-429b; 443a-c; 490d-493a esp 492b-c 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  v [469-505] 185b186a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 77 186a 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 140b,d-145c; 177b-179b; 239a-240b / Practical Reason,
334b-337a,c  /  Judgement, 597d-599d; 610b-613a,c 15. The immutable 15a.
The  immutability  of  the  objects  of  thought: the realm of truth Old
Testament:  Psalms,  100:5;  117:2;  119:160;  146:6—  (D) Psalms, 99:5;
116:2;  118:160;  145:7  /  Proverbs, 8:22-30 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
24:9—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 24:14 New Testament: II John, 2 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus, 125ab / Symposium, 167b-d / Phaedo,
231b-232b  /  Republic,  bk  v, 371a-373c / Timaeus, 447a-d; 457b-458a /
Parmenides, 487c-491a / Sophist,

[272b]
214  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  14 to \5a 568a-b / Philebus, 634b-635b / Seventh
Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4*10-^^12] 8b-9a
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  8 104a-b / Metaphysics, BK I, CH 6
505b-506b; ch 9 508c-511c; bk III, CH I [995^13-18] 514a; [995^31-996*1]
514b;
[996*4-9]
[996*13-15]
514c; ch 2
[997^34-998^19] 516a-d; ch 3
[998^i4]-ch
4
[999^24]
517b-518c; ch 4
[iooi*4]-ch
6
[1002^31] 519d-521d; bk vii, ch 8 [1033^191034*8] 556d-557b; ch
10
[1035^32-1036*12]
559b-c; ch ii
[1036^32-1037*4]
560b-c;   ch   13-14   562a-563c;   ch  15  [1040*8-^4]  564a-c;  ch  16
[1040^28-1041*4] 564d-565a; bk ix, ch 8
[1050^35-1051*2]
576d-577a; bk x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch i
[1059*33-^14]
587b-c; BK XII, ch I
[1069*30-^2]
598b-c; ch 3
[1070*4-30] 599b-d;
bk  xiii,  ch  1-5 607a611d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6 341b-342c 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811b-d;  813d814b  17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  3 58d-59c / Third Ennead, tr ix 136a-138a,c / Fifth
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  i  238a-b; tr ix, ch 5-13 248a-251c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk XI, par 9-1 1 91c-92b / Christian
Doctrine, bk i, ch 8-10 626c-627b; bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 5, A 3, rep 4 25a-d; q 10, a 3, rep 3 42c-43b; q
16,  AA 7-8 99a-100d; q 44, a i, rep 3 238b-239a; q 84, a i, ans and rep
3  440d442a;  q  85, a i, rep 2 451c-453c; q 86, a 3 463b-d; q 113, a i,
ans  576a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 53, A I, ANS and
REP  2-3  19d-21a;  q  94,  aa  5-6  224d-226b  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  27d-28c;  43d-44c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 5ad-53a /
Meditations,  v  93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  123b; 216d-217d;
228a-c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 8 355c; prop 7 356c; prop
8,  schol  2 356d-357d; prop 17, scHOL 362c-363c; part ii, prop 32 385c;
prop  34  385d;  prop 37-39 386b-387a; prop 40, DEMONST 387a; prop 43-47
388c-391a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384a-b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ii, SECT 2 128a-b; bk hi, ch hi,
sect  19  259c260a;  ch  vi,  sect  6  269d-270a;  bk  iv,  ch i, SECT 9
308c-309b;  ch  hi,  sect  31  323c-d;  ch  XI,  SECT 14 358b-c 42 Kast.
Judgement, 551a-553c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, i, 115a /
Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude [73-74I
3a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428b-d

[273a]
l5hto  I5c  Chapter  10:  CHANGE 215 53 James: Psychology, 299a-304b csp
301a,  302a304b; 869a; 879b-882a 1 5b. The unalterability of the decrees
of fate 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xviii
[52-126]
130c-131c; BK XXII
[131-223I 156c-157c
5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [507-525] 45ab / Agamemnon [1018-1033] 63a
5 Euripides: Heracles Mad [1313-1353] 376c-d / Iphigenia Among the Tauri
[14:55-1499]
424a-d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 6c-10a; 20b-22a; BK II, 77a-b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 18b-d 12 ^picTiE.TVs:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 12 118d-120b; BK II, CH 8 146a-147c 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk hi, sect ii 262ab; bk X, sect 5 296d 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk  x  [606-632]  318b-319b 14 Plutarch: Caesar, 601c-604d 18 Augustine:
City  of  God, bk v, ch i-io 207d216c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 116, A 3 594c-595a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza
136-154 106a-108b 32 Milton: Arcades [54-83] 26b-27a / Paradise Lost, BK
VII  [170-173]  220b-221a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b;
epilogue I, 645a-650c; epilogue ii, 675a-c 15 c. The immutability of God
Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:18  / Deuteronomy, 32:39-40 / / Chronicles,
16:34-36—   (D)  /  Paralipomenon,  16:34-36  /  Psalms,  9:5-8;  10:16;
29:10-11;  33:10-11; 45:6; 48 esp 48:8, 48:14; 66:7; 89-90 esp 89:30-35,
90:1-4;  93:2; 102 esp 102:11-12, 102:26-27; 103:17-18; 136; 145-146 esp
145:13,  146:10—  (D)  Psalms, 9:69; 9:16; 28:10; 32:10-11; 44:7; 47 esp
47:9,  47:15; 65:7; 88-89 esp 88:31-36, 89:1-4; 92:2; loi csp 101:12-13,
101:27-28;  102:17-18;  135;  144-145 esp 144:13, 145:10 / Ecclesiastes,
3:1415   /  Isaiah,  40:8,28;  43:10-13;  57:15—  (D)  Isaias,  40:8,28;
43:10-13;  57:15  / Jerejniah, 10:10 {D) Jeremias, 10:10 / Lamentations,
5:19  /  Daniel,  6:25-27  /  Malachi, ^:6—{D) Malachias, 3:6 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  36:17;  39:20; 42:21— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 36:18-19;
39  :25; 42:2122 New Testament: Matthetv, 24:35 1 John, i :i-5 / Romans,
1:21-25;  6:23  /  Colossians,  1:16-17  /  /  Timothy,  1:17 / Hebrews,
1:10-12;  7:23-28;  13:7-8 I James, 1:17 / I John, 5:11-12 / Revelation,
1:17-18;  10:6;  11:15-18—  (D)  Apocalypse,  1:17-18;  10:6; 11:15-18 5
Sophocles  : Oedipus at Colonus [607-615] 120a 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii,
322d-323c; 324a-b

[273b]
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 6
[258^10259^^1] 344b 345d
/ Heavens, bk i, ch 9
[279*'23>4l370c-d; bk
ii, ch 7, [286"8-i3l377c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10
[337^15-23] 439a -b / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 5
[1015^9-16] 536a; bk
xii, ch 6-7 601b-603b; CH 9 605a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14
[ii54''2030] 406c
15  Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 296a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch
1-6  119b122d  /  Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch 18-21 351d353d 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 10 3b-c; bk IV, par 26 25c-d; par 29 26b; bk vii,
par 1-6 43b-45a; par 17-18 49a-b; par 23 50b-c; par 26, 51c; bk xii, par
1  1 lOld; par 18 103a-c; BK XIII, par 44 122d / City of God, bk vii, ch
30  261b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c;  bk x, ch i, 298b,d; bk xi, ch 10
327d-328d;  ch  21-22  333a-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3  342b,d-344b; ch 14
350d-351b;  ch  17 353a-354a / Christian Doctrine, bk I, CH 5 625d-626a;
ch  8  626c-627a;  CH  10  627b;  ch  22-23  629b-630c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  A  3, ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans and rep 4
14b15b;  QQ  9-10  38c-46d;  q  14, a 7 81d-82b; a 15 89b-90b; q 18, a 3
106b-107c; q 19, a 7 114d115d; Q 26, A I, rep 2 150b-c; q 43, a 2, rep 2
230d-231c; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-278c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 61, A 5, ans 58b-59d; part hi, q i, a i, rep 3 701d-703a; Q 2, a
i, ans 710a-711c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[5284] 126a-b; xxiv [130-141] 144a; xxviii [1-78]
148d-149c;  xxix  [13-36]  150b-c  22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2994-3015]
209a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  173a  25  Montaigne: Essays,
292d-294b  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 52b-d / Meditations, iii,
86a-87a;  v  93a-96a esp 93d95b / Objections and Replies, 228a-c; 229c-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i 355a-372d esp def i 355a, DEF 3,6-7 355b,
prop  3  356q,  prop  5-8  356b-357d,  prop  11-15  358b-361d,  prop  17
362b-363c,  prop 19-20 363c-364a, prop 33, scHOL I 367c-d, PROP 34 369a;
part  v,  prop  17  456c-d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk hi [372-389]
143b144a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  469 256a 34 Newton: Principles, bk iii,
general  schol, 370a-371a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvii,
SECT  20 172d-173c; ch xxiii, sect 21 209c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  117  436a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 175d-176c; 177b-179b; 190c; 192d;
201b-c  /  Practical  Reason, 352a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi, par 270, 85c / Philosophy ofHistory, part hi, 306a

[274a]
216 THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES 12 . Monadology, par 10-18

[274b]
For:  The broad philosophical context of the theory of change, see Being
5;  Desire  i  ; Form i-ib; Matter i-ib, 2b. The distinction between the
mutable  and  the  immutable, see Astronomy 8a; Being 7b(3); Element 5a;
Eternity  ^-^d; Form la; Truth 5. The issue concerning time and eternity
in  relation  to  change,  see  Astronomy 8c(i); Eternity i; Time 2, 2b;
World  4a.  A  discussion relevant to the theory of the prime mover, see
Angel  2a.  The  mathematical  and experimental approach to the study of
local  motion  and  the formulation of its laws, see Astronomy 8c-8c(3);
Mechanics 5-5f(2), 6c-6e; One and Many 3a(2); Quantity 5c; Space 2a. The
discussion  of biological and psychological change, see Animal 4a, 6h-y,
8b; Cause 2; Desire 2c-2d; Education 4, 5c, 6; Emotion ib, 2b; Habit 4b;
Reasoning  ib;  Time  7; Virtue and Vice 4b-4c. Other discussions of the
distinction  between  generation  and other kinds of change, see Art 2a;
Form id(2); World 4e(i); and for the problem of the transmutation of the
elements,  see Element 3c. The theory of historical change in nature and
society,  see  Evolution 4d, 6a, 7c; History 4b; Progress la, ic-2; Time
8a.  The  consideration of economic, political, and cultural change, see
Constitution  7—73,  8-8b;  Progress  3-4C, 6-6b; Revolution 2-2C, 4-4b;
Wealth  12.  The  discussion  of  change  or  becoming  as  an object of
knowledge,   see   Being   8a-8b;  Knowledge  6a(i);  Opinion  i.  Other
considerations  of  man's  attitude  toward  change  and mutability, see
Custom  and Convention 8; Progress 5; Time 7. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by authors not represented
in  this collection. Fof the date, place, and other facts concerning the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. I. II.
Aquinas. De Principiis Naturae Sextus Empiricus. Against the Physicists,
bk ii, Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy, part ii, ch 2, 5 24-53 •
Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk hi, ch 1-20 HoBBES. Co?2r(?;72//2^fio^j, PART
III,  CH  15-16,  21-22  Crescas.  Or  Adonai,  propositions 4-9, 13-14,
Berkeley. Siris 17, 25 Kant. Metaphysical Voundations of Natural Suarez.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae, xviii (11), Science xxx (8-9), lx (8), xlvi
(3), xlviii-l Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind, in John of Saint Thomas.
Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho-  . Science of Logic, vol i, bk i, sect i, ch
i(c) misticus, Philosophia Naturalis, part i, qq 14, 19,

[275a]
Voltaire,  "Motion,"  in  A  Philosophical Dictionary ScHOPENH AUEK. The
World  as  Will  and  Idea  Whevvell.  The  Philosophy  of the Inductive
Sciences,  VOL  I, BK n, CH 15 Helmholtz. Popular Lectures on Scientific
Subjects,  VII  Maxwell.  Matter  and  Motion Clifford. The Common Sense
ofthe Exact Sciences^ CH 5 LoTZE. Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4-5; bk ii, ch 4
Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk i, ch 5 CRtK:F.. History, Its Theory
and Practice Ber(;son. Creative Iivolution . The Creative Mind, cii 5

[275b]
Chapter 10: CHANGE 217 G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of Science, essay iii-iv
Heidegger.  Sein  und Zeit B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics, en 54,
56-59  .  The  Analysis of Matter, ch 27, 33-34 Eddingion. The Nature of
the  Physical Worlds ch 5 Dewey. Experience and Nature, ch 2 . The Quest
for Certainty, ch 2 Whitehead. The Concept of Nature, ch 5 . Process and
Reality, part ii, ch 10 Santayanta. Scepticism and Animal Faith, cii 5 .
The Realm of Matter, ch 5-6 RiEZLER. Physics and Reality

[276a]
CITIZEN,"  like  ''comrade," has been and still is a revolutionary word.
Both  words  have  been  titles  proudly  adopted  by  men to mark their
liberation  from the yoke of despotism or tyranny. Both titles are still
sought  by  those who have not yet gained admission to the fraternity of
the free and equal. The rank and status of citizenship first appeared in
the ancient world with the beginning of constitutional government in the
citystates  of Greece. The Greeks were conscious of this fact, and proud
of it. In terms of it, they set themselves apart from the barbarians who
were  subjects  of the Great King of Persia or the Egyptian Pharaoh. The
Spartan  heralds,  according  to  Herodotus,  thus  address  the Persian
commander:  "Thou hast experience of half the matter; but the other half
is  beyond  thy knowledge. A slave's life thou understandest; but, never
having  tasted  liberty,  thou canst not tell whether it is sweet or no.
Ah!  hadst thou known what freedom is, thou wouldst have bidden us fight
for  it,  not  with  the  spear only, but with the battle-axe." Not only
Herodotus  and  Thucydides  but  also  the  great  tragic poets, notably
Aeschylus  in  the  Persians,  record this Hellenic sense of distinction
from  the surrounding peoples who still lived in childlike submission to
absolute  rule.  But the Greeks were also conscious that their political
maturity  as  self-governing citizens was, as Aristotle intimates in the
Politics,  a  recent  development  from the primitive condition in which
tribal  chieftains  ruled  despotically.  The  basic distinction between
subjection  and  citizenship  is  inseparable  from  the  equally  basic
distinction  between  absolute  and  limited,  or  between  despotic and
constitutional,  government.  The  difference between these two modes of
government is treated in the chapter on

[276b]
Cbapfern:  CITIZEN  INTRODUCTION  Constitution. It is sufficient here to
note that the difference in the authority and power possessed by rulers—
according  as it is absolute or limited—corresponds with a difference in
the  status, the degree of freedom, and the rights and privileges of the
people  ruled.  In  ORDER  TO  UNDERSTAND citizeuship it is necessary to
understand  the several ways in which men can belong to or be parts of a
political  community.  There  are  two  divisions  among  men  within  a
community which help us to define citizenship. According to one of these
divisions,  the  native-born are separated from aliens or foreigners. In
the  Greek  city-states  it  was  almost impossible for aliens to become
citizens.  Plutarch  notes  that Solon's law of naturalization, which he
qualifies  as  "of  doubtful  character,"  would  not allow strangers to
become  citizens  unless  "they  were  in perpetual exile from their own
country, or came with their whole family to trade there." The metics, or
aliens, who were allowed in the city were usually a class apart. In Rome
the  situation  was  different; it was possible for outsiders to receive
the  high  honor  of  Roman  citizenship. "The aspiring genius of Rome,"
Gibbon  writes,  "sacrificed  vanity  to  ambition,  and  deemed it more
prudent,  as  well  as honourable, to adopt virtue and merit for her own
wheresoever  they  were  found,  among  slaves  or strangers, enemies or
barbarians." Most modern republics set up naturalization proceedings for
the  regular  admission of some, if not all, immigrants to membership in
the  state.  Yet  a  difference  always  remains between a citizen and a
denizen,  or  mere  resident. Accordingly, Rousseau criticizes Bodin for
confusing citizens with townsmen. "M. D'Alembert," he says, "has avoided
this error, and in 218

[277a]
his  article on Geneva, has clearly distinguished the four orders of men
(or even five, counting mere foreigners) who dwell in our town, of which
two  only  compose the Republic." According to a second way in which men
are  divided within the political community, free men are separated from
slaves.  The  latter, though they may be native-born, are not members of
the  political  community,  but  merely  part  of its property. A slave,
according  to  Aristotle,  is  one  "who, being a human being, is also a
possession."  But,  he  says  in  another  place, "property, even though
living  beings are included in it, is no part of a state; for a state is
not  a  community  of living beings only, but a community of equals." On
this  principle, Aristotle excludes more than the chattel slave from the
status and privilege of citizenship. "We cannot consider all those to be
citizens,"  he writes, "who are necessary to the existence of the state;
for example, children are not citizens equally with grown-up men. ... In
ancient times, and among some nations," he continues, "the artisan class
were  slaves  or  foreigners,  and therefore the majority of them are so
now.  The  best  form  of state will not admit them to citizenship." The
"slaves who minister to the wants of individuals," and the "mechanics or
laborers who are the servants of the community" are to be counted as its
"necessary  people"  but  not as members of the state. When he discusses
the  size  and character of the population for an ideal state, Aristotle
says,  "we  ought  not to include everybody, for there must always be in
cities  a  multitude  of  slaves  and  sojourners and foreigners; but we
should  include only those who are members of the state, and who form an
essential  part of it." The exclusion of slaves and resident aliens from
membership  in  the  political  community  has a profound bearing on the
meaning  of  the  political concept expressed by the words "the people."
The  people is not the same as the population—all those human beings who
live  within the state's borders. Even in societies which have abolished
chattel  slavery and in which suffrage tends to be unrestricted, infants
and  aliens  remain  outside  the  pale of political life. The people is
always a part— the active political part—of the population.

[277b]
Chapter  11: CITIZEN 219 Thi: distinction of citizen from slave, infant,
or  alien  ^.Vy:^  not complete liic picture. The subjects of a king arc
not  slaves,  nor  are  they  citizens of a republic. Yet like citizens,
subjects have membership in the political community. They constitute the
people the king serves as well as rules, unless he is a tyrant, for only
if he is a tyrant does he treat them as if they were his property, to be
used  for  his own pleasure or interest. Sometimes a distinction is made
between  first-  and  second-class  citizens,  and  then the latter, who
occupy  an  intermediate  position  between citizenship and slavery, are
regarded  as  subjects.  "Since  there  are  many  forms of government,"
Aristotle  writes,  "there  must  be  many  varieties  of  citizens, and
especially  of citizens who are subjects; so that under some governments
the  mechanic  and the laborer will be citizens, but not in others." The
whole  meaning  of  citizenship  changes  for Aristotle when the working
classes  are  admitted  to  it. From a somewhat different point of view,
Aquinas  holds  that  a  man  can  be "said to be a citizen in two ways:
first,  absolutely;  secondly, in a restricted sense. A man is a citizen
absolutely  if  he  has all the rights of citizenship; for instance, the
right  of debating or voting in the popular assembly. On the other hand,
any  man  may  be called citizen only in a restricted sense if he dwells
within  the  state,  even lowly people, or children, or old men, who are
not  fit  to  enjoy  power in matters pertaining to the common welfare."
Those  who  are  thus  disfranchised,  but  are not slaves, are subjects
rather  than  citizens in the full sense. It is possible, of course, for
men  to  have the dual status of subject and citizen, as is the case now
in England and the self-governing dominions of the British commonwealth.
This  double  status  does  not blur the distinction between citizen and
subject;  rather  it  signifies the mixed nature of a form of government
which   is   both   royal—at  least  in  its  vestiges  of  monarchy—and
constitutional.  In  the  time  of  Locke,  when  a great constitutional
victory  had  been  won  against  the  despotism of the last Stuart, the
English people did not yet regard themselves as citizens. Observing that
the  title  of  citizen  has  never  been  given "to the subjects of any
prince,  not  even  the  ancient  Macedonians,"  Rousseau  finds himself
compelled to add: "not

[278a]
220  THE  GREAT  IDEAS even the English of today, though they are nearer
Uberty  than  anyone  else."  Unlike  citizens,  the subjects of a king,
especially  of  one  claiming absolute power, have no voice in their own
government,  and  no  legal means for protecting their natural rights as
men.  So  long  as the absolute ruler does not tyrannize, he governs for
the  welfare  of  his  people;  and  so, though a despot in the sense of
wielding  absolute  power  over political inferiors, he is benevolent in
the  sense  of  serving  rather  than using them. But if he ceases to be
benevolent  and  turns  tyrannical, his subjects have no recourse except
rebellion.   They  must  resort  to  violence  in  order  to  emancipate
themselves  from a condition which amounts to slavery. A citizen, on the
other hand, is safeguarded in his legal as well as in his natural rights
and,  in  some  modern republics at least, he is provided with juridical
m.eans  for  rectifying  supposed injustices. For citizens, the right of
rebellion  is the last, not the only, resort. The distinct conditions of
slavery, subjection, and citizenship can be summarized by defining three
ways  in  which rulers are related to the persons they rule. These three
relations  seem  to have been first clearly differentiated by Aristotle.
He  finds  all three relationships in the structure of the household, as
that  is  constituted  in  antiquity. Ofhousehold management, he writes,
"there  are  three  parts—one  is the rule of a master over slaves . . .
another  ol a father, and a third of a husband." In each case, "the kind
of  rule  differs: the freeman rules over the slave after another manner
from  that  in which the male rules over the female, or the man over the
child."  As  we  have  already  seen, Aristotle conceives the slave as a
piece  of  property.  When he says that the slave "wholly belongs to his
master" or that "he is a part of his master, a living but separated part
of  his  bodily  frame,"  he  is  obviously considering only the chattel
slave.  There  are,  as the chapter on Slavery indicates, other kinds or
degrees  of  slavery  less  extreme than this. But chattel slavery, more
clearly  than  the  attenuated forms of servitude, defines the nature of
mastery. The master manages or uses

[278b]
the  slave  as  he manages and uses other instruments—inanimate tools or
domesticated  animals.  "The rule of a master," xA.ristotle declares, is
"exercised  primarily with a view to the interest of the master." Yet it
"accidentally  considers the slave, since, if the slave perish, the rule
of  the master perishes with him." Thus conceived, the slave lacks every
vestige of political liberty. He is treated as radically inferior to his
master—almost  as  if he were something less than a man. He has no voice
in his own government, nor is his welfare the paramount consideration of
his ruler. In short, we have slavery when one man governs another in the
way in which a man manages his property, using it for his own good. When
one  man governs another in the way in which good parents administer the
affairs  of  children  as  members of the household, we have the type of
rule  which  also  appears  in  the  relation  between absolute kings or
benevolent  despots  and  their subjects. "The rule of a father over his
children  is  royal,"  Aristotle writes, "for he rules by virtue of both
love  and  of  the respect due to age, exercising a kind of royal power.
...  A  king," Aristotle adds, "is the natural superior of his subjects,
but  he  should  be  of  the same kin or kind with them, and such is the
relation  of elder and younger, father and son." From the analogous type
of rule in the family, we see two differences between the condition of a
slave  and  that  of  a  subject  under absolute or despotic rule in the
state.  The inferiority of children, unlike that of slaves, is not their
permanent  condition.  It  is  an  aspect  of their immaturity. They are
temporarily incapable of judging what is for their good, and so need the
direction  of  their  superiors  in  age,  experience, and prudence. But
children have some equality with their parents, to the extent that their
humanity  is  recognized  as  the reason why they should not be ruled as
slaves,  but governed for their own welfare. The government of children,
Aristotle  declares, "is exercised in the first instance for the good of
the  governed,  or  for the common good of both parties, but essentially
for  the  good  of  the  governed."  In  the same way, the subjects of a
benevolent    despot,   or   of   any   absolute   monarch   who   rules
paternalistically, are said to be

[279a]
governed for their own good. They are served, not used, by their rulers;
and to this extent they liave a degree ot political liberty. But they do
not  have  the  complete liberty which exists only with self-government.
That  occurs  only under constitutional rule, which for Aristotle has an
imperfect analogue in the family in the relation of husband and wife. In
the  state, however, it is perfectly represented by the relation between
the holldcrs of public ollice and other citizens. "In the constitutional
state,"  Aristotle  says, "the citizens rule and are ruled by turns; for
the  idea  of  a  constitutional  state  implies that the natures of the
citizens  are  equal,  and do not differ at all." I'he citizen, in other
words,  is  one  "who  has the power to take part in the deliberative or
judicial  administration of the state." Rousseau seems to have a similar
conception  of  the citizen as both ruling and ruled, though he uses the
word  "subject"  to  designate  the  citizen  as ruled. "The people," he
writes,  "are  called  citizens,  as sharing in the sovereign power, and
subjects,  as  being  under  the laws of the State." Because the man who
holds  office  in  a constitutional government is first of all a citizen
himself,  and  only  secondly an official vested with the authority of a
political  office, the citizen is a man ruled by his equals and ruled as
an  equal. Observing these facts, Aristotle describes citizenship as the
one ''indefinite office" set up by a constitution. It is indefinite both
in  tenure  and  by  comparison  with  the various magistracies or other
offices  which  have more definitely assigned functions. Since a citizen
is  ruled  only  by  other citizens, and since he has the opportunity of
ruling  others  in  turn,  citizenship involves political liberty in the
fullest  sense.  This does not mean freedom yrow government, but freedom
through  self-government—all  the  freedom  a  man  can have in society,
liberty  under  law  and  proportioned  to  justice.  Two of these three
political  conditions  slavery  and  subjection—naturally receive fuller
treatment  in  the  chapter  on  Slavery.  The  discussion of the third,
citizenship,  belongs  not only to this chapter, but also to the chapter
on  Constitution,  and  to  other  chapters  which  deal  with  forms of
constitutional   government,   such   as   Aristocracy,  Democracy,  and
Oligarchy.

[279b]
Chapter  11:  CITIZEN  221  For the same reason- that the rcvokiiionists
against absolutism or despotism in the i8th century use the phrase "free
government"  for  republican  institutions,  tiiey also use "citizen" to
designate  a  free  man,  a  man who possesses the political liberty and
equality  which they regard as the natural right of men because they are
men.  In  this respect they do not differ substantially from their Greek
or  Roman  ancestors who prize constitutional government and citizenship
as   conditions   of   freedom   and  equality.  Furthermore,  like  the
constitutionalists  of  antiquity,  the  republicans of the i8th century
are, with few if any exceptions, not democrats in the sense of extending
the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizenship to all adults. In the i8th
century slavery still exists; and a large part even of those who are not
in   economic   bondage   remains   outside  the  pale  of  citizenship,
disqualified  by accidents of birth such as race or sex, and by the lack
of  sufficient  wealth  or property which makes it necessary for them to
labor  in  order  to  live.  It  is  not  only  an ancient oligarch like
Aristotle  who  thinks  that  "the  ruling class should be the owners of
property,  for  they are citizens, and the citizens of a state should be
in  good  circumstances; whereas mechanics" should have "no share in the
state."  In  the  iSth century, as w^ell as in ancient Greece, extending
the  privileges  of citizenship to indentured apprentices, day laborers,
or  journeymen,  is  a  form of radicalism known as "extreme democracy."
Kant  may  be taken as representative of an enlightened point of view in
the  iSth  century. He finds that there are "three juridical attributes"
that belong by right to the citizens: "i. constitutional freedom, as the
right  of  every citizen to have to obey no other law than that to which
he has given his consent or approval; 2. civil equality, as the right of
the  citizen  to  recognize  no  one  as  a superior among the people in
relation to himself . . . and 3. political independence, as the right to
owe  his  existence and continuance in society not to the arbitrary will
of  another,  but  to  his  own  rights  and  powers  as a member of the
commonwealth."  The  last  attribute  leads  Kant to distinguish between
"active  and passive citizenship." Although he admits that this "appears
to stand in contradiction to the definition of a citizen as

[280a]
222  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  such,"  he  concludes that there are some in the
community  not entitled to the full privileges of citizenship. It is his
contention,  widely  shared  in  the  i8th century, that suffrage, which
"properly   constitutes   the  poUtical  qualification  of  a  citizen,"
presupposes  the  "independence  or  self-sufficiency  of the individual
citizen  among the people." Consequently he denies suffrage to "everyone
who  is compelled to maintain himself not according to his own industry,
but  as it is arranged by others." Such a restriction, he says, includes
"the  apprentice of a merchant or tradesman, a servant who is not in the
employ  of the state, a minor" and "all women." They are "passive parts"
of the state and do not have "the right to deal with the state as active
members of it, to reorganize it, or to take action by way of introducing
certain laws." Kant insists, however, that "it must be made possible for
them  to  raise  themselves from this passive condition in the State, to
the condition of active citizenship." The foregoing discussion shows the
connection  between  the  idea  of citizenship and the two revolutionary
movements  which  John  Stuart  Mill  notes  in  the history of poUtical
thought  and action. The first is the movement to obtain "recognition of
certain  immunities,  called political liberties or rights, which it was
to  be  regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler to infringe, and which
if  he did infringe, specific resistance, or general rebellion, was held
to  be  justifiable."  This  is  the  revolutionary  effort to overthrow
despotism and to establish constitutional government, with the status of
citizenship  for  at  least  some part of the population frequently much
less  than  half  of  the  total. The second revolutionary movement goes
further.  It  presupposes the existence of government by law and aims to
perfect   it.  It  therefore  seeks  to  obtain  "the  establishment  of
constitutional  checks,  by  which the consent of the community, or of a
body  of  some  sort,  supposed  to  represent  its interests, is made a
necessary  condition to some of the more important acts of the governing
power."  Since,  according  to  Mill, it aims to make the consent of the
governed  effective  through an adequate representation of their wishes,
this movement inevitably leads to

[280b]
the  fight  against  franchise  restrictions  andybr universal suffrage,
which  would  admit  every  normal, adult human being to the freedom and
equality  of  citizenship.  The  first revolution has a long history. It
begins with the Greek city-states which, having won this victory against
the  Persians,  lost  it  to the Macedonian conquerors. It happens again
with  the establishment of the Roman republic after the expulsion of the
Tarquins, and again it is undone when the Caesars assume absolute power.
This  part  of  the  story is told with varying emotions by Plutarch and
Polybius,  Tacitus  and Gibbon. During the Middle Ages the same struggle
appears  in  the  various  efforts  to  establish  the supremacy of law,
particularly  through  the  development  of customary and canon law. The
revolution  still  continues in the 17th and 1 8th centuries and the new
heights  it reaches are reflected in the writings of a constitutionalist
like  Locke  and  republicans  like  Rousseau,  Kant,  and  the American
Federalists. The Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the
United  States  are  perhaps  the  classic docum.ents of this historical
phase.  The second revolution, particularly as identified with the fight
for  universal  suffrage, is a relatively recent event. Its roots may go
back  as far as Cromwell's time to the activity of the Levellers, and in
the  18th  century  to  the  writings  of  John Cartwright. But what is,
perhaps,  its  first  full  expression  does  not  appear  until  Mill's
Representative  Government.  In that book, Mill lays down the principles
of  the franchise reforms which began in the 19th century, but which, as
in  the  case  of  woman  suffrage  or  the repeal of the poll tax, were
carried  through  only  yesterday  or  are  still  in  progress. Yet the
struggle  for universal suffrage—or, as Mill would say, against treating
any human being as a "political pariah"—does have an ancient parallel in
the  conflict between democratic and oligarchical constitutions in Greek
political life and thought. These two types of constitution were opposed
on   the   qualifications   for   citizenship  and  public  office.  The
oligarchical constitution restricted both to men of considerable wealth.
At  the  other extreme, as Aristotle observes, the most radical forms of
Greek  democracy granted citizenship to the working classes, and gave no
advantage to the rich in

[281a]
filling  the  magistracies,  for  they selected officials from the whole
citizenry  by  lot.  The  parallelism  goes  no further than that. Greek
democracy,  even  when  it  denied  special privileges to the propertied
classes,  never  contemplated  the abolition of slavery or the political
emancipation  of  women. There are other differences between ancient and
modern  institutions  which  affect  the  character  of citizenship. The
problem  of  who shall be admitted to citizenship is fundamental in both
epochs.  Insofar  as  it connotes the condition of political liberty and
equality,  the  status  of citizenship remains essentially the same. But
the  rights  and  duties, the privileges and immunities, which belong to
citizenship   vary  with  the  difference  between  ancient  and  modern
constitutionalism.  Even  if they had been written, the constitutions of
the  ancient  world  would  not  have declared the rights of man and the
citizen,  nor  would they have had bills of rights appended to them. The
significance  of  these  modern  innovations (which begin, perhaps, with
Magna  Carta)  lies,  not in a new conception of citizenship, but in the
invention  of juridical means to endow the primary office of citizenship
with  sufficient  legal power to protect it from invasion by government.
In  The  Federalist,  Hamilton  maintains  that "bills of rights are, in
their origin, stipulations between kings and their subjects, abridgments
of  prerogative  in  favour  of  privilege,  reservations  of rights not
surrendered  to  the prince." Defending the absence of a special bill of
rights  in  the original Constitution, he insists that "the Constitution
is  itself, in every rational sense, and to every useful purpose, a bill
of  rights."  It declares and specifies "the political privileges of the
citizens  in  the  structure  and administration of the government," and
"defines  certain immunities and modes of proceeding, which are relative
to  personal  and  private  concerns."  Nevertheless,  the right of free
speech  and  free  assembly  and  the right to trial by a jury of peers,
along  with  the immunity from unwarranted searches and seizures or from
ex  post  facto  laws  and  bills  of  attainder,  provided by the early
amendments to the Constitution, do

[281b]
CuAPTKR  11:  CITIZEN 223 give the citizen additional protection against
interference in the performance of his civic duties, such as independent
political   thought  and  action,  or  in  the  exercise  of  his  human
privileges, such as freedom of religious worship. The invention of these
consiiiuiioual devices sprang from the bitter experience of coercion and
intimidation  under  Star  Chamber  proceedings,  royal  censorship, and
unlimited  poMce  power.  A citizen who can be coerced or intimidated by
his  government  differs  only  in  name from the subject of an absolute
despot.  In  addition  to  having these legal safeguards, modern differs
from  ancient  citizenship in the way in which its rights and privileges
are  exercised.  The machinery of suffrage is not the same when citizens
act  through  elected representatives and when they participate directly
in the dehberations and decisions of government, by voting in the public
forum.  The  problem  of  education  for citizenship is in some respects
stated   in   almost   identical   terms  by  such  different  political
philosophers as Plato and John Stuart Mill. In both the Republic and the
Lavus,   Plato  emphasizes  that  "education  is  the  constraining  and
directing  of youth towards that right reason which the law affirms." By
this  he  means  not  only that education will affect the laws, but also
that  the  laws  themselves  have  an  educational  task to perform. The
educational  program  is  thus  planned  and conducted bv the state. The
guardians—  the  only  citizens in the Republic in the full sense of the
term—are  trained  for  public  life,  first  by the discipline of their
passions,  and  second by the cultivation of their minds. Their passions
are  disciplined  by music and gymnastics, their minds cultivated by the
liberal  arts and dialectic. In the democracy which Mill contemplates as
an  ideal, "the most important point of excellence ... is to promote the
virtue  and intelligence of the people themselves." He -does not outline
a specific curriculum for the training of citizens, but it is clear that
he  thinks  their education cannot be accomplished in the schools alone.
The  superiority  of democracy, according to Mill, lies in the fact that
it calls upon the citizen "to weigh interests not his own; to be guided,
in case of conflicting claims, by another

[282a]
224  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  rule tiian his private partialities; to apply at
every  turn,  principles  and  maxims  which  have  for  their reason of
existence  the  common good; and he usually finds associated with him in
the  same work minds more familiarized than his own with these ideas and
operations,   whose   study   it  will  be  to  supply  reasons  to  his
understanding, and stimulation to his feeling for the general interest."
In  this  "school of public spirit" a man becomes a citizen by doing the
work of a citizen and so learning to act like one. If the future citizen
is  to act hke a free man, must he not also be trained in youth to think
like  one.?  Vocational  training prepares a man to be an artisan, not a
citizen.  Only liberal education is adequate to the task of creating the
free  and  critical  intelligence  required  for citizenship. Hence in a
state which rests on universal suffrage, the educational problem becomes
greatly  enlarged  in  scope,  if  not in intrinsic difficulty. With the
advent  of universal suffrage, which Mill advocates, the state must face
the  responsibility  for  making  liberal  education  available to every
future citizen. To say that all normal children have enough intelligence
to become citizens, but to regard the native endowment of a large number
of  them  as  incapable  of  liberal  education,  makes  a  travesty  of
citizenship.  Will  the  child who cannot profit by liberal education be
able  to discharge the duties of the office to which he will be admitted
upon  coming of age.? The training of character is always more difficult
than  the training of mind. In education for citizenship, the problem of
moral  training  involves  the  question—discussed  in  the  chapter  on
Virtue—whether  the  good  man  and  the  good  citizen are identical in
virtue.  For  x\ristotle, and seemingly also for Mill, the virtue of the
good man under an ideal constitution would be identical wdth that of the
good citizen. As both ruling and being ruled, "the good citizen ought to
be  capable  of both," Aristotle \^ rites. "He should know how to govern
like a freeman, and how to obey like a freeman— these are the virtues of
a  citizen.  And  although  the  temperance  and  justice of a ruler are
distinct  from those of a subject, the virtue of a good man will include
both: for the virtue

[282b]
of  the  good man who is free and also a subject, e.g. his justice, will
not  be  one but will comprise distinct kinds, the one qualifying him to
rule,  the  other  to  obey."  The  virtues  of  the  citizen direct him
primarily in the performance of his obligations to the state. But if the
welfare of the state is not the ultimate end of man, if there are higher
goods  which  command  human  loyalty,  if  man's  common humanity takes
precedence  over his membership in a particular state, then civic virtue
does  not  exhaust human excellence. More may be morally required of the
good  man  than  of  the  good citizen. The virtues of the saint and the
patriot  may  be of a different order. On this question, the great books
reveal   a   fundamental   disagreement  among  morahsts  and  political
philosophers,  who  differ  as Plato and Hegel differ from Augustine and
Aquinas,  or  from  Locke  and  Mill, on the place of the state in human
fife.  The  ancients  frequently appeal to a law higher than that of the
state.  Socrates  forever stands as the classic example of one who would
rather  die than disobey his inner voice— the command of his conscience.
A  Stoic  like Marcus Aurelius is willing to give unqualified allegiance
to  the  political  community  only  when  it  is the ideal city of man,
embracing  the whole human brotherhood. "My city and my countr}', so far
as  I  am Antoninus," he says, "is Rome, but so far as I am a man"—whose
"nature  is  rational  and  social"—  "it  is  the world." For Christian
theologians,  membership  in  the  city of God is a higher vocation than
citizenship  in  any earthly community—even when that is the city of man
at  its  best. The city of God demands a higher order of virtue than the
city  of  man.  Referring  to the earthly city, Augustine says that "the
things w^hich this city desires cannot justly be said to be evil, for it
is  itself,  in  its own kind, better than all other human goods. For it
desires earthly peace for the sake of enjoying earthly goods." It is all
right  for  men  to  seek  "these things" for they "are good things, and
without doubt the gifts of God." But, Augustine goes on to say, "if they
neglect  the  better  things  of the heavenly city, which are secured by
eternal  victory  and peace neverending, and so inordinately covet these
present good things that they believe them to be the

[283a]
only   desirable   things,"  then,  in  Augustine's  opinion,  they  arc
misdirected  in  their lo\e. In giving precedence to the commandments of
God,  the  theologians do not deprecate the commands of the state or the
obligations of citizenship. But those who belong to both cities may find
themselves  faced  with  a conflict between the law of the state and the
di\ine  law.  In  such  circumstances, the faithful have no choice. They
must obey God before man. "Laws that are contrary to the commandments of
God,"  Aquinas  holds, do not "bind a man in conscience" and "should not
be obeyed." This conflict BK-nvEEX human and divine law finds expression
in  antiquity  in  the  Antigone  of Sophocles. "It was not Zeus who had
published  me  that edict," Antigone says of the human law she disobeys;
"nor  deemed  I that the decrees were of such force, that a mortal could
override  the unwritten and unfailing statutes of heaven. For their life
is  not of to-day or yesterday, but from all time, and no man knows when
they  were  first put forth." The problem which Antigone faces can occur
in  as  many  other  ways  as there are possibilities of tension between
individual  conscience  or  deOUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  The individual in
relation to the state 2. The conception of citizenship 2a. The status or
office  of  citizenship  in  relation to the principle of constitutional
government   2^.  The  distinction  between  citizen  and  subject:  the
distinction  between  the subjects of a constitutional monarchy and of a
despotism  2C.  The  character and extent of citizenship under different
types  of constitutions 3. The qualifications for citizenship: extent of
suffrage   4.   The   rights,  duties,  privileges,  and  immunities  of
citizenship  5.  The  virtues of the citizen and the virtues of the good
man 6. Education for citizenship 7. Political citizenship and membership
in  the  city  of  God  8.  The idea of world citizenship: the political
brotherhood of man 9. Historical episodes and stages in the struggle for
citizenship

[283b]
Chaptlr  11:  citizen  225  sire and political obligation. Whatever form
this  takes,  the  conflict confronts the political philosopher with all
the questions that constitute the problem of the individual and society,
or  man  and  the  state.  To  what  extent  and in what respects is the
individual's  personality  sacred  and  inviolable bv I he state ? I low
much freedom from government has the individual a right to demand.'' How
much  individual sacrifice has the state a right to expect? Is the state
merely  a means in the indiv idual's pursuit of happiness, or the end to
which  all  other  goods must be ordered ? Is man made for the state, or
the  state  for  man.? To questions of this sort, the answers range from
philosophical   anarchism   at  one  extreme  to  equally  philosophical
totalitarianism  at  the  other,  with  all degrees of individualism and
communism in between. The general problem of man and the state, with all
its  controversial  issues,  runs  through  many  other chapters—such as
CoxsTiTUTiGx, Good and Evil, Law, Liberty, and State— but we have placed
its  principal  formulation  in  this  chapter  because  the  concept of
citizenship  signifies  the ideal condition of the human individual as a
member of the political community. PAGE 226 227 228 229 230 231

[284a]
226  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  The  individual  in  relation  to  the  state 5
Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[366-401]
5c-6a  / Seven Against Thebes [1005-1078] 38b39a,c 5 Sophocles: Antigone
131a-142d  /  Ajax  [10711090] 152b; [1226-1263] 153c-154a / Philoctetes
182a-195a,c 5 Euripides: Heracleidae
[500-534]
252c-d / Suppliants
[338-364]
261b-c / Phoenician Maidens
[991-1020]
387a-b;
[1625-1682]
392b-d / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp
[1255-1275] 436c, [1368-1401] 437c-d
5 Aristophanes: Acharnians 455a-469a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c-7a
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 395d399a; 402b-404a; bk vi,
511c-d 7 Plato: Apology 200a-212a,c / Crito 213a219a,c esp 216d-219a,c /
Republic,  bk iv, 342a-d; 350a-d; bk v, 365c-d; bk vi, 379d380c; bk VII,
390b-391b; 401a-b; bk viii 401d-416a esp 402b-c / Laws, bk hi, 672d676b;
bk  v,  692c-693c; bk vi, 707b-708a; bk VII, 721d; BK IX, 754a-b; bk xi,
775d-778a; bk xii, 791c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[1094^5-10]
339c-d; bk v, ch ii
[1138^4-13]
386b-c  /  Politics,  BK  I,  CH  2  [1253^19-39]  446c-d;  bk  ii, CH I
[1260^37-1261^7] 455b, d; ch 2 [1261^15-

[284b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James  : Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 30] 455d-456a; ch 5
[1264^16-25] 459d-460a; bk III, CH 6 [1278^^15-29] 475d-476a; bk vii, ch
1-3 527a-530a; ch 9
[1329^22-24]
533c;  CH  13  [1332^28-38]  537a;  bk  viii, ch i [1337* 27-32] 542b 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[59-93]
30d-31b;
[978-1002]
42d-43a;  bk v [1105-1135] 75c-d 12 ^vicT¥.T\Js: Discourses, bk i, ch 19
125b-126c;  BK  II,  CH 10 148c-150a; bk hi, ch 22 195a201a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  v, sect 22 272b; BK VII, SECT 5 280a-b; bk xi, sect 21
305d306a  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [418-465]  114b-115b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus, 44d-45c / ISJuma Pompilius, 51c-52b / Solon, 71b; 71d / Marcus
Cato,  284b  /  Lysander, 361a-d / Cato the Younger, 626d-627b; 632b-c /
Demosthenes, 699c-700a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 5 513d514b;
CH  17  522b-523a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 21, A 3
718d-719c;  a  4,  rep  3 719d-720a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 90, AA 2-3 206b-207c; q 92, a i, rep 3 213c-214c; Q 94, A 2, ANS
221d-223a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi [52114] 77b-78a;
paradise, viii [115-148] 118b-c

[285a]
;  1  to  la 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 73b-c; fart ii, 99a-b; 104a-d;
105c-d;  112b-117b;  153a-157c; CONCLUSION, 279a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
7a-d;  46d; 48a 51a passim; 381a-388c; 480b 482b; 486b-489b; 490c491d 26
Shakespeare:  2nd Henry VI, act i, sc i [i8o2o6] 35c-d / Henry K, act i,
sc  ii [174-220] 535d-536b 27 Shakespeare: Troiliis and Cressida, act i,
sc III
[78-134] 109a-c /
Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[67-167] 352a-353a; act hi, sc
i  369a-373b / Henry VUI, act i, sc ii [68-102] 553c-d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a;  177a-b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
71a-72c  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part hi, 48b-49a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a; prop 73 446c-447a 32 Milton: Samson
Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a  /  Areopagitica,  398a-b  35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d / Civil
Government,  ch  II, sect 9 27a-b; ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vi, SECT 58-63
37b-38c;  sect  72-73 40d-41a; ch VII, SECT 87-CH VIII, sect 99 44a-47c;
ch  VIII,  SECT 113-CH IX, sect 131 51b-54d; ch xi 55b-58b; ch xii, sect
145  58d-59a; ch xiv, sect 163-164 63a-c; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b; CH XVI,
SECT  190-192  69b-d;  ch xviii, sect 208 73a-b; ch xix, sect 243 81d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28b-29a; part hi, 112a-115b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk i, 2d-3a; BK V, 18d-19d; 31c; bk viii, 52a-b; bk xi,
69a-c;  bk  xii,  92b-c;  bk  xxiii, 199b-200a,c; BK XXVI, 221c-222a; bk
xxvii,   229a   38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d  /  Political  Economy,
368d-369c;  374a-375b;  376a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  389d-390c;
391b-394d;  bk ii, 396d-399a; 406a-c; bk hi, 407c-408b; bk iv, 425a-427a
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 58d-61b esp 61b; 109d-110d; bk ii,
140b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91b  42  Kant: Science of Right,
436c-437c;  438d-441d  esp 439a-b 43 Declaration of Independence: [7-15]
la-b 43 Constitution of the U.S. : article i, sect 9
[267-272]
13d;
[289-295]
14a; article hi, sect 3
[507-511]
l-6a;  article  iv, sect 2 16a-b; amendments, i-x 17a-d; xiv, sect i 18c
43  Federalist:  number  16,  67d-68a; number 17, 69c; NUMBER 27, 95c-d;
number  45,  147^-148a  43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  esp  271c-273d,
302d-312a,  322d-323a,c / Utilitarianism, 453a454a;460a-461c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  195c-d; 261c-d; 393a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  142-157  55a-57d;  par  184-185  64b-d; par 187 65a-c ; par 257-270
80b-89c ; par 308 102c-103a par 323-324 107a-d; additions, 47 124a-b;

[285b]
Chapter  1  1  : CITIZEN 227 116-118 135c-136b; 158 142d / Philosophy of
History, intro, 164b; 170c 172b; 186b c; part I, 211a c; 222a c; 251a b;
part  ii,  271cd;  part  III,  289b  d;  302d-303c;  part  iv, 320c321a;
328b-330a;  365b-c;  366c  367a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
419a434d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 206d-207b; 216a; 233b-234a; bk
vi, 260a 262a; bk ix, 343c-d; bk xi, 475b 476c; 505a-511b esp 509d-510a;
bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk xiii, 577bc; bk xv, 634a-635a; epilogue i, 668a
669c;  670d-671c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii, 369a-370d 54
Freud: War and Death, 757b-c; 761a-c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
780b- 781a 2. The conception of citizenship 7 Plato: Protagoras, 45d-46a
9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 1-5 471 b,d475d; CH 13 [1283^27-1284^3]
481d-482a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A 3, REP 2
316a-318b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, viii [115148] 118b-c 38
Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk ii, 4a-6b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
368d-369c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i, 391b-393b; bk hi, 407bd; 420d 42
Kant: Science of Right, 436c-437c esp 436d; 449d-450a 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.:  amendments,  xiv,  sect  I  18c  43  Federalist:  number 42,
138d-139c passim 43 Mill: Representative Government, 349a-350a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 47 124a-b 2a. The status or office of
citizenship  in relation to the principle of constitutional government 6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396c397c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
i, ch 12
[1259^5-8]
454a; bk hi, ch i [1275*22-^21] 472a-c; ch 4
[1277^7-15] 474c-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 2, ANs 309d-316a 31
Spinoza: Ethics, bk iv, prop 37, schol 2, 435d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk ii, 4a-7c; BK HI, 9a-lla; bk v, 18b,d-25a; bk viii, 51a52b; bk
xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  84b,d-85a;  BK XIX, 142a-143c; 145c-146a,c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 358b-c / Social Contract, BK I, 392a esp 392b [fn
i];  bk hi, 424a-d; BK IV, 425d-427a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 113b- 11 5a /
Science  of  Right, 401 b-c; 436c-437c; 438d-439a / judgement, 586a-587a
43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, XIV, sect I 18c

[286a]
(2.  The  conception  of  citizenship.  2a.  The  status  or  office  of
citizenship  in relation to the principle of constitutional government.)
43  Fj:deralist:  number  52,  165a'C;  number  84,  251a'253d  43 Mill:
Liberty,  267b,d-268c  /  Representative Government, 344d-350a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  ii,  272a-d  2b.  The  distinction between
citizen   and  subject:  the  distinction  between  the  subjects  of  a
constitutional  monarchy  and  of  a  despotism  5 Euripides: Suppliants
[338-456]  261b'262b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii, 233a-d; 238b-c 7
Plato: Laws, bk viii, 733d-734a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252^7-17]
445a'b;  ch  7  [1255^16-20]  449b;  bk  hi,  ch  5  475a-d passim; ch 6
[1278^30-1279*22]  476a-c;  CH 14 [1285^17-29] 483b-c; ch 15 [1286^8-14]
484d-485a; ch 17 486C'487a; bk vii, ch 14
[1332^14-27] 537b-c
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk xi, 106a-d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch v 8a-c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 104d-106b; 113c115a; ISOc-lSla; 154b-c 25
Montaigne: Essays, 383c-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 87-94
44a-46c; ch xi 55b-58b; ch xiv, sect 163-164 63a^ 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  hi,  lla-13c;  bk  iv,  13b,d-15c;  bk v, 25d-26d; bk v-vi,
30c-34d;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  bk  vii,  47d'48a; bk XII, 93c-96a,c; bk xix,
142a-146a,c  passim  38  RovssEW  :  Inequality, 356b-d; 359a-b/5'o<:/^/
Contract, bk i, 392a esp 392b
[fn
i];  bk  hi,  417c;  420d;  bk  iv, 426b-c 40 Gibbon: Decli?je and Fall,
14a-15c  passim;  16c-17b; 17d; 521a-523a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
81c-82a:  161c-162a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 436d-437c; 450b-d 43
Federalist:  number  42, 138d-139c; number 43, 142b-c; number 54, 171a-b
43  Mill:  Liberty, 267b,d-268c / Representative Governmeiit, 339d-340c;
341d-344d  passim;  348c-355b:  427a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
additions,  155  142a-b  / Philosophy of History, part i, 213b; PART II,
271c-d;  part  iv,  356d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 384c-388a,c
passim  2c.  The  character  and  extent of citizenship under diflferent
types  of  constitutions  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-108c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 395d399a: bk vi, 520b-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viiiix, 401d-420d / Laws, bk viii, 733d-734a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  ii  413b-d  passim  /  Politics,  BK  III,  CH I
471b,d-472c; ch 5 475a-d; ch 13 [1283^44-1284^3] 482a; bk iv,

[286b]
228 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 4 ch 3 488d-489b; ch 8-9 493c-494d; bk v, ch i
[1301^25-1302^15]
502b-503b; bk vi, ch 4
[1319^2-32] 523a-b; ch 6 524b-c
/   Rhetoric,   BK   I,  CH  8  [1365^29-1366*^3]  608a-b  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
xxiia-d;  bk ii, 4a-7c; bk hi, 9a-lla; bk v, 18b,d-25a; 31b33a,c passim;
bk  xi,  68b,d-75a; bk xii, 84b,d85c; BK XIII, 99b-100c 39 Smith: Wealth
ofNations,  bk  iv,  271a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 223c-224a;
403b404d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d / Science of Right, 450b-d 43
Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d  passim;  NUMBER  14,  60b-c  43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  350a; 370b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  273d274a  3.  The  qualifications  for citizenship: extent of
suffrage 5 Aristophanes: Frogs
[686-705]
572a-b / Lysistrata [575-580] 590c-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 39b-c 7
Plato:  Republic, bk viii 401d-416a / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk v,
690d-691b  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [1270*33-39] 466c; BK III,
CH 1-5 471b,d-475d; bk vi, ch 4
[1319^2-32] 523a-b; ch 6 524b-c; bk vii, ch 4
[1326*5-^25] 530a-d; ch 9 533a-d passim, esp
[1329*18-30] 533c-d
/ Athenian Constitution, ch 21 562b-c; ch 26, par 3-4 565a; ch 42 572b-d
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8 [1365^29-1366*^] 608a-b 14 Plutarch: Solon, 73d /
Pericles, 139c-140a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi, 106a-d 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a  3,  ANS  and  rep  2  316a-318b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laivs, bk ii, 4a-6b; BK XV, 114c-115b; bk xxiii,
189a  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk iv, 428a-432b passim 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 168d-169a; BK IV, 269d-271d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  14a-d;  15c; 17a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  436d-437c;  450d452a  43 Constitution of the U.S. :
article i, sect 8
[204-205] 13b; amendments, xiv, sect
1-2  18c-d;  XV  19b;  xix  19d;  xxiii  20d  43  Federalist: number 42,
138d-139c passim; number 52, 165a-c; number 54, 171a-b; number 57, 177a;
178c-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  380c-389b; 395b-c 4. The
rights, duties, privileges, and immunities of citizenship Old Testament:
Exodus,  12:48-49;  22:21;  23:9 / Leviticus, 19:33-34; 24:22 / Numbers,
35:30 / Deuteronomy, 10:18-19; 17:6; 19:15; 20:1-9

[287a]
4/0  5  Chaptir  IhCniZEN 220 Apocrypha: Susanna esp 48— (D) OT, Daniel,
13:1-64  csp  i3:4<S  New  Testament:  Marl^,  12:13-17 / Acts, i6:r639;
21:27-28:^1  /  Romans,  13:1-7  /  Titus,  y.i 5 EuRiPiDi:s: Suppliants
[:538-364] 261 b-c 5 Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d csp
[7^0-876) 623c 625b
6  Herodotus: History, bk \ti, 233c-d 6 TuLCYmuEs-.Peloponnesian War, bk
m,  395d399a;  bk  hi.  425a-427c;  432b-c;  bk m, 520a-d 7 Plato: Crito
213a-219a,c  /  Gorgias,  287c  292a  /  Republic,  bk  viii,  409b-c  /
Statesman,  601b-c / Laws, bk VI, 697a-705c "passim; bk viii, 732b-735a;
bk xii, 791c / Seventh letter, 804a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 2
[i26i''2 ^''6]
456a-b; ch q
[i269''*33-36] 465c;
[iiji'-^iy-^^y]
467c; CH 10 [1272*13-17] 468b-c; bk hi, ch 1-2 471b,d-472d; ch 5 475a-d;
ch 12
[1282^15]-
CH 13
[ 1 284^*2 1 480c-482a; bk vi, ch 2 520d521b / Athenian Constitution, ch 8, par 5 556c;
ch  42,  par  I  572b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 22 195a201a 12
Aurelus:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c  14 Plltarch: Lycurgus,
44d-47a  /  Numa  Pompilius, 51c-52c / Solon, 71b; 71 d / CrassusNicias,
455d-456d  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a648a,c passim / Tiberius Gracchus,
675b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 21b-d; bk xi, 106a-d 20 Aql'ixas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 105 307c-321a passim 23 HoBBEs: Letiathan, part
ii,  101a-104d; 113c116d 25 Montaigxe: Essays, 381a-388c 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus 351a-392a.c esp act II, sc III
[1-52] 366a-c,
[165-272] 367d369a
30  Bacox: Advancement of Learning, 71a-75a 31 Spixoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  37,  schol 2 435b-436a 32 MiLTox: Areopagitica 381a-412b 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part ii, 75b 38 MoxTESQuiEL": Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a-6b; bk
v-vi, 31b-35a; bk vi, 37c; bk viii, 51a-52c; 54b-c; BK xr. 68b,d-75a; bk
xii,   84b,d-90c;  92b-c;  bk  xix,  142a-143c;  145c-146a,c;  bk  XXVI,
221c-222a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d-324a; 324c-325b; 358d-359a /
Political  Economy,  369b-c:  377c-d / Social Contract, bk i, 387b; 392a
esp 392b
[fn
i];  bk ii, 396d-398b; bk hi, 421b-423a; 424a-b; bk iv, 428a-432b passim
39  Sniith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 58d-61b esp 61b; bk V, 303b-304c;
395c-396a 40 Gibbox: Decline and Fall, 4b-c; 15c; 90d-92c passim: 630b,d
41  Gibbox:  Decline  and  Fall, 73b; 94c-95c: 96ad;161c-d;587a 42 Kaxt:
Intro.   Metaphysic   of  Morals.  389c390a,c  /  Science  of  '  Right,
400b,d-402a,c; 429a-c; 434a; 436c-437c; 439a-441d; 450d452a

[287b]
43  Ariiclf.s  of  Confederation:  iv  [r--56)  5bc;  VI  [87-93]  6b 43
0)NST1TUTI0N OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE I, SECT 2
[5-16] lib; sect 3 [67-72] 12a; sect 9 [267272]
13d;
[289-295J 14a; article
ii. sect i
[375
382] I4d; ARTICLE III, sect 3 15d-16a; article IV, sect 2
[519-521]
16a;  amkndxiKxrs,  i-x  17a-d; xiii, sect i-xiv, si ex 2 18c-d; XV I9b;
xix  19d;  xxiii  20d 43 Federalist: number 42, 138d-139c passim; NUMBER
44, 144d-145a; number 52. 165c; xuMBER 54, 171a-b; nimber 62, 188d 189a;
number  80,  236a-b; number 84, 251a-253d 43 Mill: Liberty, 267b,d-268c;
271c-273d; 302d303a / Representative Government, 348c-350a; 392b-396d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 2:50 75c; par 261 83a-d; par
291  97d-98a:  par  ^^24326  107a-108a; additions, 141 139c / Philosophy
ofHistory,  part ii, 273c; part iv. 365b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  10a  b 54 Freud: War and Death, 757b-c 5. The virtues of the citizen
and the virtues of the good man 5 Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a.c csp
[1316-1408] 486a-487a,c
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  175b; bk vm, 233a-d; 258d 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370ac;  BK II, 395d-399a; 402b-404a; bk hi,
425a427c  passim;  bk  vi,  511c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-47c / Mcfio,
174d176a  esp  175d-176a  /  Apology  200a-212a,c  / Crito 213a-219a,c /
Republic,  bk  iv.  346a-355a  /  Statesjnan,  605d-608d  / Laws, bk hi,
669b670c;  672d-674d; bk v, 686d-691b; bk vi, 706b-c; BK viii. 740d-741a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[1099^^29-32]
345b; bk hi, ch 8
[iii6''i5-^3] 362b-d; bk v,
ch  I  [1129^12-1130^13]  377a-c;  ch  2  [11^0^2529]  378b; bk vi, ch 8
[1141^23-1142^11]  390d391a; bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, bk i, CH
13 [i259^33-i26o'*2o] 454b-d; bk hi, ch 4 473c-475a; ch 5
[i278*40-*'5]
475d; ch 9
[1280V11]
478a-b; ch 13
[i283''44-i284«3]
482a;  ch  15 [1286^22-5^] 484c-d: ch 18 487a,c; bk IV, CH 7 [1293*^2-7]
493a-b; bk vii, ch 2
[i324*24-''6] 528b-c; ch
3 529b-530a; ch 7 531d-532c; ch 9 [i328''33-i329'*2] 533b; ch 13
[1332*28-38]
537a; ch 14
[1332^2-1333^16]
537d-538a; bk vhi, ch i
[1337^*11-18] 542a
/   Rhetoric,  bk  i,ch  9  [i366»33-i367'*i]  608d-609c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii. ch 10 148c150a; BK III. CH 7 182b-184a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect i 256b. d; BK III, SECT 4-5 260b-261a; bk iv,
sect  4  264a;  sect 29 266a; bk v, sect 16 271c-d; sect 22 272b; bk vi,
sect  14 274d-275a; bk VII, sect 5 280a-b; sect 13 280c; sect 66 284b-c;
bk  ix, sect 23 293c; bk x, sect 6 297a-b; bk xi, sect 8 303a-b; sect 21
305d306a

[288a]
(5.  The  virtues  of  the citizen atid the virtues of the good man.) 14
Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45b;48b'C/ Coriolanus, T74b,d-175a / Aristides, 263d
/  Lysander,  361a-d  / Agesilaiis, 480b,d-481a / Cleomenes, 659d-660a /
Demosthenes,  699c-  700a  15  Tacitl's: Histories, bk i, 191c-d; bk iv,
267c-d  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr ii 6b-10a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; BK XIX, CH 17 522b-523a; ch 21 524a525a; ch
24-26  528b-529a  20  Aquinas:  Siimma Tlieologica, part i-ii, q 61, A 5
58b-59d; q 92, a i esp rep 3 213c-214c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[58-75] 9a; XI
[1-66] 15a-d; xv [55-78] 21d; xvi
[64-78]
23a-b;  xxxii  [70I-XXX111  [90]  48c-50c passim; PURGATORY, VI [58-151]
61b-62c;  XVII  [91-123] 79b-d; paradise, xv [97]-xvi [154] 129b-132a 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  conclusion,  279a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 48a-b;
381a-388c;  390c391c;  480b-482b;'486b-489b;  490c-491d  26 Shakespeare:
Julius Caesar, act v, sc v
[68-81] 596a,c
30  Bacon:  Advancement ofLearning, 74b-c; 81d82a; 94b-95b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  hi,  48b-49a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 73
446c447a  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-870]  358a-b  33  Pascal:
Pensees,  6  173a 35 Locke: Toleration, 15d / Human Understanding, BK I,
CH  II,  sect  5-6  105a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 112a-115b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  xxiia-d; bk hi, 9b-12a; bk iv, 13b,d-15a;
15c-16a;  bk  v,  18d19d;  21b-  23a;  31b-c;  bk vii, 44d-45c; bk viii,
51a-52c;  55c-d;  bk  xix,  137a-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-328a;
360b,d
[fn
i];  366b-d / Political Economy, 369b-370a; 372a-377b / Social Contract,
bk  ii,  402b-403a;  BK  III,  411a-c;  412a-b; bk iv, 428a-432b passim;
434b-435a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 337d-338c; 340c-343d:
346c-347d   40  GiBBOs:  Decline  and  Fall,  630b,d-631a;  644b645c  43
Federalist:  number  55,  174c-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
329b-330a;  334b;  336c-341c  passim,  esp  337a-b;  346c350a  passim 44
BoswELL-:  Johnson,  393a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
268  84c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 171b-c; part ii, 272a-d; part
iv,  365b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 314c-316a; 321b-c 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d;  BK  XII,  537b-538a; bk xv, 634a-635a;
epilogue   I,   668a-669c;  epilogue  ii,  686c-687a  6.  Education  for
citizenship  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917] 266a-b 5 Aristophanes:
Frogs [1008-1098] 576b-577c

[288b]
230  THE GREAT IDEAS (itol 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370ac;
BK  II,  396c-397d  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 43a-47c / Crito 213a-219a,c /
Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv,  344bd: BK V, 366a-c; bk vi,
380d-381a  /  Statesman,  607b-608d  / Laws, bk i-ii 640a-663d esp bk I,
644b-645c;  bk vii 713c- 731d; bk viii, 732b735a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 2
[1094*28-^11]
339c-d; ch 9 [1099^29-32] 345b; bk v, ch 2
[1130^25-29] 378b; BK X, ch 9 434a-436a,c /
Politics, BK II, CH 5
[1263^36-1264*1] 459a;
[1264*26-32] 459c; CH 7 [1266^27-35] 462b-c;
BK  III, CH 4 [1277*14-^29] 474a-475a; bk iv, CH 9 [1294^19-24] 494c; BK
v, ch 9 [1310*1:522] 512b-c; BK VII, ch 13 [1332*28-^10] 537a-b; CH 14
[1332^42-1334*11]
537d-538d; ch 15
[1334^7-28]
539b-d;  ch  17  541a-542a,c;  bk  VIII  542a-548a,c  passim  / Athenian
Constitution,  CH  42 572b-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i 253a-256d 14
Plutarch: Lycurgus, 33c-34a; 39a-45b / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c / Solon
64b,d77a,c  passim  /  Agesilaus,  480b,d-481a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, viii [115148] 118b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114b-115a;
L50c151a;  part  iv,  273a-c; conclusion, 282d283a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
60c-62a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a;  79c80a 32 Milton:
Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b389a, 398a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk iv 13b,d18d 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 373c-377b / Social
Contract, bk ii, 402b-403a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 303b-305c;
337d-343d;  347c-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 6b; 669a-b 42 Kant:
Judgement,  586a-587a 43 Feder.\list: number 27, 95c-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
317d-319b;  320a-c;  322d323a,  c / Representative Government, 336c-341d
passim, esp 339a-340c; 349a-350a; 381b-387d passim; 417c-418d; 424b-c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 187 65a-c; par 239 76d; par 315
104c; additions, 98 133a; 147 140c; 166 145b-c; 183 148d149a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245c  54  Freud: Sexual Enlightenment of
Children,  122a,c 7. Political citizenship and membership in the city of
God  Old  Testament:  I  Samuel, 8:9-18— (D) I Kings, 8:9-18 / Jeremiah,
29:4-7  esp  29:7— (D) Jeremias, 29:4-7 esp 29:7 Apocrypha: / Maccabees,
1:41-2:70—  (D)  OT, / Machabees, 1:43-2:70 / // Maccabees, 6:87:42— (D)
OT, // Machabees, 6:8-7:42

[289a]
8/0  9 Chaptir 11: citizen 231 New Testament: Matthew, 22:15-22 / Marl{,
12:13-17 / Luke, 20:21-25 / Romans, 1:5:1-10/ Ephesians, 2:19-22/ Titus,
3:1  /  Hebrews,  13:17 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 30 138a,c; BK
II, CH 5, 143d-144a; bk iv, ch 3 224b-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi,
sect  ii  262ab;  SECT  13  262c;  bk  iv,  sect  23  265c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi, par 15 17a-b/ City ofGod, BK I, PREF 129a-d: bk v,
ch  15-16  226d-221b; bk xi, ch i 322b,d-323a; bk xiv, CH 28-BK XV, CH 4
397a-400a;  bk  xviii,  ch 1-2 472b-473d; ch 47 500d-501b; bk xix, ch II
516d-517b;  ch  14  520a-d;  ch  17 522b-523a; CH 21 524a-525a; ch 24-26
528b-529a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 21, A 4, ANS and
REP 3 719d-720a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xiii
[79-96] 72d; XVI [85-114] 77d-78a; xix [127141] 82d-83a
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 151a-c; part hi, 198d-199a; 240a-246a,c;
part  iv, 275a-277d 32 MiLToyi: Paradise Lost, bk xii [485-551] 329b331a
35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d;  16c-17b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
xxiv-xxvi,  200a-215a;  bk  xxvi,  218a-219d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
327a-c;  358d-359a  / Social Contract, bk ii, 401c-402a; bk iv, 435a439c
esp 437d-438c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 193c-194a; 226a-b; 291d-292d;
299b-300d  passim  42  Kant: Science of Right, 444a-c 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.: article vi [591599] 16d; amendments, i [615-617] 17a 43 Mill:
Liberty, 279a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270 84d-89c;
additions,  162  143b-144c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 205d-206a,c;
part  i,  216b-217c;  245d-247b;  part hi, 308b-c; 309d-310a; 310d-311a;
part   iv,  316a-d;  321b322a;  325d-326b;  331b-d;  333b-c;  336c-337d;
345c-346c;  350b-c; 351b-354a; 365b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  ii, 28d32a; bk v, 127b-137c passim 8. The idea of world citizenship:
the  political  brotherhood  of man 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 9
114c-116b;  ch  13  120b-c; bk ii, ch 10 148c-150a; ch 20, 164d-165c; bk
hi,   ch  ii  187a-b;  ch  22,  199cd;  CH  24  203c-210a  12  Aurelius:
Meditatio?is,  bk  hi,  sect 4 260b261a; sect ii 262a-b; bk iv, sect 3-4
263b264a;  bk vi, sect 44 278b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [254-296] llOa-
llla;  bk VI [845-853] 233b-234a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 7
515a-c;  CH 17, 522d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 471a-c 30 Bacon: Adva?icement
of  Learning,  31d-32a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c  /  Political
Economy, 369a-b; 373c / Social Contract, bk IV, 437c

[289b]
b  b  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 452c-d; 455a 458a,c / Judgement, 586a
587a  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 424c 428a passim, esp 426a49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi,
244d-245d;  BK  X,  466b-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi,
166c-167b 54 Freud: War and Death, 755a-76Ic esp 755b757c / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents, 785d788d 9. Historical episodes and stages in the
struggle  for  citizenship  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 104b-108d esp
107c-108c;  BK  IV,  152d-153b;  bk v, 171c-175b; BK VI, 193b-c; BK VII,
245b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk iv, 468a469a; bk vi, 520a-d;
534b-c  7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 672d-676b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch
12 470b-471d; BK III, ch 15
[1286^8-21] 484d-485a; bk
iv, CH 13 [1297^16-28] 498a; bk v, ch 4 [1304^1838] 505d-506a / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  1-41 553a-572a passim, esp ch 41 571c-572a 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk vi
[756-853] 231a-234a;
bk  viii  [626-731]  275b-278b  14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9c-d / Romulus,
21a-27c  esp  22c  /  Poplicola,  79d-80a / Coriolanus 174b,d-193a,c esp
176b-184c   /   Tiberius   Gracchus   671b,d-681a,c   /  Caius  Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  51b-52a; bk xi, 106a-d 26
Shakespeare:   Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus
351a-392a,c  32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience 68a-b / Lord Gen.
Cromwell  69a35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch vi, sect 74-76 41b-42a; ch
vii,  sect 94 46a-c; ch viii, sect loo-iii 47c-51a; ch xiv, sect 162-166
63a-64a  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 413b [fn i] 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 58d-61b esp 61b; bk hi, 170c-173b; 176a-179a;
bk  iv,  269d-271d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14a-d; 15c; 29c-d;
90d-92a;  521a-523a,c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 202a-d; 215c-219a;
403b-404d  esp  404c;  452d-453a,c;  562b-564b;  574b-582b; 586c-589a 42
Kant:  Science  ofRight, 451d-452a 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b
43  Constitution of the U.S.: Ila-20d 43 Federalist: number 14, 62b-d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-268c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy ofHistory, part ii,
263a-d;  275b-276a;  part  hi, 288c; 295d-296c; 299c300a 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto,  415b*  416c; 423d-425b; 431c-433d 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk i, lOa-b; bk vi, 238c-243d

[290a]
232  THE  GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES see Labor yd; Liberty 6b; Slavery
6c; Tyranny 8.

[290b]
For: Other considerations of the issues involved in the relation between
the  individual  and  the  state,  see  Good  and Evil 5d; Happiness 5b;
Justice  lob;  State  2f,  3c,  3e,  8e.  The  context of the concept of
citizenship  in the theory of constitutional government or government by
law  rather than by men, ^^f Constitution; Law ja-yb; Liberty id, if—ig;
Monarchy  ia(i);  Tyranny  5-5d.  Other  comparisons  of  citizens  with
subjects  or  slaves,  see  Justice  gd;  Slavery  6a-6c. The bearing of
different  types  of  constitution  on  the character of citizenship and
especially  on  the  extent  of  the  franchise,  see Constitution 5-5b;
Democracy  4-43(2), 5b(2); Oligarchy 5-53. The political machinery, such
as  elections  and  representation,  by  which the citizen exercises his
suffrage, see Constitution gr-gh; Democracy 5b-5b(4); Government ih. The
consideration  of  civic  virtue  in  relation  to virtue generally, see
Virtue  and  Vice  7b; and for the problem of education for citizenship,
see  Aristocracy 5; Democracy 6; Education 8d; State yd; Virtue and Vice
7a.  Another  discussion  of the distinction between the city of man and
the  city of God, see State 2g; and for matters relevant to the ideal of
world   citizenship,  see  Love  4c;  State  lof;  War  and  Peace  iid.
Descriptions  of  the  historical  struggle for citizenship, and for the
extension  of  the franchise, ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works
not  included  in  Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but relevant to the
For  the  date,  place, and other facts cone^ning the publication of the
works  cited,  consult  the  Bibliography  of  Additional Readings which
follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. Paine. Rights of Man
Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  ]itstic€y  Machiavelli, The
Discourses,  bk i bk iv, ch 2, sect i Montesquieu. Considerations on the
Causes  of  the Tocqueville. Democracy in America Grandeur and Decadence
of  the  Romans  Thoreau.  Civil Disobedience J. S. Mill. The Subjection
ofWo?nen  Fustel  de Coulanges. The Ancient City T. H. Green. Principles
of  Political  Obligation,  (h)  *^^'  Spencer. The Man Versus the State
Cicero.  De  Officiis  {On  Duties),  i Jellinek. The Declaration of the
Rights  ofMan and BoDiN. The Six Bootes of a Commonweale, bk i, Citizens
CH  6-7;  bk  III, CH 8 Bosanquet. Science and Philosophy, 16 Hooker. Of
the  Laws  of Ecclesiastical Polity Hobhouse. The Metaphysical Theory of
the  State  PuFENDORF. Dc Officio Hominis et Civisjuxta Legem Bryce. The
Hindrances  to  Good Citizenship Naturalem {Ofthe Duties ofMan and ofthe
Citizen  .  Modern  Democracies  According  to  Natural  Law) G. Newman.
Citizenship and the Survival of CitiliDiderot. Citoyen zation Mably. Des
droits et devoirs du citoyen Merriam. The Ma\ing of Citizens Cartwright.
Take  Your  Choice!  Tawney.  Equality  Burke. Letter to the Sheriffs of
Bristol  Maritain.  The Rights of Man and Natural Law . On the Reform of
the  Representation  in  the  Ewing. The Individual, the State and World
House of Commons Government

[291a]
Chapter  ix:  CONSTITUTION  INTRODUCTION  THE  idea of a constitution as
establishing  and  organizing  a  political  community; the principle of
constitutionality  as  determining  a  generic form of government having
many varieties; and the nature of constitutional government— these three
problems are so intimately connected that they must be treated together.
We  have  used  the  word "constitution" to express the root notion from
which  all  other  matters considered in this chapter are derived. It is
impossible  to  say  precisely what a constitution is in a way that will
fit  the  political reality of the Greek city-states, the Roman republic
and  its transformation into the empire, mediaeval kingdoms and communes
and   their  gradual  metamorphosis  into  the  limited  monarchies  and
republics  of  modern times. No definition can adequately comprehend all
the  variations  of  meaning to be found in the great works of political
theory  and  history.  But  there  are a number of related points in the
various  meanings of "constitution" which indicate what is common to the
understanding of such diverse thinkers as Plato and Locke, Aristotle and
Rousseau, Kant and Mill, Montesquieu and Hegel, Aquinas, Hobbes, and the
American Federalists. It has been said that the constitution is the form
of  the  state.  This  can be interpreted to mean that the political, as
opposed  to  the domestic, community requires a constitution in order to
exist;  just as a work of art has the very principle of its being in the
form which the artist imposes upon matter. In the context of his general
theory  of  political  association, Aristotle's remark that "the man who
first founded the state was the greatest of benefactors," may imply that
the  idea of a constitution is the creative principle by which the state
was orig233

[291b]
inally formed—or at least differentiated from the tribe and family. Kant
gives   explicit   expression  to  the  notion  that  the  invention  of
constitutions  is coeval with the formation of states. "The act by which
a People is represented as constituting itself into a State," he writes,
"is  termed  the  Original  Contract"  and  this  in turn signifies "the
rightfulness  of  the  process  of organizing the Constitution." In this
sense, the constitution appears to be identical with the organization of
a  state.  It would then seem to follow that every state, no matter what
its  form  of government, is constitutional in character. But this would
leave  no  basis  for the fundamental distinction between constitutional
and non-constitutional—or what is usually called "absolute," "royal," or
"despotic"—government.  That basic distinction among forms of government
is  as  old  as  Plato  and  Aristotle. It is first made by Plato in the
Statesman  in  terms  of the role of law in government. It occurs at the
very  opening  of  Aristotle's  Politics  with  his  insistence  on  the
difference  between  the  king  and the statesman, and between royal and
political  government.  But  Locke seems to go further than the ancients
when  he  says  that  "absolute  monarchy ... is inconsistent with civil
society,  and so can be no form of civil government at all." In addition
to  affirming  the gravity of the distinction between constitutional and
nonconstitutional government, he seems to be denying that the latter can
constitute  the  form  of a truly r/W/ society, as opposed to a domestic
society  or  the  primitive patriarchate of a tribe. Yet Locke obviously
does  not deny the historic fact that there have been communities, which
otherwise  appear  to  be  states,  that  have  their  character or form
determined bv absolute

[292a]
234  THE  GREAT IDEAS government. His point, therefore, seems to be that
among  types of government, absolute monarchy does not fit the nature of
civil  society. If "constitution" is used merely as a synonym for "form"
or  "type,"  then  even  a  state  under  absolute  monarchy or despotic
government  can  be said to have a constitution. Since every state is of
some type, it can be said that it has a certain constitution, or that it
is  constituted  in  a  certain  way.  If,  however,  we  use  the  word
"constitution"  to conform to the distinction between constitutional and
non-constitutional  government,  we  are compelled to say that there are
states  which  do not have constitutions. With this distinction in mind,
the  statement that "the constitution is the form of the state" takes on
a  different  and  more  radical  meaning.  It  signifies that there are
communities,  larger  than  and  distinct  from the family or the tribe,
which  cannot be called "states" in the strict sense because they do not
have  constitutions.  Hegel,  for instance, points out that "it would be
contrary  even  to  commonplace  ideas  to call patriarchal conditions a
'constitution' or a people under patriarchal government a 'state' or its
independence  'sovereignty.'"  In  such  conditions, what is lacking, he
writes,  is  "the  objectivity  of possessing in its own eyes and in the
eyes  of  others, a universal and universally valid embodiment in laws."
Without  such  an  "objective law and an explicitly established rational
constitution, its autonomy is . . . not sovereignty." From this it would
appear  that  a despotically governed community, such as ancient Persia,
is  a  poUtical  anomaly.  It is intermediate between the family and the
state,  for  it  is  like  a  state  in  its  extent and in the size and
character  of  its  population,  yet  it is not a state in its political
form.  The  truly  political community is constitutionally organized and
governed.   In   this   sense,   the   English   words  "political"  and
"constitutional"  become  almost  interchangeable, and we can understand
how  these  two English words translate a single word in Greek political
discourse.  As  THE FORM of the state, the constitution is the principle
of its organization. Whether writ-

[292b]
,.  ten or unwritten, whether a product of custom or explicit enactment,
a  constitution, x\ristotle writes, "is the organization of offices in a
state,  and determines what is to be the governing body, and what is the
end  of  each  community." The idea of political office—of officials and
official  status—  is inseparable from the idea of constitution. That is
why the concept of citizenship is also inseparable from constitution. As
the  chapter  on  Citizen  indicates,  citizenship  is  the  primary  or
indefinite  office  set  up by a constitution. Citizenship is always the
prerequisite   for   holding   any  other  more  definite  office  in  a
constitutional   government,   from  juryman  to  chief  magistrate.  In
specifying  the  quahfications  for citizenship, a constitution sets the
minimum  qualifications  for all other offices which usually, though not
always,  demand  more than citizenship of the man who is to fill them. A
political  office  represents  a share of political power and authority.
"Those  are  to  be  called  offices," Aristotle explains, "to which the
duties  are  assigned  of  deliberating  about  certain  measures and of
judging  and  commanding,  especially  the  last;  for to command is the
especial  duty  of  a  magistrate." As representing a share of political
power  and  authority,  a  political  office can be said to constitute a
share of sovereignty. That would not seem to be true, however, for those
who,  like  Rousseau,  maintain  that  "sovereignty is indivisible." Yet
Rousseau also admits that "each magistrate is almost always charged with
some  governmental  function" and exercises a "function of sovereignty."
Since  it  is  an  arrangement of offices, a constitution is, therefore,
also  a  division or partition of the whole sovereignty of government or
at  least  of the exercise of sovereignty— into units which have certain
functions  to  perform,  and which must be given the requisite power and
authority  to  perform  them. These units are political offices, defined
according  to  their  functions,  and  vested  with  a certain power and
authority  depending  on  their  place  and  purpose  within  the whole.
Hamilton's  maxim  that  "every  power  ought to be in proportion to its
object"  formulates  the equation by which the function of an office, or
its duties, determines its rights and powers,

[293a]
privileges  and  immunities. And except for the provision of a temporary
dictatorship   in   the   early   Roman   constitution,  or  its  modern
constitutional  equivalent  in  emergency  grants  of  power,  political
offices under constitutional government always represent limited amounts
of  power and authority—Umited in that each is always only a part of the
whole. A CONSTITUTION defines and relates the various political offices.
It determines the qualifications of office-holders. But it does not name
the individuals who, from all those qualified, shall be selected for any
office.   Because  its  provisions  have  this  sort  of  generality,  a
constitution  has  the character of law. This is equally true of written
and unwritten constitutions, of those shaped by custom and those enacted
by   constituent   assemblies.   Unlike   all  other  man-made  laws,  a
constitution  is  the law which creates and regulates government itself,
rather than the law which a government creates and by which it regulates
the conduct of men, their relation to one another and to the state. This
is  perhaps  the basic distinction with regard to the laws of the state.
"The fundamental law in every commonwealth," says Hobbes, "is that which
being  taken  away  the  commonwealth faileth and is utterly dissolved."
Montesquieu  distinguishes  what  he  calls  "the  law  politic,"  which
constitutes  the state, from ordinary legislation; and Rousseau likewise
divides  the  laws  into  the  "political" or "fundamental" laws and the
"civil  laws"—  those  "which  determine the form of the government" and
those which the government, once it is constituted, enacts and enforces.
In  addition  to  being  the  source  of  all other positive laws of the
state—for  it  sets up the very machinery of lawmaking—a constitution is
fundamental law in that it establishes the standard of legality by which
all  subsequent  laws are measured. Aristotle observes that "the justice
or  injustice  of laws varies of necessity with constitutions." What may
be  a  just enactment in one state may be unjust in another according to
the  difference  of  their  constitutions. In American practice and that
modeled upon it, a law which violates the letter or spirit of the

[293b]
Chapter   12:   CONSTITUTION   235   constitution   is   judged   to  be
unconstitutional and is deprived thereby of the authority of law. "Every
act  of  a  delegated  authority,"  Hamilton  writes  in The Federalisty
"contrary to the tenor of the commission under which it is exercised, is
void. No legislative act, therefore, contrary to the Constitution can be
valid.  To  deny this would be to affirm that the deputy is greater than
his   principal;  that  the  servant  is  above  his  master;  that  the
representatives  of  the  people  are superior to the people themselves;
that men acting by virtue of powers may do not only what their powers do
not  authorize,  but what they forbid." The conception of a constitution
as  a law or set of laws antecedent to all acts of government inevitably
raises  the  question  of  how or by whom constitutions are made. If the
provisions  of  a constitution were precepts of natural law, they would,
according  to  the  theory  of natural law, be discovered by reason, not
positively  instituted.  But  though constitutions have the character of
positive  law,  they  cannot  be made as other positive laws are made—by
legislators,  i.e.,  men holding that office under the constitution. The
generally  accepted  answer is that a constitution is made by the people
who  form  the  political  community.  But,  as  Madison  observes, some
evidence  exists  to  the  contrary. "It is not a little remarkable," he
writes,  "that  in  every  case  reported  by  ancient history, in which
government  has been established with deliberation and consent, the task
of framing it has not been committed to an assembly of men, but has been
performed  by some individual citizen of pre-eminent wisdom and approved
integrity."  He  cites  many  examples  from  Plutarch  to  support this
observation,  but  he  adds the comment that it cannot be ascertained to
what  extent these lawgivers were "clothed with the legitimate authority
of  the  people." In some cases, however, he claims that "the proceeding
was  strictly  regular."  The  writers of The Federalist are, of course,
primarily  concerned with a constitution that is not the work of one man
but   the   enactment   of  a  constituent  assembly  or  constitutional
convention.  From  their  knowledge  of  British law, they are also well
aware that a constitution may

[294a]
236  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  sometimes  be the product of custom, growing and
altering  with  change  of  custom.  But  however  it  is exercised, the
constitutive  power is held by them to reside in the constituents of the
state,  the  sovereign people. This power may be exercised through force
of  custom  to produce an unwritten constitution, or through deUberative
processes  to  draft  a  written one; but it can never be exercised by a
government  except  with popular consent, since all the powers of a duly
constituted  government derive from its constitution. In the American if
not  the  British  practice,  the  amendment  of  the  constitution also
involves, at least indirectly, an appeal to the people. Rousseau assigns
the constitutive power to a mythical figure he calls "the legislator" or
"the  law-giver,"  describing him as the man who "sets up the Republic."
Yet  Rousseau  says  of this special office that it "nowhere enters into
the  constitution."  He  thus  reaffirms  the  essential  point  that  a
constitution  cannot  create  the  office  of constitution-making. These
remarks in the Social Contract have another significance. Rousseau tries
to  distinguish  the  formation of a government by the constitution (the
political  or fundamental law made by the legislator) from the formation
of  the state by the social contract entered into by the people in their
original  act  of  association.  But  is  not  the  constitution  also a
formative  contract  or  convention?  If it is popular in origin, either
through  custom  or  enactment,  is  there more than a verbal difference
between  these  two  contracts—  the  one  which establishes a political
society  and  the  one which establishes its government? For Hobbes, and
seemingly  also for Locke, the compact by which men abandon the state of
nature  and  establish  a  civil society results at the same time in the
establishment  of  a  government. It is, Hobbes writes, "as if every man
should  say  to every man, I authorize and give my right of governing my
self,  to this iVlan or to this Assembly of men, on this condition, that
thou  give  up  thy  right to him, and authorize all his actions in like
manner."  According  to  Rousseau,  "there  is  only one contract in the
State, and that is the
[original] act of association." For him, "the institution of government
is not a contract."

[294b]
I  The  reality  and  significance of the difference between these three
political  philosophers  would  seem to depend on the precise historical
meaning  each gives to the hypothesis of men living in a state of nature
prior to political association. If, prior to the state, men live in non-
political  societies,  and if the state, as opposed to the family or the
despotically   ruled   community,  begins  to  exist  only  when  it  is
constituted,  then  the  formation of the state and the formation of its
government  would  seem  to  be  the product of a single convention. The
principle  of constitutionafity is also necessary in order to understand
the  familiar  distinction  between government by laws and government by
men.  Except  for  the divine sort of government which is above both law
and  lawlessness,  Plato  employs "the distinction of ruling with law or
without  law" to divide the various forms of government into two groups.
"The  principle of law and the absence of law will bisect them all," the
Eleatic  Stranger  says in the Statesman. In the ordinary meaning of law
as  an  instrument of government, it is difficult to conceive government
by  laws  without  men to make and administer them, or government by men
who  do  not  issue  general directives which have the character of law.
Government  always  involves  both  laws and men. But not all government
rests  upon  the  supremacy  of  law,  a supremacy which consists in the
equality  of  all  before the law and the predominance of regular law as
opposed  to  arbitrary  decision. Nor is all government based upon a law
that  regulates the officials of government as well as the citizens, and
determines  the  legality  of  official  acts, legislative, judicial, or
executive.  That  law  is,  of  course,  the constitution. Locke makes a
distinction   between   governing  by  "absolute  arbitrary  power"  and
governing  by  "settled  standing  laws."  It  is  his  contention  that
"whatever  form  the  commonwealth  is  under, the ruling power ought to
govern  by  declared  and received laws, and not by extemporary dictates
and  undetermined  resolutions,  for then mankind will be in a far worse
condition  than in a state of Nature. . . . All the power the government
has, being only for the good of the society, as it ought not to

[295a]
be arbitrary and at pleasure, so it ought to be exercised by established
and  promulgated  hiws, that both the people may know their duty, and be
safe  and secure within the limits of the law, and the rulers, too, kept
within  their  due  bounds."  As  Lxxrke  states the distinction between
government  by laws and government by men, it seems to be identical with
the    distinction   between   constitutional   and   non-constitutional
government.  In  the  latter,  an  individual  man  invests himself with
sovereignty  and,  as sovereign, puts himself above all human law, being
both  its  source  and  the  arbiter of its legality. Such government is
absolute,  for nothing limits the power the sovereign man exercises as a
prerogative  vested in his person. In constitutional government, men are
not   sovereigns   but  office-holders,  having  only  a  share  of  the
sovereignty.  They  rule  not  through  defacto  power,  but through the
juridical  power  which is vested in the office they hold. That power is
both  created  and  limited by the law of the constitution which defines
the  various  offices  of  government.  Although abstractly or in theory
absolute  and  constitutional  government are clearly distinct—more than
that,  opposed—political  history  contains  the  record of intermediate
types.  These  can be regarded as imperfect embodiments of the principle
of   constitutionality,   or   as   attenuations  of  absolute  rule  by
constitutional   encroachments.   Despite   their   incompatibility   in
principle,  historic circumstances have managed to combine absolute with
constitutional  government.  It  is  this  combination  which  mediaeval
jurists  and  philosophers call "the mixed regime" or the regimen regale
et  politiciim, "royal and political government." It may be thought that
a  foreshadowing  of  the mediaeval mixed regime can be found in Plato's
Laws,  in  the passage in which the Athenian Stranger says that monarchy
and  democracy  are  the "two mother forms of states from which the rest
may  be  truly  derived."  He then asserts that, to combine liberty with
wisdom,  "you  must  have  both these forms of government in a measure."
Since  the  Persian despotism is cited as the "highest form" of monarchy
and the Athenian constitution as the arche-

[295b]
Chapter   12:  CONSTITUTION  237  type  of  democracy,  the  combination
pro|X)sc(l  would  seem  to be a mixture of absolute with constitutional
government.  But the Athenian Stranger also says that "there ought to be
no  great  and  unmixed  powers"  if the arbitrary is to be avoided; and
since  the  whole  tenor  of  the book, as indicated by its title, is to
uphold the supremacy of law, it is doubtful that a truly mixed regime is
intended—a    government   which   is   partly   absolute   and   partly
constitutional.  Aristotle,  furthermore,  gives us reason to think that
such  a  mixture  would  be  unthinkable to a Greek. At least in his own
vocabulary, the terms royal znd political ditt as contradictory as round
and  square.  Royal,  or  kingly,  government for Aristotle is "absolute
monarchy,  or  the  arbitrary  rule  of  a sovereign over all." In royal
government,  there  are no political offices, and no citizens. The ruler
is  sovereign  in  his own person and the ruled are subject to his will,
which  is  both the source of law and exempt from all legal limitations.
To  Aristotle,  political  government  means  pure constitutionalism. It
exists  only  where "the citizens rule and are ruled in turn," for "when
the  state  is  framed  upon the principle of equality and likeness, the
citizens  think they ought to hold office by turns." To the generic form
of  constitutional  government,  Aristotle  sometimes  gives the name of
"polity," though he also uses this name for the mixed constitution which
combines  democratic  with  oligarchical  criteria  for  citizenship and
public  office.  The  mixed  constitution is not to be confused with the
mixed   regime,   for  it  is  a  mixture  of  different  constitutional
principles,  not  of  constitutionalism itself with absolute government.
When the word "polity" signifies constitutional government generally, it
has  the  meaning  which  the  Romans express by the word "republic" and
which   the   constitutionalists   of  the  1  8th  century  call  "free
government."  The distinctive characteristics of such government—whether
it  is called political, republican, constitutional, or free— lie in the
fact  that the citizens are both rulers and ruled; that no man, not even
the  chief  magistrate,  is  above  the law; that all political power or
authority  is  derived from and limited by the constitution which, being
popular in origin, cannot be changed except by the people as a whole.

[296a]
238  It is perhaps only in the Middle Ages that we find the mixed regime
in  actual  existence.  "That rule is called politic and royal," Aquinas
writes,  "by which a man rules over free subjects who, though subject to
the  government  of the ruler, have nevertheless something of their own,
by  reason  of  which  they  can resist the orders of him who commands."
These  words  seem  to  present  an  accurate  picture of the peculiarly
mediaeval  political  formation  which  resulted  from the adaptation of
Roman  law  (itself  partly  repubUcan  and  partly  imperial) to feudal
conditions  under  the  influence  of  local  customs  and the Christian
religion.  The  mediaeval mixed regime is not to be confused with modern
forms   of   constitutional  monarchy  any  more  than  with  the  mixed
constitution or polity of the Greeks. "The socalled limited monarchy, or
kingship  according  to law," Aristotle remarks, "is not a distinct form
of  government."  The  chapter  on  Monarchy  deals  with  the nature of
constitutional monarchy and its difference from the mixed regime as well
as  its relation to purely republican government. The mediaeval king was
not a constitutional monarch, but a sovereign person, in one sense above
the  law  and in another limited by it. To the extent that he had powers
and  prerogatives  unlimited  by law, the mediaeval king was an absolute
ruler. He was, as Aquinas says, quoting the phrase of the Roman jurists,
legibus  solutus—exempt  from the force of all manmade law. Aquinas also
describes  him  as  "above the law" insofar as "when it is expedient, he
can  change  the  law, and rule without it according to time and place."
Yet  he  was  also bound by his coronation oath to perform the duties of
his  office,  first  among  which was the maintenance of the laws of the
realm—  the  immemorial  customs of the people which define their rights
and  hberties.  The king's subjects could be released from their oath of
allegiance  by his malfeasance or dereliction in office. To this extent,
then,  the  mediaeval king was a responsible ruler, and the mixed regime
was constitutional. Furthermore, the king did not have jurisdiction over
customary  law; yet where custom was silent, the king was free to govern
absolutely, to decree what he willed, and even to innovate laws.

[296b]
Mediaeval  in  origin,  the  institution  of a government both royal and
political,  or  what  Fortescue, describing England in the 15th century,
called   a  "political  kingdom,"  exerted  great  influence  on  modern
constitutional  developments.  As  late  as the end of the 17th century,
Locke's  conception  of  the  relation  of  king  and  parliament, royal
prerogative and legal limitations, may emphasize the primacy of law, but
it  does  not  entirely  divest  the king of personal sovereignty. Locke
quotes  with approval the speech from the throne in 1609, in which James
I said that "the king binds himself by a double oath, to the observation
of the fundamental laws of his kingdom. Tacitly, as by being a king, and
so  bound to protect as well the people, as the laws of his kingdom, and
expressly  by  his  oath  at his coronation." To this extent the British
kingdom  is,  as  Fortescue  had  said,  "political."  But the king also
retains the prerogative to dispense with law and to govern in particular
matters  by  decree  apart  from  law, and to this extent the government
still  remains  royal.  Locke recognizes the difficulty of combining the
absolute  power  of  the  king in administration with the limitations on
that  power represented by Parliament's jurisdiction over the laws which
bind  the  king. To the question, Who shall be judge of the right use of
the  royal  prerogative ? he replies that "between an executive power in
being,  with  such  prerogative, and a legislative that depends upon his
will  for  their  convening,  there  can  be no judge on earth . . . The
people  have no other remedy . . . but to appeal to heaven." Montesquieu
as  well  as Locke can conceive monarchy, as distinct from despotism, in
no other terms than those of the mixed regime. He separates despotism as
lawless,  or  arbitrary  and  absolute,  government  from  all  forms of
government by law, and divides the latter into monarchies and republics.
Montesquieu  insists  that  the  ancients  had  no notion of the kind of
monarchy   which,   while   it   is  legal  government,  is  not  purely
constitutional  in  the sense of being republican. He calls this kind of
monarchy  "Gothic  government,"  and,  as  Hegel later points out, it is
clear  that  "by  'monarchy'  he understands, not the patriarchal or any
ancient type, nor on the other hand, the type or-

[297a]
ganized into an objective constitution, but only feudal monarchy." It is
not  until  the  i8th  century that the slightest vestige of royal power
comes  to be regarded as inimical to law. For Rousseau "every legitimate
government is republican"; for Kant, "the only rightful Constitution ...
is  that  of  a  Pure  Republic,"  which,  in  his  view,  "can  only be
constituted  by  a  representative system of the people." The writers of
The  Federalist take the same stand. They interpret the "aversion of the
people   to   monarchy"   as   signifying   their   espousal  of  purely
constitutional  or  republican government. In the tradition of the great
books,  only  Hegel speaks thereafter in a contrary vein. Constitutional
monarchy  represents  for  him  the essence of constitutionalism and the
only  perfect  expression  of  the  idea  of  the  state. Because modern
republics,  and  even  modern constitutional or limited monarchies, have
developed  gradually  or by revolution out of mixed regimes; and because
this development came as a reaction against the increasing absolutism or
despotism  of  kings,  the  principle of constitutionality has been made
more  effective  in modern practice than it was in the ancient world. In
addition  to  asserting limitations upon governments, constitutions have
also provided means of controlling them. They have been given the force,
as well as the authority, of positive law. They have made office-holders
accountable  for  their  acts;  and  through such juridical processes as
impeachment  and  such political devices as frequent elections and short
terms  of  office,  they  have  brought the administration of government
within  the  purview  of the law. Following Montesquieu, the Federalists
recommend  the  separation  of  powers, with checks and balances, as the
essential means of enforcing constitutional limitations of office and of
preventing  one  department  of  government  from  usurping the power of
another.  The citizens are further protected from the misuse of power by
constitutional   declarations   of  their  rights  and  immunities;  and
constitutional  government  is  itself  safeguarded  from  revolutionary
violence by such institutions as judicial review and by the availability
of  the  amending  power as a means of changing the constitution through
due process of law.

[297b]
Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 239 In the history of political change, it is
necessary  to  distinguish  change  from or to constitutional government
and,  within  the  sphere  of  constitutional  government, the change of
constitutions.  RepubHcs are set up and constitutions established by the
overthrow  of  despots or with their abdication. Republics are destroyed
and  constitutions  overthrown  by  dictators  who  usurp  the powers of
government.  Violence,  or the threat of violence, usually attends these
changes.  The  other  sort  of change may take place in two ways: either
when  one  constitution  replaces  another,  as frequently occurs in the
revolutions  of  the Greek city-states; or when an enduring constitution
is  modified  by  amendment,  as is customary in modern republics. Every
constitutional  change  is  in  a  sense revolutionary, but if it can be
accomplished  by  due  process  of law, violence can be avoided. All the
changes in which constitutional government or constitutions are involved
raise  fundamental questions of justice. Is republican government always
better  than absolute monarchy and the mixed regime— better in the sense
of being more just, better because it gives men the liberty and equafity
they  justly  deserve? Is it better relative to the nature and condition
of  certain  peoples  but  not all, or of a people at a certain stage of
their   development,   but   not  always?  In  what  respects  does  one
constitution  embody  more justice than another? What sorts of amendment
or reform can rectify the injustice of a constitution? Without answering
such  questions,  we cannot discriminate between progress and decline in
the  history of constitutionalism. Divergent answers will, of course, be
found  in  the  great books. Among the political philosophers, there are
the defenders of absolutism and those who think that royal government is
most  like  the  divine;  the  exponents  of  the supremacy of the mixed
regime; the republicans who insist that nothing less than constitutional
government is fit for free men and equals. And there are those who argue
that  the  justice of any form of government must be considered relative
to  the  condition  of  the people, so that republican government may be
better  only  in  some circumstances, not in all. The issue arising from
these conflicting views

[298a]
240 THE GREAT IDEAS concerning constitutional and absolute government is
treated in the chapters on Citizen, Monarchy, and Tyranny. But one other
issue  remains to be discussed here. It concerns the comparative justice
of  diverse  constitutions. Constitutions can differ from one another in
the  way  in  which  they  plan  the operations of government, or in the
qualifications  they set for citizenship and public office. Usually only
the  second mode of difference seriously affects their justice. In Greek
political  life,  the issue of justice as between the democratic and the
oligarchical constitution is a conflict between those who think that all
free men deserve the equality of citizenship and the opportunity to hold
office,  and those who think it is unjust to treat the rich and the poor
as  equals.  The  latter insist that citizenship should be restricted to
the  wealthy  and  that  the  magistracies should be reserved for men of
considerable  means.  Finding  justice  and  injustice  on  both  sides,
Aristotle favors what he calls "the mixed constitution." This unites the
justice  of treating free men alike so far as citizenship goes, with the
justice  of  discriminating between rich and poor with respect to public
office.  Such  a  mixture,  he  writes, "may be described generally as a
fusion  of  oligarchy  and  democracy,"  since it attempts "to unite the
freedom of the poor and the wealth of the rich." The mixed constitution,
especially  if  accompanied  by  a  numerical predominance of the middle
class,  seems to him to have greater stability, as well as more justice,
than  either  of  the  pure  types  of constitution which, oppressive to
either  poor  or rich, provoke revolution. In modern political life, the
issue   between   oligarchy  and  democracy  tends  toward  a  different
resolution. The last defenders of the oligarchical constitution were men
like  Burke,  Hamilton,  and John Adams in the i8th century. Since then,
the   great  constitutional  reforms  have  progressively  extended  the
franchise  almost to the point of universal suffrage. These matters are,
of  course,  further treated in the chapters on Democracy and Oligarchy.
Political  representation, with a system of periodic elections, seems to
be indispensable to constitutional government under modern con-

[298b]
ditions.  The territorial extent and populousness of the nation-state as
compared   with   the   ancient   city-state   makes  impossible  direct
participation  by  the  whole body of citizens in the major functions of
government.  Considering  the  ancient  republics  of  Sparta, Rome, and
Carthage,  the  writers  of  The  Federalist try to explain the sense in
which  the  principle  of  representation  differentiates  the  American
republic  from  these ancient constitutional governments. "The principle
of  representation,"  they say, "was neither unknown to the ancients nor
wholly overlooked in their political constitutions. The true distinction
be  tween  these and the American government lies in the total exclusion
ofthe  people,  in  their  collective  capacity,  from  any share in the
latter,  and  not  in  the  total exclusion ofthe representatives of the
people  from the administration of the former.'' The Federalists then go
on to say that "the distinction . . . thus qualified must be admitted to
leave a most advantageous superiority in favor of the United States. But
to  insure  to this advantage its full effect, we must be careful not to
separate  it  from the other advantage of an extensive territory. For it
cannot be believed that any form of representative government could have
succeeded  within  the  narrow  limits  occupied  by  the democracies of
Greece."  In  their  opinion,  representative  government  is not merely
necessitated  by  the  conditions  of  modern  society, but also has the
political  advantage  of safeguarding constitutional government from the
masses.  As  pointed out in the chapter on Aristocracy, where the theory
of representation is discussed, the officers of government chosen by the
whole  body  of  citizens  are  supposed—at  least  on one conception of
representatives— to be more competent in the business of government than
their  constituents.  It is in these terms that the Federalists advocate
what  they  call "republican government" as opposed to "pure democracy."
Like  the  idea  of  political  offices, the principle of representation
seems  to  be  inseparable  from  constitutionalism  and  constitutional
government.  Though the principle appears to a certain extent in ancient
republics—whether  oligarchies  or democracies—ancient political writing
does not contain a formal discussion of

[299a]
legislation has become the exclusive function of ment. OUTLINE OF TOPICS
1.  The  difference between government by law and government by men: the
nature  of  2a.  The  constitution  as  the  form  or  organization of a
political  community:  arrangement of offices; division of functions 2b.
The  constitution as the fundamental law: its relation to other laws, as
a  source  or  measure  of  legality  or  justice  3.  The  relation  of
constitutional   government   to  other  forms  of  government  3^.  The
combination  of  constitutional  with  absolute  government:  the  mixed
regime;   constitutional   or   limited   monarchy  3^.  The  merits  of
constitutional  government  compared  with  royal  government and 4. The
constitutional  conception  of  political office: the qualifications and
duties  of public officials 5 J. The justice of different constitutions:
the  extent  and  character  of  citizenship  under  each  5^. The mixed
constitution:  its  advantages  7.  The  preservation  of constitutions:
factors   tending   toward  their  dissolution  yb.  The  safeguards  of
constitutional  government:  bills  of  rights;  separation  of  powers;
impeachment  8.  The  change  of constitutions 8^. Methods of changing a
constitution:  revolution, amendment 9. The theory of representation ga.
The  functions  and  duties  of representatives: their relation to their
constituents  10. The origin, growth, and vicissitudes of constitutional
government

[299b]
Chapter 12: CONSTITUTION 241 PAGE the mixed regime 244

[300a]
242  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  The  diflference  between government by law and
government  by men: the nature of constitutional government 5 Aeschylus:
Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[904-931]
122d-123a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b 5 Aristophanes:
Wasps  [463-507]  512d-513c  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c; bk
VII,  233a-d  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 368cd; BK III,
425a-c;  438a-b  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  369c-d;  bk  vi, 380b-c /
Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk hi, 667c676b esp 671c; bk iv, 681b-682c;
bk  viii,  733d-734a;  bk  ix, 745c-746a; 754a-b / Seventh Letter, 805d;
807a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6 [1134*24-^17] 382a-c esp
[1134^35-37] 382b;
bk x, ch 9
[1180*14-24] 434d-435a /
Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252*13-17] 445a-b; ch 5 [1254*34-^9] 448a;
ch 7
[1255^15-20] 449b; ch
12 453d-454a; bk II, ch 10 [1272*35-^10] 468d-469a; bk hi, ch 10
[1281*29-39] 479a; ch
ii
[1282^1-13]
480b-c; CH 15-17 484b-487a; bk iv, ch 4
[i29i'^3o-i292*37]
491a-d; ch 6 492b-493a; bk v, ch 9
[1310*25-36] 512c; bk
vii, ch 2
[1324^^32-40] 528d-529a

[300b]
Symbols:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's attention to one or
more  especially  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect 14 254b-c 14
Plutarch:  Caesar,  591d / Cato the Younger, 635a-b; 638b-639a/ Tiberius
Gracchus, 67Sb-d 15 Tacitus: Afinals, bk i, la-2b; bk hi, 51b-c; 61c-62a
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  15  17a-b 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A I, REP 3 205b-206b; a 3 207a-c; q 95, a i
esp  REP  2  226c-227c;  q 96, a 5, rep 3 233d234d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  104d-106d;  114b115a;  131d-132a; 138b-c; 149b-151a; part iv,
272c;273a-c 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc hi
[1-15] 44c-d; ACT III, sc
i [223-242] 49c 27 Shakespeare: Henry VIII, act i, sc ii
[91loi] 553d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37, schol 2 435b-436a 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [63-110]  320b321b  35 Locke: Civil Government
25a-81d  esp  ch  iv,  SECT 21 29d, CH VI, sect 57 36d-37b, ch vii, SECT
87-94  44a-46c,  ch  xi  55b-58b, ch xiv 62b-64c, CH xviii, sect 199-202
71a-72a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk ii, 4a; 7c9a,c; bk hi, 12a-13c; bk iv, 15a-c; bk v, 25d31a; bk
vi, 33a-35a; 36a-b; bk viii, 54a-b;

[301a]
2 to 3a Chapter 12: CONSTITUTION 243 57c-58d; bk xr, 69a-c; bk xix, 137c
d;  bk  XXV, 211c-d; BK XXVI, 223c-d 38 RoLssEAu: Inequality, 323d-324a;
357b  c;  358b-d;  361c-362a  /  Political  Economy,  370b371a  / Social
Contract,  bk  i, 387b,d-391b; BK II, 400a; 406a-b; bk hi, 408c; 419a-c;
bk  IV,  433a-434b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b passim; 51b-d;
154a-c;  342a-c;  592a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73d- 75a; 96d; 125a;
161c-162a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-  11  5a  /  Science of Right,
435c-437c;   450d-452a   /   Judgement,   586a-587a  43  Declaration  of
Independence:  la-3b  passim  43 Federalist: number i6, 68b-c; number 33
107b-109b passim; number 44, 146d-147a; number 47, 153c-154d; number 53,
167d168b;  number  55,  174c-d;  number  57, 176d178a; number 75, 223c-d
passim;  number  78,  230d-232a;  number 81, 237d-238b 43 Mill: Liberty,
267d-268b  /  Representative  Government, 327b,d-355b passim 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  203d-205d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 260265
82a-84b;  par  278  92c-93a;  par  286  96c97a;  par  298-299  99c-100b;
additions,  132  137d-138b;  171  146b-c  / Philosophy ofHistory, INTRO,
198b-199c;  part  i, 207d-208c; 213b214d; part ii, 261d-262c; 271d-272a;
part  HI,  301c-302d;  part  iv,  327a-328a; 342a-d; 363c-365c 54 Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b-d 2. The notion of a constitution
2a.  The  constitution  as  the  form  or  organization  of  a political
community: arrangement of offices; division of functions 7 Plato: Latvs,
bk   vi,  697a-705c  esp  697a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  i
[i274''36-37]  471b;  cH  3  [i276«35-''i4]  473b-c; ch 6 [1278'' 10-14]
475d; CH 7 476c-477a passim, esp
[i279'*25-27] 476c; bk
iv, ch i
[i289''i5-i7]
488a;  ch  3 [1290*8-12] 489a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
105,  A  I,  ANS  307d-309d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch x-xiv 55a-64c
passim;  ch  xvii,  sect  198  70d-71a;  ch xix, sect 212-220 74a-75d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk xi, 69d-75a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract,
bk  hi,  406b,  d410a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, la; 521c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  562  b-c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 435a-439a;
450d-452a / Judgement, 55 7d [fn 2] 43 Constitution of the U.S.: lla-20d
esp  ARTICLE  i-iii  lla-16a  43 Federalist: number 39 125a-128b passim;
NUMBER 47-83 153c-251a passim

[301b]
43  Mill:  Liberty,  321  b-c  /  Representative Government, 327b,d 332d
passim; 355b 356a; 401d402a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part rii, par
267  84b; par 269 84d; par 271-273 89c-92a; j)ar 290 97d; additions, i6r
143a-b;  164  144c145a  / Philosophy of History, intro, 173a175c 2b. The
constitution  as  the  fundamental law: its relation to other laws, as a
source  or  measure  of  legality  or  justice 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi,
380b-c / Laivs, bk iv, 681b-682c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 3
[1276^1-15]
473b-c; ch ii [1282^1-13] 480b-c; bk iv, ch i
[1289*13-25] 488a-b; ch
ii [i295"40-*'i] 495c; bk V, CH 9 [1310*12-35] 512b-c; bk viii, ch i
[1337^19! 542a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d;  138b-c  35  Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  xix,  sect  212 74a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
i-ii,  2d-6b;  bk  v,  18b,d-25c;  bk  xxvi,  214b,d;  bk  xxix, 265d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  358b-d  /  Social  Contract, BK II, 405d-406d 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a esp 114b-d / Science of Right, 435a-441d
esp   435c-436b,   437c-d,   438d-441d;   450d-452a   43   Articles   of
Confederation:  xiii-conclusioN  9c-d  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :
article  i, sect 8 13a-d esp [254-259] 13c-d; article vi [583590] 16d 43
Federalist:  number  33  107b-109b;  number  44,  146d-147a;  number 53,
167d-168b;  number  78  229d-233c;  number  80,  236d-237a;  number  81,
237d-238b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  430a-431a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 260269 82a-84d; par 274 92a; par 298
99c;  par  349 llld-112a; additions, 166 145b-c / Philosophy of History,
intro,  173a-175c;  part  iv,  364b  3.  The  relation of constitutional
government  to  other  forms  of  government  "ia.  The  combination  of
constitutional    with    absolute   government:   the   mixed   regime;
constitutional  or  limited  monarchy  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens
[359-422] 5b6b; [600-624] 8d-9a 5 Euripides: Suppliants [339-358] 261b-c
6  Herodotus:  History, bk iv, 152d-153b 7 Plato: Statesman, 598b-604b /
Laivs,  bk  hi, 667a-676b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 14 483a-484a;
CH 15-16 484b-486c esp ch 15 [i286^3i]-ch 16
[1287*8]
485b-c; bk v, ch ii
[1313*18-33]

[302a]
(3.  The  relation  of  constitutional  government  to  other  forms  of
government.   3a.   The  combination  of  constitutional  with  absolute
government:  the  mixed  regime;  constitutional  or  limited monarchy.)
515d-516a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^^391366*2] 608b
14 Plutarch : Lycurgus, 34b-35d / Dion, 800c 15 Tacitus : Annals, bk hi,
59d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch iv 7a-8a; ch xix, 27a-b; 29c-d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii, 103d-104b; 106d107c; 151c-152a; part hi, 228a-b 35
Locke: Ciiil Government, ch vii, sect 94 46a-c; ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch
xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiii  59b-62b  passim;  ch xiv 62b-64c; CH xviii, SECT
199-206  71a-72c;  ch  xix  73d81d passim, esp sect 213 74b-c 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  216b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 266d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c-8c; BK III, llc-12b; 13c; bk vi, 36a-b; bk ix,
58b,d-60a;  bk xi, 69a-77b esp 69d-75a; bk XIX, 142a-146a,c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  357b-c  /  Social  Contract,  BK  III, 414d-415b 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and  Fall,  26d-28b;  622d623a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,
439c-440a; 441 b-c; 450a-452a 43 Federalist: number 39, 125c; number 43,
141a-d; number 47, 154a-c; number 69 207a210c passim; number 70, 213b-c;
number  71,  216a-b;  number  84,  252b-c  43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-268c /
Representative  Government,  343c-344a;  351a-c; 353d-354b; 401d-402b 44
Bosw  ELI.:  Johfison,  178a-b;  255a-d;  390a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part hi, par 273 90c-92a; par 275-286 92a-97a; additions, 170-172
145d-146d  /  Philosophy  of  History^  part i, 208b-c; part iv, 342b-d;
368c-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; BK IX, 384c-388a,c
passim  3b.  The merits of constitutional government compared with royal
government  and  the  mixed  regime  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [391-460]
261d-262b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 107c-108c 7 Plato: Statesman,
598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk hi, 672c-676c; bk iv, 681d-682c; bk ix, 754a-b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1134*^24-^17]
382a-c / Politics, bk i, ch 5
[1254^24-^24]
447d-448b; ch 7
[1255^16-20] 449b; ch
13
[1259^^32-1260^7] 454b-455a,c; bk
hi, ch 7 476c-477a; ch 15-17 484b-487a; bk iv, ch 2
[1289*26-^10]
488b-c;  ch  io-ii  495a-496d;  BK  V,  CH  8  [1308^10-30] 510d-511a 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 151c-152a

[302b]
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch ii, sect 1:5 28ab; CH VII, sect 87-94
44a-46c;  ch  xi 55b-58b; CH XIV, sect 162-163 63a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  216b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk ii, 7c-9a,c; BK HI,
12a-13c; bk iv, 13b,d-15c: bk v, 25d31b; BK VI, 33a-35a; 36a-b; 37d-38c;
bk  vii,  45c-46a;  47d-48a;  bk  xi,  69a-75d  38 Rousseau: Inequality,
356b-359c / Social Contract, bk i, 387b,d-391b; bk hi, 408b-c; 412c-414d
40   Gibbon:   Decline   and  Fall,  24b;  32b-34a,c;  68b,d-69b;  521d;
522c-523a,c;  523d-524a  42 Kant: Science of Right, 439c-440a; 450a-452a
/Judgement,  586a-587a  43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a:  number 69
207a-210c   passim   43   Mill:   Liberty,  267d-269a  /  Representative
Government,  338d-340d;  341d-350a;  351a354a;  363b-366a;  436b-437a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 301, 101a; additions, 180 148b
/  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  213b-214d;  part  iv, 359b 4. The
constitutional  conception  of  political ofl&ce: the qualifications and
duties  of public officials 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 697a-705c 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 12
[1259*^4-9]
454a;  bk  ii,  ch  9  \i2']o^j-i2yi^i^  466d-467b;  CH 10 [1272*35-^10]
468d-469a; bk hi, ch 6
[1278^30-1279*22]
476a-c; ch ii 479b-480c passim; ch 12 [i282^i5]-ch 13 [1284*2] 480c482a;
bk  iv,  ch  3  [1290*5-13]  489a;  ch  14-16  498b-502a,c;  bk  v, ch 9
,[1309*33-^14]  511c-d; BK VI, ch 4 [i3i8*'2i-i3i9*4] 522b-c / Rhetoric,
bk  I,  ch  8  [1365^31-36]  608a  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45c / Cato the
Younger^  625b-627b  /  Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xi,  105d-107b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 3 207a-c
23  Hobbes: Laiathan, part ii, 122b-124b 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act
ii,  so  ii-iii  364a-369a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 94
46a-c;  ch  ix, sect 131 54d; ch xh, sect 143 58c-d; ch xiii 59b-62b; ch
xvh,  sect 198 70d-71a; ch xix, sect 221-222 75d-76c 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  i,  28b-29b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xi, 71a72a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d-325b;  356a-c; 358b-d / Social Contract, bk
hi,  423c-424d;  BK  IV, 427a-428a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 26d-27a;
27d'28a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73d; 94c-95c; 563d-564b; 586c-587a
43 Articles of Confederation: v 5d-6a; ix
[299-310] 8b
43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: article i, sect 2-6 llb-12d; article ii-
iii, sect i 14b-15c;

[303a]
5 to 5b Chaptir 12: constitution 245 ARTICLE VI
[583-5Q9I
16d; AMKNUMF.NTS, XII 18a-c; xiv, si:ct 2-3 18(l-19a; xx-xxil 19d-20b 43
Federalist:  number  39,  125c-126b;  number 52-80 165a-237d passim, esp
number   57,   176d-177a   43   Mill:  Liberty,  268b-c;  320c-323a,c  /
Representative  Government,  354b-362c;  363a-b;  365b-366a;  398d-406a:
409d-417c passim 46 He(;el: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 277 92b-c;
par 293-297 98b-99b; AnnnioNs, 169 145d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk m,
241c-242b . The diversity of constitutions among the forms of government
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 107c-108c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii-ix,
401d-421a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b / Laws, bk iv, 679c682c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk viii, ch 10
[1160*31-
^22]  412c-413a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7-1  i 461d470b; bk hi, ch 5
[1278^3-33]  475a-c; ch 6-9 i294»'ii] 475d-478d esp ch 8 [i279*'i7]-ch 9
477a-d;  bk iv, ch 2 [i289^i3]-cH 9 488c-494c; ch ii-i2 495b-497b; ch 14
[1297^  1280^33]  37-1298^40] 498b-499c: bk v, ch i [1301*2535] 502b; BK
VI  520a-526d;  bk vii, ch 8-10 532c-534d / Athenian Constitution, ch 41
571c-572a  /  Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 8 608a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica.
part  iii,  q  105,  A  I,  ANS 307c-309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
104d-108a   35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-8c;  BK  III, 9a'12a; bk v,
18d-19d;  23a-c;  bk  xi,  75d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-d / Social
Contract,  BK  III,  419b-c; BK IV, 427a-428a 42 Kant: Science of Right,
450b-d  43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d  passim; NUMBER 14, 60b-d;
number  39,  125b-c  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 355b -356b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 273274, 90d-92a; additions, 166
145b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 173a-175c; part iv, 367c-368b 5a.
The  justice  of  diflferent  constitutions: the extent and character of
citizenship  under  each  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-108c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 395d399a: bk vi, 520b-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk hi,
667c676b;  bk  iv, 679c-680d; bk viii, 733d-734a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
v, ch 3
[1131*24-29]
378d; CH 7 [1135*2-4] 382d; bk viii, ch io-ii 412c-413d/Po///;o-, bk hi,
ch 1-2 471b,d-472d; CH 5 475a-d; ch 9 477c-478d; ch 13 [1283^*44-

[303b]
1284*3]  482a;  bk  iv,  cm  3  488d-489b;  en 8-9 493c-494d; bk v, ch i
[i3oi*25-i3f)2"i5] 502b503b; CH 3
[i303''5
8] 505a; bk vi, cm 3 521c-522a: ch 4
[iy9'*2-32|
523a-b;  en  6  524b-c  / Athenian Constitution, cm 2 553a-c; CH 12 557b
558a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  cm  8 [1365** 31-1366*6] 608a b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  i, sect 14 254b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti-
ii,  q  105,  A  I, ANS 307d-309d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii,
4a-8c; BK III, 9a-lla; bk v, 18b,d-25a; 31b-33a,c passim; bk vi 33a-43d;
bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  XII,  84b,d-85c;  bk xhi, 99b 100c 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405a406a  39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk iv,
271a-b  40  GihEo^:  Decline  and Fall, 616d-617d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  81d-82a;  223c224a;  403b-404d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 114b-d /
Science  of Right, 401b-402a; 436d-437c; 450b-451d 43 Federalist: number
10,  51c-52d;  number  57  176d-179b 43 Mill: Representative Government,
350a;  370a372b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 274 92a;
additions,  166  145b-c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 173a-175c; part
ii,  272a-d;  273d-274a;  275b-276a;  part  iv,  367c-368b 5h. The mixed
constitution:  its  advantages  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk vhi,
590a-b  7  Plato:  Laws,  ek  hi,  667a-676b;  bk  iv,  680d681a; bk vi,
699d-700b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265^251266*30] 461b-d esp [1265^33-39] 461b: ch ii
[i272^24]-CH
12
[1274*13] 469b-470d; bk
iv, ch 8-9 493c-494d; ch 11-12 495b-497b; bk v, CH 7
[1307*5-28]
509a-b; ch 8
[1308*^101309*32] 510d-511c
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Dion, 800c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv,
72a;  bk vi, 97b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANS
229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i, ans 307d-309d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xix,
27a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iii, 228a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  x,  sect  132 55a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b,  d60a;  bk  xi 68b,d-84d esp 69d-75a 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  410c;  414d415b; bk IV, 427a-c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 24b; 630b,d631a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
71d;  81c-d;  218c219a;  403c-d;  404c-d; 428a 43 Federalist: number 39,
125c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 355b-356b; 401d-402b

[304a]
6.  The  origin of constitutions: the lawgiver, the social contract, the
constituent  assembly 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 14a-c; bk iv, 152d153b
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-c  /  Statesman, 603c / Laws, bk hi,
664a'667d  /  Seventh  Letter, 807a-b 9 Aristotle : Politics, bk i, ch 2
445b-446d esp
[1253^30] 446d; BK
II, CH 12 470b-471d; bk III, CH 15 [1286^8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 13
[i297''i6-28]
498a / Athenian Constitution 553a-584a,c esp ch 5-12 554d-558a, ch 29-31
566b-567d, ch 41 571c-572a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d  / Romulus, 20c-28a / Lycurgus 32a-48d esp
33c-35d,  47a-c  / Solon, 68a-74b / Poplicola-Solon, 86a-87b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk hi, Slb-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 84c-90d; 97c-d; PART
II,  99a-104d;  109b-c;  133b;  part  hi,  200a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays,
462d-463b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35
Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch VI, SECT 76 42a; ch vii,
sect  87  44a-b;  CH  VIII  46c-53c esp sect 96-97 47a-b; ch x, sect 132
55a-b;  ch  xi,  sect 141 58a-b; CH XV, SECT 171 65a-b; ch xvi, sect 175
65d;  CH  XIX,  sect 220 75c-d; sect 243 81d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
216b;  262a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ix, 58b,d60a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  353c-355b;  358b-d  /  Political  Economy,  370b-d / Social
Contract,  bk I, 391a-393c; bk ii, 400a-402a; bk hi, 423a424d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  71d-72d;  403b-c; 562b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
434b-c;   435a-436c;   437c-d;  439a-441d;  450d-452a  esp  450d451c  43
Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28] la-b 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
preamble  lla,c;  article  vii  [604-610] 17a,c 43 Federalist: number i,
29a-b;  number  2,  32a'33b; number 22, 84d-85a; number 3738, 117d-124a;
number 40 128b-132a; number 49, 159b-c; NUMBER 53, 167d-168b; NUMBER 78,
232a-c   43   Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a  /  Representative  Government,
327b,d-332d  passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 258,
80d-81b;  par  273,  91d-92a;  additions,  116  135c-d  /  Philosophy of
History, intro, 173a175c; PART IV, 365c-366b 51 Tolstoy: War a?7d Peace,
epilogue ii, 680b684a

[304b]
246  THE GREAT IDEAS (itol 7. The preservation of constitutions: factors
tending  toward their dissolution 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
396c-d  7  Plato:  Republic, bk vi, 380b-c; bk viii-ix, 401d-421a esp bk
viii,   403a-404a,  405c-406a,  408b-409b,  411d-414b  /  Laws,  bk  hi,
667c676b;  BK  XII,  786c-787d;  794a-799a,c  /  Seventh Letter, 801b-c;
806d-807b  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [1270^7-26] 466d-467a; ch
10
[1272*35-^11]
468d-469a;  bk IV, CH 11-12 495b-497b; bk v 502a-519d passim, esp CH 7-9
508c-512d,cH  ii515d-518c;  bk VI, CH 5 [1319^33-1320*4] 523b-c; bk vii,
CH 9 [1329*3-12] 533b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1360*20-29] 600c
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 35c-d; 47a-48a / Coriolanus, 180b-d / Lysander,
361a-d / Agesilaus, 482a-c; 495c-d / Agis, 649b-c 15 Tacitus: Histories,
bk  i,  210d-212d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, AA 2-3
236d-238b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 148c-153a; 154b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  47a-51a; 318c-319b; 462c-465c; 504c-506a 26 Shakespeare: Julius
Caesar  568a-596a,c  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 90, 125a / New
Atlantis,  205d-207b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch viii, sect 9798
47a-c;  ch  xiii,  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch XIV, SECT 162-168 63a-64c; ch
xviii, sect 203-210 72a-73c; ch xix, sect 223-225 76c77a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  hi,  9b-10c; BK IV, 15d-16a; bk v, 21d-22b; bk vii,
44d45b;  bk  viii,  51a-57a;  bk  x,  63b-c;  bk  xi, 74c-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 361a-362a / Social Contract, bk ii, 403a-404a; 405d-406a; bk
hi,  408b-c;  418a-421c;  bk  iv, 432b-435a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
622d-623a  42 Kant: Science of Right, 441b-c; 450d-452a esp 450d-451a 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43 Federalist: number 8, 45a-47a;
number  id  49c-53a;  number  15-16,  64b-68d;  number 18-22 71a-85a esp
number  20,  77c;  number 25, 91b-d; number 27-28 94d-98b passim; number
41, 133a-134c; number 43, 141a142d; number 44, 147a-b; number 71, 215bc;
number   78   229d-233c   43  Mill:  Liberty,  320a-c  /  Representative
Government,  327b,d-332d;  350b-356b;  401d-402b;  413c-414d;  425b-d 44
B0SWEL.L:  Johnson,  120a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
273,  91d-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 272c273a; part iv,
365c-d; 367c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 668a669c

[305a]
la  to  8«  Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 247 la. The relative stability of
diflferent  types  of  constitutions  6  Herodotlis:  History  ,  bk hi,
107c-108c  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii,  587a-b 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  csp  bk  VIII, 403a-404a, 405c-406a,
408b-409b, 411d414b / Laws, bk hi, 667c-676b / Seventh Letter, 801 b-c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9-11  465b-470b passim; bk hi, ch 13
[1284*3-^34]  482a-483a;  BK  IV,  ch  II [1295^35-1296^2] 496a-c; ch 12
496d-497b; bk v 502a-519d esp ch i [1301*^51302*16] 502d-503b, ch 3
[1302^34-1303^18]
504b-505a.  ch 4 [1304*18-^18] 505d-506b, ch 7 [1307*5-27] 509a-b, ch 12
[i3i5''ii-39]  518cd;  BK  VI,  CH 5 [1319^33-1320*3] 523b-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  iv,  72a-b  / Histories, bk II, 224d-225a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,q  105, A I, ANS 307d'309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  105c-106d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk hi, lOc-d; BK
VIII,  51a-54b;  57b-c;  bk  xv,  112c-114a;  bk XIX, 142a-143c; 145d 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk hi, 411b-c; 413d-414c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall, 48d-49a; 522d523a,c 43 Federalist: number 10, 51c-53a; number
27,  96b;  number  48, 157b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 321 b-c / Representative
Government, 355b-356b; 401d-402b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 195c-d; 390a-b 7b.
The safeguards of constitutional government: bills of rights; separation
of  powers; impeachment 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Solon, 70c71c /
Coriolanus, 179c-184c / Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
iil  51b-c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 103d-104a; 150b; 151d-152a 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii, sect 107 49b-d; ch xi, sect 134-CH
xii,  sect  143  55b-58d; ch xiii 59b-62b; ch xvii, sect 198 70d-71a; ch
xix  73d-81d  passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c-8c; bk V,
29a;  31d; bk vi, 33a-35a; bk viii, 54b-c; bk XI, 68b,d-75a; 82c-83a; bk
xii,  84b,d-85c;  bk  XIX,  142a-143c  38  Rousseau:  Political Economy,
370b-377b  /  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 407d-408a; 410d-411a; 414d-415b;
423a;  424a-d;  bk  iv, 432b-433a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b; 25a;
27a-b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81c-d; 93a-c; 94c95c; 96c-d 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 435c-441d passim; 450d-452a esp 451d-452a

[305b]
43 Declaration of Independence:
[7
28] lab;
[52-55]
2a;
[66-67]
[70-71]
2b;
[95-105I
3a 43 Articles of Confederation: v [74]-vi
[93]
6a-b  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: preamble lla,c; article i, sect 2
[45-47] lid; sect 3 [Hi-95] 12a-b; sect 6 [i43]-sect 7 [169] 12c-d; sect
9
[267-275]
13d;
[283-295]
13d-14a; sect 10
[300-303]
14a; ARTICLE II, SECT I
[331-334I
14b; SECT 4 15c; article hi, sect 2
[493]-
SECT 3
[511]
15d-16a; artic^^e iv, sect 4 16b-c; article vi
[583-599]
l-6d;  amendments,  i-x 17a-d; xiii, sect i-xiv, sect i 18c; XV 19b; xix
19d  43  Federalist:  number  8,  46c-d; number 9-10 47a-53a; number 21,
78d-79b;  number  25,  90a-b;  number  26-28  92a-98b passim; number 41,
133a-134c;  number  43,  140c-142d; NUMBER 44, 144d-145a; 146c-d; number
4651,  151a-165a; number 53, 167b-168b; number 55, 173b-174c; number 57,
176d-178b  passim;  number  58,  180d;  number  62, 189d191c; number 63,
192c-193c;  number  65-66  198a-203a;  number  68, 205d'206a; number 69,
207b-d;  number 73 218d-221c; number 76, 226a-227b; number 78 229d-233c;
number 80, 236a-b; number 81, 237d-239c; number 83-84 244b-256a 43 Mill:
Liberty, 267d-268b; 269a-c / Representative Government, 355b-356b; 361b;
365b366a; 369b-389b; 392b-401a; 401d-402b; 406c-407d; 412b-c 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 195c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 272 89d-90c;
par  286  96c-97a;  additions,  164  144c-145a; 184 149a / Philosophy of
History,  part  IV, 368c-d 8. The change of constitutions Sa. Methods of
changing    a    constitution:    revolution,   amendment   6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk viii, 575c-577d 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 401c-d;
bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  esp  bk  viii, 403a-404a, 405c-406a, 408b-409b,
411d-414b  /  Seventh  Letter,  800b801b; 804a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
viii, ch 10
[i 160*3 1-''22]
412c-413a / Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[1273^361274*22] 470c-d; bk
hi, ch 3
[1276*35-^15]
473b-c; bk iv, ch i
[1288^43-1289*8] 487d488a; ch
5 [1292^12-22] 492a; bk v, ch 1-2 502a-503d; ch 3
[1303*14-24] 504c-d; ch
4
[i304^8]-CH 7 [1307^25] 506b-509d / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  5  554d-555a; ch 29 566b-d; CH 33-34 568b-569a; ch 38
570a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 6a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 97, A 3 237b-238b

[306a]
(8. The change of constitutions. 8a. Methods of changing a constitution:
revolution,  amendment^  23  HoBBEs:  Let'iathan,  part  ii,  150c-151a;
conclusion, 280c-281a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 47a-51a; 462c-465c 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch xix 73d-81d passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws,
bk  xi,  77a:  77d  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 424a-d 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 441b-c; 450d-451a 43 Declaration of Independence:
[7-28] lab; [95-108] 3a
43  Articles  of  Confederation:  xiii  9c  43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article v 16c; AMENDMENTS, X\7II, SECT 3 19c; XX, SECT 6 20b ; XXI, SECT
3  20b  ; xxii, sect 2 20b-d 43 Federalist: number 14, 62a-d; number 21,
78d-79b;  number  39-40,  127d-132a;  number  43,  143a-b;  number 49-50
159b-162c; number 53, 167d-168b: number 78, 232a-c; number 85, 257a-259a
43  Mill:  Liberty,  321a-b  / Representative Government, 327b,d-332d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 273274, 91d-92a; additions, 161
143a-b:  166 145b-c; 176 147c-d / Philosophy of History, part IV, 364a-c
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424cd;  425b-c;  432b-c Sb, The
violation   and  overthrow  of  constitutional  government  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  438a-b;  bk  viii,  579c-583c;  585d-586b;
587a589a; 590a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1292*5-37]
491b-d; ch 5 [1292^6-11] 492a; ch 6 [1293*110] 492c;
[1293*27-34] 492d-493a; bk
v,  ch  5-7 506b-509d; bk vi, ch 4 [i3i9''2-3i] 523ab; ch 6 [1320^29-37]
524c  / Athenian Constitution, ch 14-19 558d-561d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1360*17-29]  600c 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 180b-d / Lysander, 361a-362a
/Agesilaus,  482a-c;  495c-d / Pompey 499a-538a,c / Caesar 577a-604d esp
578b-c  /  Cato  the Younger, 629d-639c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a;
3a-b;  23c  / Histories, bk i, 210d-212d 25 xMontaigne: Essays, 47a-51a;
318c-319b;  462c-465c;  504c-506a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii,
sect   149   59b-d;  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch  xvi-xix65d-81d  passim  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bm viii, 51a52c; 53c-d; bk xi, 82c-83a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 358b-359d / Social Contract, bk hi, 407c; 408b-c;
418a-419c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b; 51c-d; 153c-154b; 592a
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 74b-d

[306b]
1  248  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  to 9a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 450d-451a 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43  Federalist: number 16, 68a-c;
number  20,  77c;  NUMBER  21,  78d-79b;  number  25,  91b-d; NUMBER 26,
93c-94d; number 28 96c-98b; number 44, 146c-d; number 47-48 153c-159a 43
Mill:  Representative Government, 350c-351c 44 Boswei^l: Johnson, 176a-b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part hi, 300b301c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  8d-10d  9.  The  theory  of  representation 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk iv, ch 493d-494a; ch 14 498b-499c
[1298^21-22] 499b
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, ]
[1294*9-15]
passim,  esp  a  3,  ANs and rep 2 207a-c; q 97, a 3, rep 3 237b-238b 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,96c-98a,c: part 11, lOla-b; 105a-c; 117b-121a;
153a-159c  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 88-89 44c-d; CH XI,
sect  140  58a;  ch  xix, sect 222 75d-76c; sect 240 81b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4c-5a  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii,
396b-d;  bk III, 421c-423a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271d
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 451c-452a 43 Declaration of Lndependence:
[41-47]  2a  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: article i 11a14b passim 43
Federalist:  number  10,  51d-53a esp 51d52a; number 14, 60a-61b; number
35,  113a114b;  NUMBER 52-66 165a-203a passim, esp number 57, 176d-178b,
number  63,  193c194a;  number  76,  227a;  number  78,  231a-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  268b-c  /  Representative  Goverfimd'/?/327a-442d  passim, esp
338a-b,355b-362c,  370a-372b,  401a-406a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  301-303 100b-102a; par 308-311 102c-104a; additions, 182
148c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History^  INTRO, 175b-c 9a. The functions and
duties  of  representatives:  their  relation  to  their constituents 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 97c-98a.c; part II, 105a-c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch xii, sect 143 58c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 73a-74b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  71a-c  38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk hi, 421c423a 40 Gibbon: Declifie and Fall, 522c-d 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 438d-439a; 441 b-c; 450a-b; 451d-452a 43 Declaration
of Independence:
[35-47]
lb-2a;  [109-121]  3a-b 43 Articles of Confederation: v [49-58] 5d; ix-x
7a-9a; conclusion 9c-d

[307a]
^bto  10  Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION  249 43 CONSTITT'TION OF THF. U.S.:
ARTICLE  I  11a14b 43 Ffdkralist: number io, 51 d 52c; number 28, 97b-d;
number ^5-36, 113a 115a; number 4-|, 146c-d; number 48, 157c; number 49,
160c-d;  number 52-66 165a 203a passim, csp NUMBER 53, 168b 169d, number
62,   190a  b,  mmber  6:^,  192b  193a;  number  78.  231a-c  43  Mill:
Representatiir  Goverrwicnt,  351a-c; 353b; 355b-362c; 400a-406a 44 Bosw
ell: Johnson, 86a-b; 176a-b 9^. Types of representation: diverse methods
of  selecting  representatives 7 Plato: Latvs, bk vi, 697a-705c; bk xii,
786b787b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 10 478d-479a; CH 13
[1283*2 1-*'34]
481b-d; bk iv, ch 9
[1294^6-13]
494c; CH 14 498b-499c; ch 15
[i3oo»9>4] 500d-501b; bk
vi, ch 2
[1317^216I 520d; ch 3
[i3i8'*i9-**5] 521c-522a; ch 4
[1318^21-26] 522b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45c-46a  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act ii
361a-369a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch vtii, sect 95-99 46c-47c; ch
xiii,  sect  154-158  60c-62b;  ch XIX, sect 216 74d 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  it,  73a-74b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of haws, bk ii, 4a-6d; BK XI,
71a-d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324c-325b / Social Contract, bk i, 391b;
bk  iv,  425d-428a esp 426d-427a 43 Articles of Confederation: v [49-73]
5d6a 43 COxNSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE I, SECT 2
[5]-SECT4 [102] llb-12b; sect5 [107-115] 12b;
AMENDMENTS, XII 18a-c; XIV, SECT 2 18d; XVII 19b-c 43 Federalist: number
22,  82a-c;  number  35,  113a-114b;  number 52-63 165a-195b passim, esp
number  54  170a-172b,  number 62 188d191c; number 68 205b-207a 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  369b-399d; 407d-409c;412a-414d 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  176a-b;  251a;  261c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  311-313  103d-104b  / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172d-173c; part
ii,   277c-d;  part  iv,  365a;  368a-b  10.  The  origin,  growth,  and
vicissitudes  of  constitutional government 6 Herodotus: History, bk iv,
152d-153b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 396b397d; bk hi,
432b-c;  438a-b;  bk  viii,  575c576c;  579c-583c; 585d-586b; 587a-589a;
590a-c

[307b]
7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 667c 676b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1181*^1^-24]
436c / Politics, bk ii, cm 12 470b 471d; bk hi, CH 15
[1286^8
21] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 1:5
[1297^16-28] 498a; bk
v. ch 4
[1304*18-38!
505d-506a;  ch  5-7 506b-509d / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-41 553a 572a
passim,  csp  CH  41  571c-572a  14  Plutarch:  Theseus, 9a-d / Romulus,
20c-28a/  Lycurgus  32aA8d  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c / Poplicola, 77a-82a /
Poplicola-Solon,  86a-87b  /  Coriolanus  174b,d-193a,c  esp 176b-184c /
Lysander,  365a-368a,c / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c / Agis 648b,d-656d
/  Cleomenes,  657a-663c  /  Tiberius  Gracchus  67lb,d-681a,c  /  Caius
Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a; 3a-b; 21b-22d;
BK  III, 51b-c; BK IV, 72a-b; bk vi, 97b / Histories, bk i, 210d-212d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, A I, ANS 307d-309d 27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  3S\a-392a.,c  32  Milton: Sonnets, xii 65a-b /
Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 94
46a-c;  ch  viii,  sect  ioo-iii  47c-51a  passim;  CH xiv, sect 162-166
63a-64a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  74a-76b;  part  hi,  120a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk xi 68b, d84d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
356a-b;  357b-c  /  Social  Contract, bk hi, 420a-c; bk iv, 428a-434b 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
la; 24b,d-28a; 51ad; 153c-154b; 241b-244a passim; 521a-523a,c; 622d-623c
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 71d-75b esp 71d72a, 73b-c; 202a-d; 217a-b;
403b-404d;  562b-565a; 574b-582b; 586c-589a esp 587a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  451d-452a  43  Declaration of Independence: la-3b 43 Articles of
Confederation: 5a-9d 43 Constitution of the U.S.: lla-20d 43 Federalist:
number  2  31a-33b; number 9, 47a-d; number 18-20 71a-78b passim; number
37-38  117d-125a;  number  40 128b-132a; number 48 156d-159a; number 52,
165d167b;  number  63  191d-195b  passim; number 85 256a-259a,c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  267b,d-268c  44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 176a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  additions,  176  147c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
192d193a;  part  ii,  275b-276a;  part hi, 295d296c; part iv, 335a-336c;
362b-368d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; 260b-c; epilogue
i, 668a-669c

[308a]
250  THE  GREAT  IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES see Justice 9c, loa; Law 7a. yc;
Nature 2b; State 3d.

[308b]
For:  Other  considerations of the distinction between government by law
and  government  by  men,  and  for  the  comparison  of  constitutional
government  with  other  forms of government, see Aristocracy 4; Law 6b,
ya-yb;  Liberty  id,  if; Monarchy ia-ia(2), 4c-4e(4); Tyranny 5—5d. The
exposition  of  different  types of constitutions and different forms of
constitutional  government in themselves and in relation to one another,
see  Aristocracy  i-2e;  Citizen  2C-3; Democracy 3-3C, 4a(i)-4a(2), 4d;
Oligarchy  1-2,  4,  5a.  Other  discussions of the mixed regime and the
mixed  constitution, see Aristocracy 2b; Democracy 3a—3b; Government 2b;
Monarchy   ib(i)—   ib(2).  The  idea  of  citizenship  in  relation  to
constitutional  government, see Citizen 2a-2b; and for the conception of
the  statesman  as  a  constitutional  office-holder,  see  State 8. The
conception of constitutional law and its relation to other bodies of law
and  legal  justice,  Matters  relevant to the conventional character of
constitutions  and  the  relation  of  the idea of a constitution to the
theory  of  the  social  contract,  see  Custom  and  Convention 6a; Law
Constitutional  government in relation to the theory of sovereignty, see
Democracy  4b; Government ig(i)-ig(3); Law 6b; Monarchy 4e(3); State 2c;
Tyranny  5c.  Other  discussions  of  the  safeguards  of constitutional
government  and  of  the  theory  and machinery of representation, ^<?d'
Aristocracy  6;  Democracy  4b,  5-5C;  Government  ih;  Liberty ig. The
problem of constitutional change and the stability of different types of
constitution,  see  Aristocracy 3; Democracy 7-73; Revolution 2a, 3c(2);
State  3g.  The  issues  involved  in  the development of constitutional
government and the establishment of liberty under law, see Government 6;
Liberty  6b;  Monarchy 4e(2); Progress 4a; Revolution 3a; Tyranny 4b, 8.
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Greai Boo\s
ofthe  Western World, but relevant to the For the date, place, and other
facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas.  FoRTEScuE.  Governance of England. •'• GuicciARDiNi.
Dialogo  e  discorsi del reggimento di Machiavelli. The Discourses, bk i
Firenze  Milton.  The  Tenure  of  Kings  and Magistrates Bodin. The Six
Boo\es   of   a  Comrnonweale  Hume.  Idea  of  a  Perfect  Commonwealth
Bellarmine.  The  Treatise  on  Civil Government {De Laicis) II' Hooker.
Ofthe  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical Polity PoLYBius. Histories, vol i, bk vi
Bolingbroke. Dissertation upon Parties, letter 18

[309a]
Bentham.  Fragment  on  Government,  ch i (36-48), 3 J. Adams. A Defense
ofthe Constitutions of Government of the United States of America Paine.
Rights  of  Man Burke. Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol . On the Reform
of the Representation in the House of Commons . An Appealfrom the New to
the  Old  Whigs  .  Letter  to Sir Hercules Langrishe Godwin. An Enquiry
Concerning  Political  Justice,  bk  VI, CH 7 Sieves. Discoiirs dans les
debats  constitutionels  de  Van  in  Jefferson.  Notes  on the State of
Virginia  .  Democracy, ch 3 Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk v, ch
4-5  Calhoun.  A  Disquisition  on  Government  .  A  Discourse  on  the
Constitution  and Government of the United States Tocqueville. Democracy
in  America  .  L'ancien  regime  [Ancient  Regime) Bagehot. The English
Constitution

[309b]
Chapter 12: CONSTITUTION 251 Dicky. Introduction to the Study of the Law
of  the  Constitution  MoscA.  The  Ruling  Class  Jellinek.  Allgemeine
Staatslehre  Bryce.  The  American Commonwealth . Studies in History and
Jurisprudence  Beard. The Supreme Court and the Constitution DuGUiT. Law
in  the  Modern  State  Farrand.  The Framing of the Constitution of the
United  States J. Dickinson. Administrative Justice and the Supremacy of
Law  in  the  United  States  Merriam.  The Written Constitution and the
Unwritten Attitude McIlwain. The Fundamental Law Behind the Constitution
.  Constitutionalism and the Changing World . Constitutionalism, Ancient
and   Modern   Kelsen.  Geiieral  Theory  of  Law  and  State  RossiTER.
Constitutional  Dictatorship Borgese et al. Preliminary Draft of a World
Constitution

[310a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  heroes  of  history and poetry may be cruel, violent,
self-seeking,  ruthless,  intemperate,  and  unjust,  but they are never
cowards. They do not falter or give way. They do not despair in the face
of  almost  hopeless odds. They have the strength and stamina to achieve
whatever  they set their minds and wills to do. They would not be heroes
if  they  were  not  men of courage. This is the very meaning of heroism
which  gives  the  legendary  heroes  almost the stature of gods. In the
Homeric  age  they  do in fact contend with gods as well as men. The two
Homeric  epics, especially the Iliad, are peopled with men who cannot be
dared  or  daunted.  In Tennyson's poem, Ulysses, now restive in Ithaca,
remembering  the  years  at  Troy  and the long voyage home, says to his
companions,  Some  work of noble note may yet be done Not unbecoming men
that  strove  with Gods and though We are not now that strength which in
old  days  Moved  earth and heaven; that which we are, we are: One equal
temper  of heroic hearts, Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To  strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield. In the Iliad, courage is
the  quality  above  all others which characterizes the great figures of
Achilles  and  Hector,  Ajax,  Patroclus,  and  Diomedes,  Agamemnon and
Menelaus.  The  only other quality which seems to be equally prized, and
made  the  subject  of  rivalry  and  boast,  is  cunning—  the craft of
Odysseus,  that  man  of  many  devices, and the cleverness in speech of
Nestor.  Yet  the  best speech is only the prelude to action, and except
for  the night expedition of Odysseus and Diomedes into the Trojan camp,
the  great  actions  of the Iliad are unplanned deeds of prowess— stark,
not  stealthy.  The  heroes  have  boundless passions, and fear is among
them. When they are called fearless.

[310b]
Chapter  13:  COURAGE  it is not because nothing affrights them or turns
their  blood  cold. Fear seizes them, as does anger, with all its bodily
force.  They  are fearless only in the sense that they do not act afraid
or  fail  to  act.  Their courage is always equal to the peril sensed or
felt,  so that they can perform what must be done as if they had no fear
of  pain  or  death.  Yet brave men often speak of courage as if it were
fearlessness  and  mark  the  coward  as  one  who is undone by fear. An
ambush, Indomeneus says in the Iliad, will show "who is cowardly and who
is  brave;  the  coward will change color at every touch and turn; he is
full  of fears, and keeps shifting his weight first on one knee and then
on  the  other;  his heart beats fast as he thinks of death, and one can
hear  the  chattering of his teeth." The brave man, mastering fear, will
appear to be fearless. This is the courage of men of action, men in war,
found  not  only  in the heroes of Troy's siege, but in the stalwarts of
all  other battles Leonidas at Thermopylae, Aeneas and Turnus engaged in
single  combat,  the  conquerors  in  Plutarch,  the warrior-nobility in
Shakespeare,  the  civilized  Prince  Andrew and young Rostov in War and
Peace. It is the sort of courage which goes with physical strength, with
feats   of   endurance;   and,  as  signified  by  the  root-meaning  of
"fortitude,"  which is a synonym for courage, it is a reservoir of moral
or  spiritual  strength  to sustain action even when flesh and blood can
carry  on  no  further. Such courage is a virtue in the primary sense of
the  Latin  word  virtus—  manliness, the spirit, or strength of spirit,
required  to  be a man. There are other sorts of courage. The courage of
the  tragic  hero,  of Oedipus and Antigone, goes with strength of mind,
not body. This, perhaps even more than being lion-hearted, is 252

[311a]
a  specifically  human  strength.  Courage  does  not  consist  only  in
conquering  fear  and in withholding the body from flight no matter what
the  risk  of  pain.  It consists at least as much in steeling the will,
reinforcing  its  resolutions, and turning the mind relentlessly to seek
or  face  the truth. Civil no less than martial action requires courage.
Weary  of  empire,  Marcus  Aurelius  summons  courage  each day for the
performance  of  an  endless  round of duties. "In the morning when thou
risest  unwilling,"  he reminds himself, "let this thought be present— I
am rising to the work of a human being." How he conceives the work of an
emperor, he makes plain. "Let the deity which is in thee be the guardian
of  a  living  being,  manly  and  of  ripe  age,  and engaged in matter
political,  and  a Roman, and a ruler, who has taken his post like a man
waiting  for  the  signal  which summons him from life, and ready to go,
having need neither of oath nor of any man's testimony." The burdens are
heavy,  the  task difficult but not impossible, for a man "can live well
even  in a palace." Civil courage is as necessary for the citizen as for
the  ruler.  This virtue, in Mill's opinion, is especially necessary for
citizens  of a free government. "A people may prefer a free government,"
he  writes,  "but  if, from indolence, or carelessness, or cowardice, or
want  of public spirit, they are unequal to the exertions necessary- for
preserving  it;  if  they  will  not  fight  for  it when it is directly
attacked; if they can be deluded by the artifices used to cheat them out
of  it;  if by momentary discouragement, or temporary panic, or a fit of
enthusiasm for an individual, they can be induced to lay their liberties
at  the  feet even of a great man, or trust him with powers which enable
him  to  subvert their institutions; in all these cases they are more or
less  unfit for liberty: and though it may be for their good to have had
it  even  for  a  short  time,  they are unlikely long to enjoy it." The
courage or pusillanimity of a people is sometimes regarded as the cause,
and  sometimes  as  the  effect,  of  their political institutions. "The
inhabitants  of  Europe,"  Hippocrates writes, are "more courageous than
those of Asia; for a climate which is always the same induces indolence,
but  a  changeable  climate, laborious exertions, both of body and mind;
and from rest

[311b]
Chapter  13: COURAGE 253 and indolence cowardice is engendered, and from
laborious exertions and pains, courage." This, according to Hippocrates,
partly  explains  why the Asiatics readily submit lodespoiismand why the
Europeans  fight  for  political  libcriy.  But  the  character  of  the
Europeans,  he  adds, is also the result of "their institutions, because
they  are not governed by kings ... for where men are governed by kings,
there they must be very cowardly . . . and they will not readily undergo
dangers  in  order  to  promote the power of another; but those that are
free  undertake  dangers  on  their  own  account  .  . . and thus their
institutions  contribute  not  a little to their courage." For Hegel, on
the contrary, civic courage consists in undertaking dangers, even to the
point  of  sacrifice,  for  the state. Moreover, for him true courage is
entirely   a  civic  virtue.  "The  intrinsic  worth  of  courage  as  a
disposition  of  the  mind,"  he writes, "is to be found in the genuine,
absolute,  final  end, the sovereignty of the state. The work of courage
is  to  actualize  this  final  end,  and  the  means to this end is the
sacrifice  of  personal  actuality."  Though  he admits that courage "is
multiform,"  he  insists  that  "tl|g  mettle of an animal or a brigand,
courage  for  the  sake of honor, the courage of a knight, these are not
true  forms  of  courage.  The  true  courage  of  civilized  nations is
readiness  for  sacrifice  in  the  service  of  the  state, so that the
individual counts as only one amongst many." The work of man is learning
as  well as action. Man has a duty to the truth as well as to the state.
The  abiUty to face without flinching the hard questions reality can put
constitutes  the  temper  of  a  courageous  mind.  "The huge world that
girdles us about," William James writes, "puts all sorts of questions to
us,  and  tests  us  in  all sorts of ways. Some of the tests we meet by
actions  that  are  easy,  and  some  of  the  questions  we  answer  in
articulately  formulated  words.  But  the deepest question that is ever
asked admits of no reply but the dumb turning of the will and tightening
of  our  heart-strings  as we say, 'Yes, I will even have it so!' When a
dreadful  object is presented, or when lite as a whole turns up its dark
abysses to our view, then the worthless ones among us lose their hold on
the situation altogether . . . But the heroic

[312a]
254  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  mind  does  differently  ... It can face them if
necessary,  without  for that losing its hold upon the rest of life. The
world  thus finds in the heroic man its worthy match and mate ... He can
stand  this  Universe."  Not  only in answering questions, but in asking
them,  courage  is  required. The story which St. Augustine tells in the
Confessions,  of his persistent questioning of doctrines and dogmas, his
refusal to rest in any creed which did not wholly satisfy his mind, is a
story of speculative courage, capped by the fortitude with which he bore
the  agony  of  irresolution  and  doubt.  Learning  is  never  an  easy
enterprise,   nor  truth  an  easy  master.  The  great  scientists  and
philosophers  have  shown  the  patience  and perseverance of courage in
surmounting  the social hardships of opposition and distrust, as well as
the  intellectual  difficulties which might discourage men less resolved
to  seek and find the truth. The great religious martyrs, as indomitable
in their humility as soldiers are in daring, have been as resolute—never
yielding  to  a  despair which would have dishonored their faith. In all
these types of fortitude, different motivations are apparent, as diverse
as the forms which courage takes under the various demdtids of life. Not
all  the  forms of courage may be equally admirable, partly because they
are  unequal  in  degree,  but  also  partly because the courageous acts
themselves,  or  the  purposes for which fortitude is needed, are not of
equal  moral  worth.  Yet  the  essence  of courage seems to be the same
throughout.  It sustains the honor of Don Quixote and in some sense even
of  Sir John Falstaff; it burnishes the fame of Alexander and Caesar; it
fortifies Socrates and Galileo to withstand their trials. Whether in the
discharge of duty or in the pursuit of happiness, courage confirms a man
in the hard choices he has been forced to make. As THE CHAPTER ou ViRTUE
indicates,  the traditional theory of the moral qualities places courage
or  fortitude  among  the  four  principal  virtues. The other three are
temperance,  justice,  and  either  wisdom or prudence, according to the
enumeration of different writers. Plato names these virtues when, in the
Republic, he compares the parts of the state with the parts of the soul.
"The same principles

[312b]
which  exist  in the State exist also in the individual," Socrates says,
and "they are three in number." There is one "with which a man reasons .
.  .  the  rational  part  of  the soul, another with which he loves and
hungers  and  thirsts and feels the flutterings of any other desire— the
irrational   or   appetitive,   the   ally   of   sundry  pleasures  and
satisfactions."  The  third  part is "passion or spirit" which "when not
corrupted   by  bad  education  is  the  natural  auxiliary  of  reason.
Corresponding to these three parts of the soul, there are, or should be,
according to Plato, three classes in the state: the guardians or rulers,
the  husbandmen and artisans, or the workers, and the auxiliaries or the
soldiers. The virtues which belong to the several parts of the soul also
belong  to  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  state.  Wise is the man,
Socrates  declares,  "who  has  in him that little part which rules, and
which  proclaims  commands,  that  part  too  being  supposed  to have a
knowledge  of what is for the interest of each of the three parts and of
the  whole."  Courageous  is he "whose spirit retains in pleasure and in
pain  the  commands of reason about what he ought or ought not to fear."
Temperance,  however, instead of being exclusively the perfection of one
part,  pervades  the  whole, and is found, according to Socrates, in the
man  "who  has these same elements in friendly harmony, in which the one
ruling  principle  of  reason,  and  the  two subject ones of spirit and
desire are equally agreed that reason ought to rule." Justice— "the only
virtue  which  remains  .  .  . when the other virtues of temperance and
courage  and wisdom are abstracted" "is the ultimate cause and condition
of  the  existence  of  all of them, and while remaining in them is also
their preservative." It is the virtue which "does not permit the several
elements  within  a man to interfere with one another, or any of them to
do  the  work  of  others."  The  political analogy finds justice in the
wellordered  state,  where  wisdom  rules,  courage defends the laws and
peace,  and  temperance  balances  the economy. Wisdom would belong most
properly  to  the guardians, courage to the auxiliaries, while all three
classes  would  need temperance. Hegel also associates courage with "the
military class"— "that universal class which is charged with the defence
of the state" and

[313a]
whose  duty  it  is  "to  make real the ideality implicit within itself,
i.e.y  to  sacrifice  itself." But whereas for Hegel courage seems to be
the foremost political virtue, Plato puts it last in the order of goods.
"Wisdom is chief," the Athenian Stranger says in the Laws; "next follows
temperance;  and  from  the  union  of  these  two  with courage springs
justice,  and  fourth in the scale of virtue is courage." In the context
of a different psychological analysis, and a theory of the virtues which
considers  them  primarily  as habits, Aristotle's conception of courage
differs  from Plato's in a number of respects. It is most closely allied
with  temperance.  These  two  virtues together belong to the irrational
part  of  the soul— the passions or appetites—and are concerned with our
attitude  toward  pleasure and pain. They discipline us, both in feeling
and  action,  with  regard  to the pleasurable objects of desire and the
painful  objects  of  fear or aversion. Aristotle seems to think courage
more  praiseworthy  than  temperance,  "for it is harder to face what is
painful  than  to  abstain from what is pleasant." Just as the temperate
man  is  one  who  habitually  forgoes certain pleasures and seeks other
pleasures moderately for the sake of achieving some greater good, so the
courageous  man  is one who can at any time endure pain and hardship, or
overcome  fear of danger and death, in order to achieve a paramount end.
Since  death  is  "the  most terrible of all things," Aristotle declares
that  "properly,  he  will  be called brave who is fearless in face of a
noble  death, and of all emergencies that involve death." But it must be
"for  a  noble  end  that  the  brave  man  endures  and acts as courage
directs."  The paramount end, the greatest good, which the moderation of
temperance  and  the  endurance  of  courage  serve,  is  for  Aristotle
happiness.  Yet  through  their  relation to justice, which concerns the
good of others and the welfare of the state, temperance and courage help
a  man  to  perform  his  social duties, whether as ruler or citizen, in
peace  or war. The man who acts lawfully will not only be just, but also
courageous  and temperate, for, in Aristotle's view, "the law bids us do
both  the  acts of a brave man, e.g., not to desert our post nor take to
flight  nor throw away our arms, and those of a temperate man, e.g., not
to commit adultery

[313b]
Chapter  13:  COURAGE  255  nor to gratify one's lust." Not only may the
law-abiding  man  be  called upon to be courageous in the respects which
Aristotle  indicates,  but it may sometimes take great courage to uphold
the  law  itself  against  many  temptations to the contrary. "After the
death of Moses . . . the Lord spake unto Joshua," and said unto him: "Be
thou  strong  and  very  courageous,  that  thou  mayest  observe  to do
according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not
from  it  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the The fourth virtue with which
courage,  temperance,  and  justice  are  associated  in  the conduct of
private  or  public  life  is  prudence,  or  "practical wisdom." Though
Aristotle  classifies  prudence as an intellectual virtue, consisting in
the  capacity  for  making  a right judgment about things to be done, he
also  regards  prudence as inseparable in origin and exercise from these
other  three  virtues which he calls "moral" rather than "intellectual."
Later  writers call the four virtues taken together—courage, temperance,
justice,  and  prudence— the "cardinal'* virtues in order to signify, as
Aquinas  explains,  that  the whole ofmoral life "hinges" upon them. The
theory of the cardinal virtues, and of their connection with one another
in  such  wise that none can be perfect in the absence of the others, is
treated  in  the chapter on Virtue. The chapters on Justice, Temperance,
and  Prudence  discuss the doctrine that each of these virtues is only a
part  of  virtue,  which  must  be  integrated with the other parts. The
special  role  which  prudence plays in relation to virtues like courage
and  temperance—at  least  according to Aristotle's view that "it is not
possible  to  be  good in the strict sense without practical wisdom, nor
practically  wise without moral virtue"—must be reserved for the chapter
dealing with that virtue. Nevertheless, it is necessary to consider here
how  its  dependence  on  prudence  may qualify the meaning or nature of
courage.  The  connection  which  some  writers  see between courage and
prudence  affects  the  definition  of  courage  in  two ways. The first
involves the doctrine of the mean which enters into the consideration of
all the moral virtues, but especially courage and temperance.

[314a]
256  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Aristotle originates the analysis of virtue as "a
mean  between  two vices . . . because the vices respectively fall short
of  or  exceed  what is right in both passions and actions." It requires
prudence  to  decide  what  things should be feared, when they should be
feared,  and  how much; and so a prudent judgment is involved in fearing
the  right  things at the right time and in the right manner—neither loo
much  nor  too  little.  "The  coward, the rash man, and the brave man,"
Aristotle   writes,  "are  concerned  with  the  same  objects  but  are
differently  disjx)sed to them; for the first two exceed and fall short,
while the third holds the middle, which is the right, position; and rash
men  are  precipitate and wish for dangers beforehand but draw back when
they  are in them, while brave men are keen in the moment of action, but
quiet  beforehand." Aristotle is not the only one to define courage as a
middleground  between  contrary  extremes.  Most  writers who devote any
attention to the nature of courage come to somewhat the same conclusion.
Epictetus,  for example, in declaring that we should "combine confidence
with caution in everything we do," seems also to make courage a mean. He
points out that such a combination at first "may appear a paradox" since
"caution  seems  to  be contrary to confidence, and contraries are by no
means  compatible." But this, he says, is only due to "confusion." There
would  be  a  paradox "it we really called upon a man to use caution and
confidence  in  regard to the same things ... as uniting qualities which
cannot  be  united."  But, as Epictetus explains, caution and confidence
can  be united because they concern different objects. The difference in
objects  which  he  has  in mind becomes clear in the light of the Stoic
maxim,  "Be  confident  in  all  that lies beyond the will's control, be
cautious  in  all that is dependent on the will." Sharply distinguishing
between  what  does and does not lie within our control, Epictetus tells
us to look with care and caution only to those things in which we can do
evil  by  making an evil choice. "In such matters of will it is right to
use  caution."  But  in  other  matters,  "in  things outside the will's
control, which do not depend on us . . . we should use confidence."

[314b]
By   uniting   caution   and   confidence,  we  avoid  the  extremes  of
foolhardiness and cowardice and achieve the mean in which Aristotle says
courage  consists.  Both  are  necessary. Cowardice is not the only vice
opposed  to  courage.  The  man  who acts without caution in the face of
danger,  recklessly  disregarding  what  might  be reasonably feared, is
foolhardv  rather  than  courageous;  even as the coward is held back by
fears  which  his reason tells him should be overcome. Because he agrees
that  courage  consists  in  avoiding both extremes, Spinoza writes that
"flight  at the proper time, just as well as fighting, is to be reckoned
as  showing strength of mind." These two acts are allied, since it is by
"the  same virtue of the mind" that a man "avoids danger . . . and seeks
to  overcome  it."  To determine at a given moment whether to flee or to
fight,  so  as  to  avoid  either  foolhardiness or cowardice, obviously
involves  a  decision  of reason. Such a decision, according to Spinoza,
demands  "strength of mind," bv which he means "the desire by which each
person  endeavours from the dictates of reason alone to preserve his own
being."  Without  rational direction or, as Aristotle would say. without
prudence,  one  may  be  fearless  but  not  courageous. Those who, like
Hobbes,  do  not  include  reason or prudence as an essential element in
their  conception  of courage, treat courage as an emotion rather than a
virtue,  and  tend to identify it with fearlessness, making its opposite
the  condition  of  being  over-fearful. '"Amongst the passions," writes
Hobbes,  ''courage  (by  which I mean the contempt of wounds and violent
death)  inclines  men to pri\ate revenges, and sometimes to endeavor the
unsettling  of the public peace; and timorousness many times disposes to
the  desertion  of  the public defense." As Hobbes describes courage, it
may  be  of  doubtful  value to the individual or to the state. Melville
seems  to  have  this  meaning of courage in mind when he says that "the
most  reliable  and  useful  courage  is that which arises from the fair
estimation  of  the  encountered  peril"—  the  lack  of which makes "an
utterly  fearless man ... a far more dangerous companion than a coward."
If  apparent  fearlessness  were  courage, then certain animals might be
called "courageous,"

[315a]
and  men  of  sanguine temperament, extremely self-confident or at least
free from fear, would be as courageous as those who succeed in mastering
their  fears  in order to do what is expected of them. But, as Aristotle
observes,  drunken men often behave fearlessly and we do not praise them
for  their  courage.  Plato  likewise  presents  a view of courage which
requires  forethought  and a genuine concern for danger. **I do not call
animals  .  . . which have no fear of dangers, because they are ignorant
of them, courageous," says Nicias in the Laches. They are "only fearless
and  senseless  .  .  . There is a difference to my way of thinking," he
goes  on,  "between  fearlessness  and courage. I am of the opinion that
thoughtful courage is a quality possessed by very few, but that rashness
and  boldness,  and  fearlessness,  which  has  no forethought, are very
common  qualities  possessed by many men, many women, many children, and
many  animals."  According  to  this  conception of courage, "courageous
actions,"   Nicias  says,  "are  wise  actions."  In  lint,  with  these
considerations,  the definition of courage would involve a reasonable, a
wise  or  prudent, discrimination between what should be feared and what
should  be undertaken in spite of peril or pain. As the Parson declares,
in his discourse on the Seven Deadly Sins in the Canterbury Tales, "this
virtue is so mighty and so vigorous that it dares to withstand sturdily,
and  wisely  to keep itself from dangers that are wicked, and to wrestle
against  the  assaults of the Devil. For it enhances and strengthens the
soul  ... It can endure, by long suffering, the toils that are fitting."
To  be  able  to  make decisions of this sort in particular cases, a man
must have some view of the order of goods and the end of life. For a man
to  act habitually in a courageous manner, he must be generally disposed
to  value  certain  things  as more important than others, so that he is
willing  to  take risks and endure hardships for their sake. Freud seems
to be skeptical of what he calls "the rational explanation for heroism,"
according  to  which "it consists in the decision that the personal life
cannot  be  so  precious  as  certain  abstract  general  ideals."  More
frequent, in his opinion, "is that instinctive and impulsive hero-

[315b]
CiiAPTi-R  13: COURAGE 257 ism which knows no such motivation and flouts
danger in the spirit of Anzengruber's Mans the Road-Mender: 'Nothing can
happen to me.' " But Aquinas, who emphasizes rational motivation as much
as  Freud  discounts it, insists that courageous men "face the danger on
account  of  the  good  of  virtue, which is the abiding object of their
will,  however  great  the  danger be." Courage as Aquinas conceives it,
though  only  a  part  of  virtue in the sense of being one virtue among
many,  nevertheless  represents  the  whole moral life from one point of
view.  The  quality of courage, he points out, "overflows into the rest"
of  the  virtues, as these in turn enter into courage. "Whoever can curb
his  desires  for the pleasures of touch," Aquinas writes, "so that they
keep  within  bounds,  which  is  a very hard thing to do, for this very
reason  is  more able to check his daring in dangers of death, so as not
to go too far, which is much easier; and in this sense fortitude is said
to  be temperate. "Again," he continues, "temperance is said to be brave
because  fortitude  overflows into temperance. This is true in so far as
he  whose  soul  is  strengthened by fortitude against dangers of death,
which  is a matter of very great difficulty, is more able to remain firm
against  the  onslaught  of  pleasures; for, as Cicero says, // would be
inconsistentfor  a  man  to  be  unbroken  byfear, and yet vanquished by
cupidity,  or that he should be conquered by lust, after showing himself
to  be unconquered by toil.'' As the man who is temperate because he has
rationally  ordered  his  actions to a certain end can be expected to be
courageous  for  the same reason, so, according to Aquinas, he will also
be  prudent,  since  both  his  temperance and his courage result from a
prudent  or rational choice of means to the end he pursues. Writing as a
theologian, Aquinas distinguishes what he calls "the perfecting virtues"
of  the  religious life from "the social virtues" of the political life—
the  virtues  with  which  the  moral philosopher is concerned. He holds
courage to be inseparable from the other virtues on either plane—whether
directed to a natural or supernatural end— because it is the sameness of
the end in each case which binds the virtues together. "Thus prudence by
contemplating  the  things  of God," he explains, "counts as nothing all
the things of this world" and "temperance, so

[316a]
258  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  far  as nature allows, neglects the needs of the
body;  fortitude  prevents  the soul from being afraid of neglecting the
body  and  rising to heavenly things; and justice consists in the soul's
giving  a whole-hearted consent to follow the way thus proposed." We are
thus  brought to the second qualification upon courage which arises from
its  connection  with  prudence,  and  through  prudence  with the other
virtues.  Does  it  make  any difference whether the end for which a man
strives valiantly is itself something commendable rather than despicable
?  If  not, then the thief can have courage just as truly as the man who
fears dishonor more than death; the tyrant can be courageous no less and
no differently than the lawabiding citizen. In his advice to the prince,
Machiavelli  seems to consider only the utility of courage. Referring to
the  end  which  he  says  "every  man  has before him, namely glory and
riches,"  he  points  out  that  men  proceed in various ways: "one with
caution,  another  with  haste;  one  by force, another by skill; one by
patience, another by its opposite; and each one succeeds in reaching the
goal  by  a different method." Fortune, he thinks, plays a large part in
their  success,  and  for  that  reason  he holds no method certain. Any
method  requires  us  to use fortune to the best advantage. This demands
courage  and  even  audacity.  "It  is  better  to  be  adventurous than
cautious,"  he  writes,  "because fortune is a woman, and if you wish to
keep  her  under it is necessary to beat and ill-use her; and it is seen
that she allows herself to be mastered by the adventurous rather than by
those who go to work more coldly. She is, therefore, always womanlike, a
lover  of  young  men, because they are less cautious, more violent, and
with  more  audacity  command  her."  It  would  appear that Machiavelli
recommends  courage, or at least daring, to those who wish to succeed in
great  undertakings,  whether  the end in view is commendable or not. In
either  case,  courage  may  improve  the  chances of success, and it is
success  that counts. According to their notions of courage as a virtue,
Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Aquinas  sharply disagree with this, as we have
already seen. So do Kant and Hegel.

[316b]
"It  is  the  positive aspect, the end and content," Hegel writes, which
"gives  significance to the spiritedness" ofcourageous actions. "Robbers
and  murderers  bent  on  crime  as their end, adventurers pursuing ends
planned  to  suit their own whims, etc., these too have spirit enough to
risk  their lives." Because their ends are either malicious or unworthy,
the  mettle of a brigand and even the courage of a knight do not seem to
Hegel  to  be  true  forms of courage. According to Kant, "intelligence,
wit, judgement, and other talents of the mind, however they be named, or
courage,  resolution,  perseverance,  as  qualities  of temperament, are
undoubtedly  good  and  desirable  in  many respects; but these gifts of
nature  may  also become extremely bad and mischievous if the will which
is to make use of them, and which, therefore, constitutes what is called
character,  is  not  good."  If a good will is necessary to make courage
virtuous,  then  the behavior of a scoundrel may look courageous, but it
can only be a counterfeit. "Without the principles of a good will," such
things as the ability to face dangers or to bear hardships, Kant thinks,
"may  become  extremely  bad  . . . The coolness of a villain," he adds,
"not  only  makes  him  far  more  dangerous,  but  also  makes him more
abominable in our eyes than he would have been without it." It may still
remain true that courage can take many forms according to the variety of
objects  which  inspire  fear, or according to the types of action which
men  find  burdensome  or  painful. But if the truly courageous man must
always  be  generally  virtuous as well, then many of the appearances of
courage do not spring from genuine virtue. The conception of virtue as a
habit  adds  the  criterion  of a settled disposition: even the habitual
coward  may  perform  a  single  courageous  act.  Nor should courage be
attributed  to  those  who by freak of temperament are utterly fearless.
The  merit  of virtue overcoming fear— cannot be claimed by them. In the
great  political  books,  especially  those  of  antiquity, the place of
courage in the state and in the training of citizens receives particular
attention.  The  constitutions  of Crete and Sparta seem to make courage
the only essential virtue for the citizen.

[317a]
.  Plutarch,  in his life of Lycurgus, shows how "the city was a sort of
camp." The training and education of all was directed to military valor.
"Their  very  songs  had  a  life  and  spirit in them that inflamed and
possessed men's minds with an enthusiasm and ardour for action . . . The
subject always serious and moral; most usually, it was in praise of such
men  as  had  died  in defence of their country, or in derision of those
that had been cowards; the former they declared happy and glorified; the
life  of  the  latter  they described as most miserable and abject." The
result  was,  according  to Plutarch, that "they were the only people in
the  world  to whom war gave repose." Both Plato and Aristotle criticize
the  constitutions  of  Crete  and  Sparta for making war the end of the
state  and  exalting  courage, which is only a part, above "the whole of
virtue."  Courage  must  be  joined with the other virtues to make a man
good,  not  only  as  a  citizen but as a man. "Justice, temperance, and
wisdom,"  says  the  Athenian  Stranger  in  the Laws, "when united with
courage  are better than courage only." Furthermore, military courage is
not  even the whole of courage. While recognizing the need for it, Plato
thinks  that  a  wise statesman would put it in its proper place, if men
are to be OUTLINE OF TOPICS The nature of courage 1 2. The vices opposed
to  courage:  cowardice,  foolhardiness 3. The passions in the sphere of
courage:  fear,  daring,  anger,  hope,  despair  4.  The  relation  and
comparison  of courage with other virtues 5. The motivations of courage:
fame  or  honor, happiness, love, duty, religious faith 6. The formation
or training of the courageous man 7. The political or civic significance
of  courage  ya.  The  courage  required  of citizens and statesmen: the
political  recognition  of  courage  yb.  Courage in relation to law and
liberty yc. Courage in war

[317b]
Chapter  13:  COURAGE  259  trained to be good citizens, not mcrcK' good
soldiers.  Arguing  that  no sound legislator would order "peace for the
sake  of  war, and not war for the sake of peace," the Athenian Stranger
suggests  that  a  broader  conception  of  courage than the Cretans and
Spartans  seem  to  have  would  recognize its use, not only in external
warfare,  but in the tasks of peace— in the struggle to lead a good life
and  build a good society. "What is there," he asks Megillus the Spartan
and  Cleinias  the  Cretan,  "which  makes  your  citizens equally brave
against  pleasure  and  pain, conquering what they ought to conquer, and
superior  to  the  enemies  who  are  most  dangerous and nearest home?"
Nevertheless,  through the centuries the type of courage which the poets
and  historians celebrate has been the bravery of men who put their very
lives in jeopardy for their fellow men— the courage of the citizen doing
his duty, or, what is still more spectacular, of the soldier confronting
the  enemy.  This fact among others is one reason why many writers, from
the  Greeks  to  Hegel,  have  found  a moral stimulus in w^ar; or, like
William  James, have sought for its moral equivalent. On this point they
are  answered  not  merely by those who see only degradation in war, but
also  by  the  many  expressions  of the insight that peace can have its
heroes too. PAGE 260 261 262 263 264 265 266

[318a]
260  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d, tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  The  nature  of  courage 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii
[310-328] 85b-c; bk xiii
[266-294] 91a-b; bk xvi [493-501] 117c
5  Euripides:  Heracles Mad [140-160] 366b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  ii,  396d398c  passim  7  Plato:  Laches 26a-37d esp 32a-37d /
Protagoras,  57d-64d  /  Cratylus,  100c  / Apology, 205d-206d / Phaedo,
225b-226c  / Republic, bk IV, 346a-355a esp 347a-d / Statesman, 605d608d
/ Laws, bk i, 644c-d 8 Aristotle : Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[125^20-27]
174d-175a; bk vi, ch 13 [151^3-13] 205d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[1104*^4-8]
350a; ch 6
[i 107^9]-ch 7
[1107*^3] 352c-353a;
BK III, CH 6-9 361a-364b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1366^33-^14] 608d-609a
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b,d140c  12  Aurelius:
Meditatio?JS, bk xi, sect 18 304b305b 13 Virgil: Aejieid, bk x [466-472]
315a  14  Plutarch:  Niima  Pompilius,  50c  /  Pelopidas,  232a-233a  /
Clcomenes,  659d-660a  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk ii, 227a 19 Aquinas:
Sufnma  Theologica, part i, q 59, a 4, rep 3 309a-310a; part i-ii, q 45,
a 4, ANs 812b-813a

[318b]
b Symbols: The abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's attention to one or
more  especially  20 Aquinas: Sutnma Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, AA 2-4
55c-58b;  q  66,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 2 78c79b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xiv
[67]-
xviii
[51] 127c-134a
22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 60-61 529b530a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i,  62d;  75b;  conclusion,  279b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 20d-22a; 96b-c;
115b121c esp 117d-119d; 167a-170a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act ii,
sc ii
[32-37] 578c
27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, sc III [45-54] 108c /
Coriolanus,  act  iv,  sc  i [i-iiJ 377a / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v
[24-58]  407a-c  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii, 256c-d; 291d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi, prop 59, schol 415d-416b; part iv, prop 69,
corol and schol 445c; prop 72-73 446b-447a 32 Milton: Sa?nson Agonistes
[652-666] 353b354a
37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 70a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93a41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 159a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals^ 256a b

[319a]
Itol  Chapter  13:  COURAGE usv 46 Hi;gfl: Philosophy of Right, part in,
par  32732(S 108a-c; additions, 189 149d / Philosophy of History, intro,
195c-d;  part  i,  243d  244c; PART IV, 343d-344a 48 Melmlle: Moby Dic{,
83a-86b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk 11. 77d-78a; hk IX, 369c-d; bk xi,
480a-482b csp 481d-482a; BK xiii, 577a-578b; bk xiv, 589c-590c csp 590a;
605b-d  53 James: Psychology, 826a-827a 2. The vices opposed to courage:
cowardice,  foolhardiness  Old  Testament:  Exodus, 14:9-14 / Leviticus^
26:^2-40  /  Detiteronojny, 20:8 / / Satmiel, 17 esp 17:11, 17:24— (D) /
Kings,  17  csp  17:11,  17:24  / Proverbs, 28:1 / Isaiah, 30:15-18— (D)
Isaias,    30:15-18    Apocrypha:    Ecclesiasticus,   3:26—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticiis,  3:27  New  Testament:  Matthew,  26:56,69-75  / MarJ{,
14:50,66-72  /  Lu\e,  22:55-61  /  John,  7:13; 18:15-18,25-27 4 Homer:
Iliad, bk hi 19a-23d; bk xiii
[266294]
91a-b: bk xxii
[1-366]
155a-159a  /  Odyssew  bk  ix  [461-542]  234a-d;  bk xii [iiii26J251b 5
Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[631-723]
34a-35a 5 Sophocles: Ajax [733-783] 149b-d / Electra
[947-1057] 163d-164d
5 Euripides: Suppliants [473-510] 262c-d 5 Aristophanes: Frogs [277-311]
567c-d;  [460674]  569c-571d  6Herodotl"s: History, bk hi, 120d-121b; bk
VII,  216b-218b;  225c-d;  bk ix, 303c-304a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesiati
War,  bk  i,  370ac;  bk  n, 389d-390b; bk iv, 462d-463a; bk v, 484a-c 7
Plato:  Laches, 35c-d / Protagoras, 58a-59a; 63a-d / Phaedo, 225d-226b /
Republic,  bk  v, 366c-d / Timaeus, 474b-d / Theaetetus, 513b / Sophist,
557b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk h, ch 2 [iio4*i9]-ch 3
[1104^13] 349c-350a; ch 7
[ii07'*32-*'3] 353a;
ch  8  354a-d;  bk  hi, ch 6 [iii5'''io-24] 361a-b; CH 7 361c-362b; ch 8
[1116^15-22] 363a; ch 12
[1119*21-34] 365d-366a; bk v, ch 2 [ii3o'*i3-
^8]  377c-378a  passim; bk vh, ch 5 [ii49'*5-8] 399c / Politics, bk vhi,
ch  4 [1338^8-38] 544ab / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9 [1366^11-14] 609a; bk II,
ch 13 [1389^29-1390^6] 637b; ch 14 [1390^ 28-^9] 637d-638a 12 Epictetls:
Discourses,  bk  h,  ch  i  138b,  d140c;  ch  7  145b-146a; bk iv, ch 7
232c-235a  13  Virgil:  Aefieid,  bk xi [336-444] 337a-340a 14 Plutarch:
Aemilius   Paulus,   219d-229c   /  Pelopidas,  232a-233a;  244c-245d  /
MarcellusPelopidas 261a-262d / Nicias 423a-438d / Demosthenes. 695d-703b
17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 8, 86d87b

[319b]
19 AouiNAs: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, o 44, A 4, ANs 809c-810a; q 45,
a 4, ans 812b 813a 20 Agi iNAs: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A 3,
REP 5 6 316a-318b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; iii
[22-69] 4b-d; VIII [67]-ix [105] llc-13b
23 Machiavelli: Prince, cii xii-xiii 17d-21a 23 Hobbes: I^eviathan, part
h,  115d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk iv, 264c-265a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  22d-24a;  25c-26d;  115b119d; 167a-170a; 334b-335a;
337b-c  26  Shakespeare:  Jst  Henry  VI, act iv, sc i [947] 20a-b / 1st
Henry  IV, act ii, sc iv [126312] 445c-447b; act iv, sc hi [1-29] 459b-c
/  Julius Caesar, act ii, sc ii [32-37] 578c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
ii,  sc  ii [575-6:53] 46b-d; act iv, sc iv [31-66] 59a-c / Macbeth, ACT
I,  sc  VII [29-82] 289c-290b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part h, 256c-d;
291c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[204-208] 115b
37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 272b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxviii,
239d-240a  43 Mill: Representative Government, 392 b-c 47 Goethe: Fa«^/,
part  11  [9711-9904]  235b-240b  48  Melville: Moby Dicl{, 305a-307a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 16a-18b; bk it, 80d-81b: 102a-c; bk v,
203c-d; bk viii, 330d332a; bk ix, 344b-346a; 366d-367b; bk x, 419b-420d;
426b;  bk  xi,  475b-476c; 480a482b; BK xiii, 569d-570a; bk xiv, 596c-d;
603a-604b;   610c-611c;   bk   xv,  618d-619d;  epilogue  I,  648b-c  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x,  273a-d 3. The passions in the
sphere  of  courage:  fear,  daring, anger, hope, despair Old Testament:
Exodus, 23:27 / Leviticus, 26:36-38 / Numbers, 13:16-14:10— (D) Numbers,
13:17-14:10  / Deuteronomy, 11:23-25; 20:1-9 / Joshua, 2:8-11,23-24— (D)
Josue,  2:8-11,23-24 /Judges, 14:19 / Psalms, 31:24— (D) Psalms, 30:25 /
Proverbs, 29:25 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 17— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom,
17   /   Ecclesiasticus,  22:16-18;  40:1-7—  (Z))  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,
22:19-23; 40:1-7 New Testament: Romans, 5 :i-5 / // Corinthians^ 1 :8-io
/  II  Timothy,  i '.-] / I John, 4:18 4 Homer: Iliad, bk hi 19a-23d; bk
xxii  [1-366]  155a-159a  / Odyssey, bk ix [461-542] 234a-d 5 Aeschylus:
Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[944-1093] 50b-51d
5  Sophocles:  Electra  [949-1195]  163d-166a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants
[473-510]  262c-d  5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [277-311]  567c-d;  [^6o674]
569c-571d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ix, 303c-304a; 309d310a

[320a]
(3.  The  passions  in the sphere of courage: fear, daring, anger, hope,
despair.^  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 402c404a; bk iv,
460c-d;  bk  vii,  555b-557b;  559b560b 7 Plato: Laches, 36b-c / Phaedo,
225d-226b  /  Republic,  bk iv, 346a-355a esp 347a-d / Timaeus, 466a-c /
Laws, bk i, 651a-c; bk hi, 675a-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[125^20-27]
174d-175a  9  Aristotle : Ethics, bk hi, ch 6-9 361a-364b / Politics, BK
VIII, CH 4
[1338^8-38] 544a-b
/ Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 5 628b-629d; ch 13
[1389^29-1390^11] 637b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a; bk ii
[1-61] 15a-d; bk hi
[1-93] 30a31b;
[830-1094] 40c-44a,c; bk v [1194-1240]
76d-77b;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk xi, sect 18
304b305b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [194-209] 108a-b; [450465] 115b; BK VII
[445-474] 248b-249a; bk ix
[123-158] 282a-283a; bk
xii
[593-611] 370a;
[650-696] 371b-372b
14   Plutarch:   Aemilius  Paulus,  224d-229c  /  Pelopidas,  232a-233a;
244c-245d  /  Caesar,  583b-585d  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a  15 Tacitus :
Annals, bk hi, 49d-50a / Histories, bk ii, 226b-227a; 235a; bk hi, 249a;
265b-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 13 39a-c / City of God, bk
ix,  ch 4-5 287a-289a; bk xix, CH 4 511a-513c esp 512b-513c 19 Aquinas :
Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, . A 4, rep 3 309a-310a; part i-ii, q 35,
a  6,  REP  3  777b-778c;  qq  40-48  792d-826a,c  20  Aquinas  :  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60,  A  4,  ANs 52b-53a; a 5, ans and rep 4
53a-54d;  Q  61,  AA 2-3 55c-57a; a 4, ans and rep 1-2 57a-58b; a 5, ans
and  rep 1-2 58b-59d; q 66, A 4, ans and rep 2 78c-79b; part hi suppl, Q
96,  A  6  1058a-1061b  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; VIII
[67]-ix  [105]  llc-13b  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza
68-70  10a;  stanza 80-81 lib; bk hi, stanza 129 71a-b; bk iv, stanza 89
100a;  bk  v,  stanza  258 154a / Nun's Priest's Tale [14,914928] 451b /
Parson's Tale, par 60-61 529b530a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvh, 24a-b;
ch  xix,  26c-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 62c-63a esp 62d; 68d; 77d;
79b-d;  96b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk iv, 261a-266c;
297b-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a;  25c-26d;  53c55d;  115b-119d;
167a-170a;  334b-335a;  337bc;  342a-d; 435a-d 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry
IV,  act  i,  sc  hi  437d-440d;  act ii, sc hi 443b-444b; act iv, sc hi
[1-29] 459b-c / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc

[320b]
262  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3/0  4  II  [34-37] 578c; ACT IV, sc m [145-195]
589d590c  27  Shakespeare: Macbeth, act i, sc vii 289b290b / Coriolanus,
act  iv,  sc  i  [1-33]  377a-b  / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v [24-58]
407a-c  /  Henry  VIII,  act i, sc ii [68-88] 553c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part hi, prop 51, schol 411d-412a; the affects, def 39-41 420d; PART IV,
prop  69,  coROL  and  schol 445c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 215 212a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xx, SECT 9-12 177b-c 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 52a-53b; 69a-70c;llld112b; 234a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk i, 2b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 335c-d 42 Kant: Judgement, 502d-503d
44 BoswEi-i.: Johnson, 394a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[5407-5456]
133b134b;  [9711-9904]  235b-240b  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 83a-85a; 90b;
118a131a; 417b-418a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 17b-18a; 48c; bk h,
77c-81b;   95a-c;   97c-106d;  bk  hi,  134a135c;  150a-164a,c;  bk  iv,
173d-177a;  188a190c;  bk  V, 203c-d; bk ix, 369a-372a; bk x, 419b-420c;
451c-456a;  457a-c;  461d-463c; 467a-468a,c; bk xi, 480a-482b; 513d-515a
esp   514c-d;  527b-532a,c;  bk  xii,  549d-551c;  560a-562d;  bk  xiii,
569d-570a;  586d-587c;  BK  XV, 614a-618b; 627a-c; epilogue i, 648b-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 155d-157b 53 James : Psychology,
826a-b  54  Freud : General Introduction, 607d-608c ; 613d614a / War and
Death,  762b-c;  765a-b  4.  The relation and comparison of courage with
other  virtues  5  Sophocles:  Electra [947-1057] 163d-164d 5 Euripides:
Phoenician Maidens
[697-747]
384a-d  6  Thucybibes:  Peloponnesian War, bk i,370a-c; BK H, 402d-403b;
411b-c;  bk vh, 555b-557b 7 Plato: Laches, 31d-37d / Protagoras, 57d-64d
esp  58a-c,  63a-64a  /  Cratylus,  100c  /  Meno,  183d-184c  / Phaedo,
225d-226b  /  Gorgias,  284a-c  /  Republic,  bk  iv, 346a-350a; bk vih,
404a-405c  /  Timaeus, 466a-c / Sophist, 557b-d / Statesman, 605d-608d /
Laws, bk i, 643a-d; 644b-645c; 651a-c; bk hi, 673d-674a; 675a-c; bk xii,
795c-796b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[117^35-^2]
164a; [118^16-17] 165a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2 [iio4^i9]-ch 3
[1104^13] 349c-350a; ch 8 354a-d; bk hi, ch ii
[1118^28-34] 365b-c; ch 12 [1119*21-34] 365d366a; bk v, ch 2 [1130^13-^8] 377c-378a passim; bk VI, CH 13 [1144^1-1145*5] 394a-d; bk
IX, CH 4
[i 166^8-12] 419d; bk x, ch 7 [i 177*28-
^^25] 432a-c / Politics, bk vii, ch i [1323*22-34] 527a-b; ch 2
[1324*23-1325*15]
528b-529a passim; ch 7 531d-532c; ch 15
[i334''ii-^8]

[321a]
539a-c; bk viii, ch 4
[1338^8
t^S]  544a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch g [i366''33-'*i4] 608d 609a; BK II, CH
14  637d-638a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch i 138b, d140c 12
AuRELius:  Meditations, bk xi, sect 18 304b305b 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus,
175b  /  Cato the Younger, 637b-c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 211c-212b
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead, tr ii, ch 8, 86d-87b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xix,  ch  4,  511d513c;  ch  20  523d-524a  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  35,  A 6, rep 3 777b-778c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 60, A 4-<3 61, A 5 52b-59d; q 65, aa 1-3 70b-
73d; Q 66, AA 1-4 75b-79b; part hi suppl, q 96, A 6, ANs and rep 3-4,8-9
1058a-1061b;  a  12  1064d-1065b  22  Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 60-61
529b-530a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 62c-63a; conclusion, 279c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  133b-134d 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 183a-c 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act iv, sc hi
[145-195] 589d-590c
27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act ii, sc ii
[8691] 365a / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v [2458] 407a-c
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 256c-d; 291d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  80a-81a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop 51, schol
411d-412a; part iv, prop 73, schol 446d447a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[38-59]
340b;
[652-666] 353b-354a
42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals, 256ab / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  377d  44  Bosweul:  Johnson, 251a; 539b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  343d344a  48  Melville:  Moby Dic^,
45a-46a;  83a-85a  49  Darwin: Descent ofMan, 315b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  x,  440d-442a;  br  XI,  481a-482a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  155d-157b  5.  The  motivations of courage: fame or
honor,  happiness,  love,  duty, religious faith Old Testament: Genesis,
22:1-14 / lumbers, 13:16-14:10— (Z)) Numbers, 13:17-14:10 / Deuteronomy,
7:16-24;  20:1-9;  S^'^-^ZJoshua,  1:5-9;  23:6-11—  (£))  Josue, 1:5-9;
23:6-11  /  Judges^  J  /  I  Samuel,  17;  20—  (D) / Kings, 17; 20 / 7
Chronicles,  22:12-13; 28:20— (Z)) I Paralipomenon, 22 :i2-i3 ; ^8 :20 /
Esther,  4  :i5:8  / Psalms, 27; 46; 56:4; 91; 118— (Z)) Psalms, 26; 45;
55:5;  90;  117/  Proverbs,  28:1; 29:25 / Isaiah, 12:2; 35:4; 41:10-16;
43:1-7;

[321b]
Chapter  13:  COURAGE  263  51:7-13—  (D)  Isaias, 12:2; 35:4; 41:10-16;
j^y.i-y;  '^wy  -IT,  /  Daniel,  i;  3:1-4:3;  6:1-22—  (D)  Daniel, i;
3:1-23,91-100;  6:1-22 Apocrypha: Judith, 8-13— (D) OT, Judith, 8:113:26
/  Song  of  Three  Children -{D) OT, Daniel, 3:24-90 / Susanna— {D) OT,
Daniel^  13:1-64 / / Maccabees, 2:49-64; 6:43-46; 9:710; 13:1-6— (D) OT,
7  Machabees, 2:49-64; 6:43-46; 9:7-10; 13:1-6 / 77 Maccabees, 6:187:42;
8:12-22;  11:7-11;  13:10-15;  14:37-46;  15:7-27— (D) OT, 77 Machabees,
6:18-7:42; 8:12-22; 11:7-11; 13:10-15; 14:37-46; New Testament: Matthew,
5:10-12;  10:26-31  /  Luke,  1:70-75;  12:32  /  John, 15:13 / Acts esp
4:1-30,  5:40-41,  6:8-7:60,  16:1-40,  19:1-41, 20:22-24— (D) -^^t^ ^sp
4:1-30, 5:40-41, 6:8-7:59, 16:1-40, 19:1-40, 20:22-2^/ Romans^ 8:31-39 /
77  Corinthians,  i  :i-i2;  6:4-10;  11  12330  / Philippians, 1:27-28;
2:29-30  /  77  Thessalonians,  1:4-5  / Hebretus, 11; 13:6 / I Peter, 3
:8-22 4 Homer: Iliad, bk v
[520-532]
35c; bk vi
[369-502] 43d-45a; bk viii [130-156] 52c; bk
XII
[310-328] 85b-c; bk
xiii
[206-294] 90b91b; BK XVI [493-501] 117c; bk xxii [77-130]
156a-c;  [289-305]  158b  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against Thebes [630-723]
34a-35a  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d /
Ajax  [430480]  146d-147b / £:/<?r/rfl [949-1195] 163d-166a 5 Euripides:
Heracleidae [484-573] 252c-253a / Suppliants [297-356] 261a-c / Hecuba
[343383] 355d-356a; [482-603] 357a-358a / Heracles Mad
[275-311]
367c-d / Phoenician Maidens [991-1030] 387a-b / Iphigenia at Aulis
[1375-1565] 437c-439b
5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [565-580] 477a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk iv,
126a-b;  bk  vii,  216b-220b;  226b-c; 233a-234b; 255c-d; bk viii, 264c;
274d; bk ix, 291c-292a; 303c-304a; 309d-310a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  370ac;  bk  ii,  396b-399a esp 397d-398c; 402c-404a; bk V,
484a-c;  501a-b;  bk  vi, 527b-d; bk vii, 542b-c; 555b-557b; 559d-560b 7
Plato:  Symposium, 152b-153b; 160c / Phaedo, 225b-226c / Republic, bk v,
366c-367b  /  Laws,  bk  i,  651a-652a;  bk hi, 675a-c / Seventh Letter,
800c-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  6-9  361a-364b; BK IV, ch 3
[1124^7-9]  371b-c / Politics, bk v, ch 10 [1312^24-39] 514d; BK VII, ch
2  [1324^  10-23]  528c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 9 [1366^1114] 609a 10
Hippocrates:  ^z>^.  Waters,  Places,  par  16  15d16a;  par 23 18a-c 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 22 195a201a; CH 24 203c-210a 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk  vni  [520-540]  273a-b;  bk x
[276-286] 309b310a; [466-472] 315a; bk xi [376-444] 338b340a; bk xii
[53-80]
355b-356a;
[650-696]
371b-372b

[322a]
(5.  The  motivations  of courage: fame or honor, happiness, love, duty,
religious faith. ^ 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 2c-9a esp 3a-d /RomulusTheseus,
30a-b  / Coriolanus, 175d-176b / Aemilius Pauhis, 224d-229c / Pelopidas,
232a233a;  238b-239c  /  Flammimis,  302b  / Alexander, 542a'd / Caesar,
583b-585d; 599b-c / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c / Cleotnenes, 659d-660a
/  Aratus, 826C'836d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lla-b; bk hi, 49d-50a; BK
XV,  171d;  BK  XVI,  180d-184a  /  Histories,  BK  I,  195a-b;  200b-c;
211c-212b;  bk ii, 217d218a; 226d-228a; 234b-235c; bk iii, 248b-c; 249a;
256b-c;  259c-260a;  265b-c;  bk  iv,  266d;  267b-c  17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 4-16 14a19b passim 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ix,
ch  4  287a288b;  BK  X,  ch  21  311c-312a;  bk xix, ch 4 511a-513c esp
512b-513c  19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 45, A 4, ANs
812b-813a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q 96, A 6
1058a-1061b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; HI
[22-69] 4b-d;
viii
[67]-ix
[105]
llc-13b;  XXVI  [85-142]  39a-c;  paradise,  xvii  [106-142]  133b-c  22
Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 68-70 10a; stanza 80-81 lib;
bk iv, stanza 89 100a; bk v, stanza 258 154a / Knight's Tale
[859-1029] 174a-177a /
Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b / Cler}(s Tale 296a-318a / Physician's Tale
366a-371a  esp  [12,147-191]  369b370b  /  Prioress's  Tale [13,418-620]
392a-395b  /  Second  Nun's Tale 463b-471b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch x,
16c-d;  ch  xix  26a-30a;  ch xxvi 36b-37d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
74c-d;  part  hi, 210b-211a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
32c-35a; bk iv, 265b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-24a; 115b-119d; 340a-343b
passim; 494b-d 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act v, sc hi [237270] 146b-c
/  1st Henry IV, act i, sc hi 437d440d; ACT II, sc hi 443b-444b; act iv,
sc hi
[1-29] 459b-c; act v, sc
i [127-143] 462a-b / Henry V, act hi, sc i 543d-544b; act iv, sc HI
[1-78]
555c-556c;  sc  v 558a-b / Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii [84-96] 570b; act
v, sc v
[68-81] 596a,c
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii, sc ii [575-633] 46b-d; act iv, sc iv
[39-66] 59b-c / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii 113c-115d / Macbeth,
act  I,  sc  VII  289b-290b / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v 406d-408a 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  41b-c, 147b-d, part ii, 203a-b,
227c-228d,  256a-d,  280b-c  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix [856-1016]
266a269b

[322b]
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  153 201b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 36a-38b esp 38b;
94b95a;  142b-c;  146b-147a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk iv,
13b,d14a; 14d-15a; bk xxviii, 239d-240a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
iv,  437d-438c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92a-93b; 93d-94b; 217d-220d
esp  219c-220b;  370b-d; 376a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 159a; 224a;
238c;  324c-325a;  385a-386b  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals,
259d260b
[fn
2]  /  Practical  Reason,  326b-327d  /  Science  of  Right, 448d-449c /
Judgoneiit,  504b505a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452c-453a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  384b-c; 394a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 327
108a-b;  additions,  189 149d / Philosophy of History, intro, 166b-168a;
184b-d;  part  i,  224d-225a;  part hi, 308b-c; part iv, 322c; 341a-c 47
Goethe: Faust, part i [884-902] 23a; part ii
[9855-9862] 239b; [10,407-422] 253b
48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 45b-46a; 118a-122b; 174a-b; 349a-350a 49 Darwin:
Descent  ofMan,  311a-d;316a-c;322c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk i,
21d-22b;   bk  II,  77c-81b;  89b-d;  97c-106d;  bk  hi,  135c-137c  esp
136b-137c;  142b-d;  146d-147c;  149a164a,c;  bk iv, 173d-179b; bk viii,
330d-332a;  bk  ix,  366d-367b;  370a-372a;  bk x, 437c-d; 445c; 448a-b;
451c-456a;  457a-c;  467a-c;  bk  XI,  481a-d; 514c-d; 527b-528b; bk xh,
560a562d; bk xih, 569d-570a; 586d-587c; bk xiv 596c-600d; 605b-d; bk xv,
618d-619d;  627a  '  c;  epilogue i, 673d-674a,c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  155d-157b;  bk  x,  273a-d 54 Freud: War and Death,
765a-b  6.  The formation or training of the courageous man 5 Euripides:
Suppliants
[857-917]
266a-b / Hecuba [530-603] 357b-358a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[882iiO4]499b-502a  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 35c-d; bk v, 175b; bk
VII,  233a-d;  bk  ix,  314a,c  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
396d397a;  bk v, 501a-b 7 Plato: Laches, 26a-32a / Symposium, 152b153b /
Republic, bk ii-ih, 320c-339a / Laws, bk I 640a-652d; bk viii, 732d-733b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[1103^14-26]
349a-b; ch 2 [iio4*i9]-ch 3
[1104^13] 349c350a / Politics, bk vh, ch 2 [1324^5-23] 528cd; BK VIII, CH 3 [1337^24-27] 542d-543a; ch 4
[1338^^8-38] 544a-b
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 2 106d-108b; BK II, ch i 138b,d-140c; bk
hi, ch 3 178d180a; BK IV, ch i 213a-223d

[323a]
d  1  tolb Chapter 13: COURAGR 265 13 Virgil: Aetieid, rk viii [494-520J
272a-273a;  BK  IX  [590-620] 295a-b; hk xii [425-440] 365b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus, 39a-45c / Corio/anus, 175b / Pelopidas, 238b-239c / Cleomenes,
661a663c  24  Rabrlais:  Gargantiia  and  Pantagnicl,  bk  i, 28a-29b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  331a-332a;  336c  337b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning, 23a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 303b-305c; 337d-338a 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 93d-94b; 644b645d csp 645a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  223a; 224a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 325d-327d / Judgement,
504a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  282b-283a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv,
175a-b;  bk  IX,  369c-d;  bk  xi,  481a-482a;  bk xiv, 605b-d 53 James:
Psychology,  82b-83a  7.  The political or civic significance of courage
7a.  The  courage  required  of  citizens  and  statesmen: the political
recognition  of  courage  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [310-328]  85b-c 5
Sophocles:  Ajax  [1264-1363]  154a-d  /  Philoctetes [1418-1433] 195a 5
Euripides: Rhesus
[150-202]
204c-205a / Hcracleidae [489-573] 252c-253a / Suppliants
[297-356] 261a-c / Hecuba [300-330] 355b-c /
Phoenician  Maidens  [991-1018]  387a-b / Iphigenia at Aulis [1368-1562]
437c-439b 5 Aristophanes: Knights
[565-580] 477a-b
/  Wasps  [1060-1121]  520c-521b  6  Herodotus: History, bk vii, 225c-d;
226b-c;   233a-234b;  239a-c;  256d-25rc;  bk  viii,  282c283a;  bk  ix,
291c-292a;  293c-294d  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396b399a;
402c-404a; bk vii, 555b-557b; 559d560b 7 Plato: Apology, 207b-d / Crito,
217b-c  /  Republic,  bk ii, 319c-320c; bk iv, 347a-d; bk V, 366c-367b /
Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  644a-645c;  bk xii, 784d-786b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 8
[1116*15-^3]
362b-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1129^19-24]  377a  /  Politics.  bk  III,  ch 4
[1277*8-25]  474a-b;  ch 12 [1283* 18-20] 481b; bk VII, ch 2 [1324^5-23]
528c-d; ch 7 531d-532c; ch 15
[1334*11-^6] 539a-b;
bk  VIII, CH 4 [1338^8-38] 544a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 10
148c150a; bk hi, ch 24 203c-210a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 5
261a; BK V, SECT I 268b, 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[781-807] 232a-b; bk
XI  [225-444]  334a-340a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  40c-45c / Poplicola,
83b-84a  / Coriolanus, 177b-179a; 180d-181b / Aemilius Paulus, 226c-229c
/ Pyrrhus, 328c330a / Nicias, 423a-430d / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c /
Cleomenes, 659d-660a / Demosthenes, 695d-703b / Aratus, 835b-c

[323b]
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  16d-17a;  hk xii, 117a 17 Plotinus: Third
Enncad,  tr ii, ch 8, 86d 87b 20 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, pari' i n, 9
105,  a  3, ans and rep 5-6 316a-318b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch hi, 5c;
ch vi, 9b c; CH VIII, l^b c; ch IX, 15a b; en x, 16b c; ch xvii 23d-24d;
cii  xix  26a  30a;  ch  xxi,  32a-d;  cii xxiv-xxvi, 34d-37d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  115d;  conclusion,  279b-c  25 Montaigne: Essays,
53c-55d;  181d  183c;  327d-329d; 331a-332a 26 Shakespeare: Richard III,
act  v,  sc hi [237341] 146b-147c / He?jry V, act hi, sc i 543d544b; ACT
iv, sc iii
[1-78] 555c-556c; sc v
558a-b / Julius Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act i, sc II [84-96] 570b, ACT V,
sc  V [68-81] 596a,c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc III
[33-54] 108c / Coriolanus, act ii, sc ii
[86-138] 365a-c; act
iv, sc i
[i-ii] 377a
/  Timon  of  Athens,  act  hi, sc v 406d-408a / Cymbeline, act v, sc hi
479d-480d  /  Henry  VHI,  ACT I, sc II [68-88] 553c-d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote, part i, 40d 30 Bacon: AdvancetnetJt ofLearning, 23a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  72-73  446b447a 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Cromtvell
69a-h  /  Sr Henry Vane 69b / Paradise Lost, bk ii [430-456] 120b121a 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 12b-c; BK IV, 15a-c; bk xiv, 107b-d;
bk  xxx, 281a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 375a / Social Contract, bk
hi,  411b-c;  bk  iv,  437d-438c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  23c;
369d-370c;   427a-c;  630b,d-631a;  644d-645c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  329b-c;  334b-c; 392b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  325  107d; par 328 108b-c; additions, 189 149d / Philosophy of
History,  part  i, 213d-214a 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 315b-c; 321b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 9c-10d; bk iii, 149d-150a; bk x, 445c; bk
xi,  475b-476c; 513d-515a; bk xii, 537b-538a; bk xiv, 610c611c; epilogue
i,  648b-c;  668a-669c  lb.  Courage  in  relation  to law and liberty 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  175b;  bk vii, 232c-233d; 238a-c; 239a-c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396b399a;  402c-404a;  bk iv,
469d-470b;  478d479b;  BK  V, 484a-c; bk vii, 555b-557b 7 Plato: Apology
200a-212a,c  / Crito 213a219a,c / Laws, bk i, 644a-645c; bk iii, 675a-c;
bk xii, 784d-786b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 8
[1116*15-^24]
362b-363a / Politics, bk v, ch 10 [1312*18-39] 514d; CH II [1313*34-^10]
516a-b;  bk  vii, ch 7 531d-532c; ch 15 [1334*19-22] 539a / Rhetoric, BK
I,  CH  9  [i366'°i-i4] 608d-609a 10 Hippocrates: /4/n-, Waters, Places,
par 16 15d16a; par 23 18a-c

[324a]
(7.  The  political  or  civic  significance  of courage, lb. Courage in
relation  to  law and liberty.^ 14 Plutarch: Cato the Voww^^ 620a-648a,c
esp  643a-644b  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a / Aratus, 826c-836d 15 Tacitus:
Afinals,  bk  xii,  117a;  bk  xvi, ISOd184a / Histories, bk iv, 271b 17
Plotinus:   Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  86d87b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  A  3,  ANS  and  REP 5-6 316a-318b 23
Machiavelli:  Prince, ch v 8a-c; ch x, 16b-d; CH XXVI 36b-37d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  113b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 23b-24a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  72-73  446b447a  32  Milton: Lord Gen. Fairfax
68b-69a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  hi,  12b-c;  BK IV, 15a-c; bk xiv, 107b-d; bk xvii, 122a-b 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 324c / Social Contract, bk I, 388c; bk hi, 411b-c;
bk  iv, 437d-438c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 23c; 523d-524a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  223a;  224a;  324c325a  42  Kant: Science of Right,
448d-449c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  282b-283a  /  Representative Government,
329b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 324, 107c-d 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii [9855-9862] 239b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xi,  513d-515a;  epilogue I, 668a-669c 7c. Courage in war Old Testament:
Deuteronomy,  20:1-4,8  /  JudgeSy  14-16 / / Samuel, 14:4-13; 17— (D) /
Kings, 14:4-13; 17 Apocrypha: Judith, 8-13— (D) OT, Judith, 8:113:26 / /
Maccabees,  6:43-46;  9:1-22—  (D)  OT,  /  Machabees, 6:43-46; 9:1-22 4
Homer:  Iliad 3a-179d esp bk hi 19a-23d, bk VI [369-502] 43d-45a, bk xii
[310-328]  85b-c,  bk  XIII [206-294] 90b-91b, BK XVI [493-501] 117c, BK
XXII
[77-130]
156a-c, bk xxiii
[i367] 161a-165a
5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d esp
[331-432]
18d-19d / Seven Against Thebes [630-723] 34a35a 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[857-917]
266a-b / Phoenician Maidens
[697-747] 384a-d;
[9911030] 387a-b
5 Aristophanes: Knights
[565-580] 477a-b
/  Wasps  [1060-1121]  520c-521b  6  Herodotus: History, bk vii, 233a-d;
239a-c;  252a-259a esp 256d-257c; bk ix, 291c-292a; 298c-304c; 309d-310a
6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  367c368a;  370a-c; bk ii,
389d-390b;  396b-399a;  402c-404a;  411b-412c;  bk  iv,  457b'C; 460c-d;
469d-470b; 478d-479b; bk v, 484a-c; 491b-c;

[324b]
266  THE GREAT IDEAS Ic 501a-b; bk vi, 522b-c; 527b-c; bk vii, 555b557b;
559b-560b;  561a-b 7 Plato: Laches, 32a-c / Symposium, 172a-b / Apology,
205d-206a  /  Crito, 217b-c / Republic, bk hi, 324c-325b; bk iv, 347a-d;
bk  v,  366c367b/  Timaeus,  445d-446b/La«/i-,  bk  i,642b643a;  bk xii,
784d-786b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 13
[151^3-13]
205d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 6 [1115^24-35] 361b-c; CH 8
[1116*^15-^24] 362b-363a; bk v,
ch I
[ii29''i9-24] 377a / Politics, bk
ii, ch 9
[1269^34-39] 466a; bk hi, ch 7 [1279^40-^3]
476d; bk v, ch 10 [1312^25-39] 514d; bk vii, CH II
[1330^^32-1331^8]
535c; BK viii, ch 4
[i338''8-38]
544a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1366^1-14] 608d-609a
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c 13
Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  124a-146b;  bk  ix-xii  279a-379b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  40c-45c  /  Poplicola,  83b-84a  /  Coriolanus,  177b-179a  /
Aemilius Paulus, 219d-229c / Pelopidas, 232a-233a; 238b-239c / Marcellus
246b,d-261a,c/  Marcellus-Pelopidas 261a-262d / Philopoemen 293a302a,c /
Pyrrhus,  328c-330a  / Nicias 423a-438d / Caesar, 583b-585d / Cleomenes,
659d-660a;  661a-663c  /  Demosthenes,  695d-703b / Aratus, 826c-836d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44d-45a;  bk  hi,  49d50a;  bk xii, 117a-b /
Histories,  bk  i, 210c; 211c-212b; bk ii, 226d-227a; 232d-233a; bk III,
246b-c;  248b-c;  249a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A
3,  ANS  and  REP  5-6 316a-318b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i,
stanza  68-70  10a;  BK II, STANZA 88-93 33a-b; bk v, STANZA 258 154a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  x,  16c-d;  ch  xiiXIII  17d-21a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  115d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
32c-35a;  bk  iv,  297b-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 3a-5a; 20d-22a; 22d24a;
25c-26d; 53c-55d; 95d-97b; 302b-306a; 327d-329d; 336c-337a; 532d-533a 26
Shakespeare:  1st Henry VI, act iv, sc v-vi 23d-25a / 3rd Hejiry VI, act
v, sc iv [1-59] lOla-c / Richard III, act v, sc hi [237-341] 146b-147c /
KingJohn,  act  v,  sc  i  [44-79] 399d400a / 1st Henry IV, act i, sc hi
437d-440d; act II, sc III 443b-444b; act iv, sc hi
[i29] 459b-c
/ Henry V, act hi, sc i 543d544b; act iv, sc hi
[1-78] 555c-556c;
sc  v  558a-b  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv, sc iv [46-66] 59b-c /
Troilus  and Cressida, act ii, sc ii 113c115d / Coriolanus, act i, sc iv
[8-63] 356c357c; sc vi [55-87] 358d-359a; act ii, sc ii
[86-135] 365a-c / Timon of Athens, act
hi, sc V 406d-408a / Cymbeline, act v, sc hi 479d-480d

[325a]
Ic  Chapter  13:  COURAGE 267 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 147b d;
PART  II, 203a-b; 280b-c 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Fairfax 68b-69a / Paradise
Lost,  BK II [430-466] 120b-121a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv,
102b,d-103a;  bk  xxviii, 239d-240a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv,
437d438c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93d-94b;  94d; 369d-376a esp
370a-c,  375b-c:  427a-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 19d-20a; 238c;
324c-325a; 357c-359c; 534b-536d passim; 543a-551a passim, csp 543d-544a,
549c-550c  42  Kk-st:  Judgement,  504a-b  44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 384b-c
CKOSS-KEFEKENCBS  For: The general theory of virtue and the virtues, see
Virtue  and  Vice.  and Vice id, 6a. y-yd; and for courage as a military
virtue,  see  War  and  Peace  ioc.  The  analysis of the heroic and the
conception  of  the hero, see Honor 5-53, 5c. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. I. Aquinas.
Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq 123-140 F. Bacon. "Of Boldness," in
Essays Milton. The Readie and Easie Way to Establish a Free Commonwealth
Dostoevsky.  The  Idiot  II.  Theophrastus.  The  Characters  Cicero. De
Officiis  (On  Duties),  iii  Seneca.  De  Constantia  Sapientis (On the
Firmness of the Wise Man) Sir Gawain and the Green Knight P. Sidney. The
Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia Cor.neille. Polyeucte

[325b]
46  Hi:(;el:  Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 189 149d / Philosophy of
History,  part  i,  242d243b;  part ii, 274a-275a; part iv, 343d 344a 47
Cioethe:  Faust, part ii (9435-9505] 228b230b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
321c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 77c-81b; 95a-c; 97c-106d; bk hi,
134a-135c;  149a164a,c;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  366d-367b; 369a372a; bk x,
426b;  441d-442c; 445c; 451c456a; 457a-c; 461d-463c; 467a-468a,c; bk xi,
475b-476c;  480a-482b; 517d-518a; bk xii, 537b-538a; bk xiii, 569d-570a;
586d-587c; bk XIV, 589c-590c; 590d-604b passim; 610c611c; 613a-c; bk xv,
627a-c  VauvenARGUES.  Introduction a la connaissance de Vesprit humain,
part  i,  ch  i  Morgann.  Essay  on  the Dramatic Character of Sir John
Falstaff   Leopardi.  Essays,  Dialogues,  and  Thoughts  Stendhal.  The
Charterhouse  of  Parma  T.  Carlyle.  On  Heroes, Hero- Worship and the
Heroic  in  History  Emerson.  "Courage,"  in Society and Solitude T. H.
Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,  iv  Crane.  The  Red  Badge of Courage
Rostand.  Cyrano  de Bergerac Rank. The Myth of the Birth of the Hero G.
W, Russell. The Hero in Man Routh. God, Man, and Epic Poetry Raglan. The
Hero

[326a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  contrast  between  the  artificial and the natural is
generally understood in terms of the contribution which man does or does
not  make  to  the origin or character of a thing. Works of art are man-
made.  The  artificial  is  somehow  humanly  caused  or  contrived. The
contrast  between the natural and the conventional or customary involves
the  same  point  of  difference.  Though customs are not, in the strict
sense, made by man, as are works of art, they do grow only as the result
of   the  kind  of  acts  which  men  perform  voluntarily  rather  than
instinctively.   Similarly,  conventions,  like  contracts,  are  social
arrangements  or  agreements  into  which  men  enter  voluntarily.  The
fundamental  notions  with  which this chapter deals are thus seen to be
closely related to ideas and distinctions treated in the chapters on Art
and  Nature.  For  example,  the  distinction  between  human action and
production,  or  doing  and  making,  helps  us  to  understand  how the
conventional  and the artificial differ from one another as opposites of
the   natural.  Art  involves  voluntary  making.  Customs  result  from
voluntary  doing.  In  both cases, the distinction between the voluntary
and  the  instinctive  the  latter  representing the natural—seems to be
presupposed.  A  third  term—habit— is traditionally associated with the
consideration  of  the voluntary and the instinctive. Like these others,
it seems to have a critical bearing on the discussion of custom and art.
Aristotle,  for  example,  conceives art as an intellectual virtue, that
is,  a  habit of mind, an acquired skill. For Hume the customary and the
habitual  are  almost the same. Whether they are to be identified or are
only connected causally, the relation of habit to custom not only throws
some  light on the nature of custom, but also calls our attention to the
fact that the words "custom"

[326b]
Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION and "convention" cannot be treated
simply  as  synonyms.  In  the  tradition  of  the great books, the word
"convention"  has  at  least  two  meanings,  in only one of which is it
synonymous  with "custom." When "convention" is used to signify habitual
social  practices  it  is,  for  the  most  part,  interchangeable  with
"custom."  In  this significance, the notion of convention, like that of
custom,  is  an  extension  of  the  idea of habit. What habit is in the
behavior  of the individual, customary or conventional conduct is in the
behavior of the social group. The other mxaning of "convention" does not
connote  the  habitual  in  social  behavior,  but  stresses  rather the
voluntary  as  opposed to the instinctive origin of social institutions,
arrangements,  or  practices.  For  example,  different  sorts of family
organization are conventional in the sense that at different times or in
different  communities  men  have  set up their domestic arrangements in
different  ways.  In  each  case  they tend to perpetuate the particular
institutions  which  they  or  their  ancestors  originated. Whatever is
conventional about social institutions might have been otherwise, if men
had  seen fit to invent and adopt different schemes for the organization
of  their  social  life.  This  indicates the connection between the two
senses  of  the  word  "convention," for all customs are conventional in
origin,  and all conventions become customary when perpetuated. The fact
that  men  can depart from, as well as abide by, their conventions— that
they  can transgress as well as conform to custom—seems to indicate that
custom  and  convention belong to the sphere of human freedom. Yet there
is  also  a sense in which custom is a constraining force, which reduces
the  tendency  of  individuals to differ from one another, and which has
268

[327a]
the  effect  of  moulding  them  alike  and regimenting their lives. The
repressive  effect  of  custom  can  be seen, according to Freud, in the
neurotic disorders from which men suffer when their instinctive impulses
come  into  conflict with "accepted custom." Discussing the influence of
custom  upon  the  developing individual, he s;iys that "its ordinances,
frequently  too  stringent,  exact  a  great  deal  from him, much self-
restraint,  much renunciation of instinctual gratification." It becomes,
therefore,  one  of  the  aims  of psychoanalytic therapy to release the
individual from his bondage to custom, or at least to make him conscious
of  the  way  in which certain desires have been submerged or distorted,
and his whole personality shaped, by the constraints which the mores and
taboos  of  the  tribe  have imposed upon him. Considered in relation to
society, custom also seems to exercise a conservative, if not repressive
effect.  Established  customs  tend to resist change. They are sometimes
thought  to  impede  progress.  But to the extent that they conserve the
achievements  of the past, they may be indispensable to progress because
they  provide  the  substance  of what we call "tradition." A passage in
Bacon's  Advancement  of  Learning illustrates these apparently contrary
effects  of  custom.  ?u3  Amm  Over-emphasis  upon  either antiquity or
novelty  seems  to  Bacon  a  disease of learning, or an obstacle to its
advancement.  "Antiquity  envieth  there  should  be  new additions," he
writes,  "and  novelty  cannot be content to add but it must deface." If
custom tends to support antiquity against novelty, it may also encourage
inventions  or discoveries which genuinely enhance the tradition without
defacing it. "Antiquity deserveth that reverence," Bacon says, "that men
should  make  a  stand  thereupon and discover what is the best way; but
when  the  discovery  is  well  taken, then to make progression." As the
preserver  of  antiquity,  custom  thus  appears  to  afford a basis for
progress.  One  other  fact  about  customs which most commentators from
Herodotus  to  Montaigne  and  Freud have observed is their variet}- and
variability.  Customs differ from time to time, and from place to place.
But this diversity and variation in custom does not necessarily mean

[327b]
Chapter 14: CUSTOM AND CONVHN'l'lON 269 that no uniformity at all exists
in the actions of men. "Were there no uniformity in human actions," Hume
points  out, it would be impossible "to collect any general observations
concerning  mankind,"  At  least  enough  uniformity  is  found,  in his
opinion,  for  it  to  be  "universally  acknowledged  that human nature
remains  still  the  same."  To whatever extent human behavior is purely
natural  or instinctive, it is common to all members of the species, and
does  not,  like customary conduct, vary remarkably from one part of the
human  race  to another, or from generation to generation. The diversity
and  variation  of customs seems therefore to be of their essence and to
show  that they are both man-made and voluntary in origin. "If they were
not  devices  of men," Augustine writes, "they would not be different in
different  nations,  and could not be changed among particular nations."
The  distinction  between  nature  and  convention  can  be  formulated,
therefore,  partly in terms of the contrast between the constant and the
variable,  and partly in terms of the difference between the instinctive
and  the voluntary. The early Greeks had an apt v/ay of expressing this.
As  Aristotle  phrases  their  insight,  they referred to the natural as
"that which everywhere has the same force and does not exist by people's
thinking  this  or  that," as, for example, "fire burns both here and in
Persia."  The conventional and those things which are "not by nature but
by  human  enactment  are  not  everywhere the same." The laws of Persia
differ  from the laws of Greece, and in Greece or in Persia, they change
from  time  to  time.  The  variability  of  custom  in  contrast to the
constancy  or  uniformity  of nature puts the distinction between nature
and  convention at the service of the skeptic. One form of the skeptical
attack  upon natural law, universal moral standards, and the objectivity
of  truth  or  beauty  consists in making custom the only measure of the
acceptability  of  human  actions  or judgments. To say, for example, as
Hume  does,  that  the  connection  which the mind seems to make between
cause  and  effect  is  based  on  custom  rather  than  reason, has the
skeptical  effect  which  Hume intends. It substitutes the arbitrary for
the rational. It dispossesses reason as a source of

[328a]
270  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  either  the  vaHdity or the intelhgibiUty of our
conclusions  concerning  cause  and effect. As the chapters on Knowledge
and  Opinion  indicate,  the  skeptical  argument takes other forms. The
reduction  of  all  human  judgments  to  opinion  makes the differences
between  men,  in  either action or thought, unresolvable by argument or
debate. One opinion can predominate over another only by force or by the
weight  of  numbers.  When  it  predominates  by  weight  of numbers, it
prevails  by  custom or convention. It is the opinion which the majority
have  agreed  upon at a given time or place. To settle every controversy
about  what  men  should  think  or do by counting heads is to hold that
everything  is  a matter of opinion and purely conventional. Whether the
skeptic  reduces everything to opinion or to convention, he achieves the
same  effect.  What  he  means  by  calling everything an "opinion" or a
"convention"  is equally inimical to reason. In either case, the willful
or  arbitrary  is  enthroned  in  reason's  place  and only force can be
finally  decisive.  The  two  ideas—opinion  and  convention—seem  to be
corollaries  of  one  another.  Both imply a kind of relativity. Opinion
normally  suggests  relativity  to  the individual, custom or convention
relativity  to the social group. Either may be involved in the origin of
the  other.  The  individual may form his opinions under the pressure of
prevailing  customs  of  thought  or  action;  the  customary beliefs or
practices  of  a  society  or  culture  may, and usually do, result from
opinions  which  have come to prevail. The Greek sophists, we learn from
the  dialogues  of Plato, appealed to the distinction between nature and
convention  and  to  the  distinction  between  knowledge and opinion in
exactly  the  same  way. They used the notions of opinion and convention
with  equal  force  in  their  efforts to question absolute standards of
conduct  and the objectivity or universality of truth. The most familiar
of all the sophistical sayings— the remark attributed to Protagoras that
"man  is  the  measure  of all things"— is interpreted by both Plato and
Aristotle  to  mean that what men wish to think or do determines/or them
what is true or right. Man's will governs his reason, and convention, or
the  agreement  of  individual  wills, decides what is acceptable to the
group.

[328b]
In  the Gorgias, which is named after another of the leading sophists of
the  day,  Plato puts into the mouth of Callicles the sophistic position
that  there  is  no  law  or  standard of justice except the rule of the
stronger.  Insisting  that  "convention  and  nature  are  generally  at
variance.with  one  another,"  CaUicles  attempts  to  show  that all of
Socrates'  efforts  to  discover an absolute standard of justice come to
naught,  because  he  cannot  help but resort "to the popular and vulgar
notions  of  right,  which  are  not natural, but conventional." As they
appear in Plato's dialogues, the sophists are obviously impressed by the
kind  of  information  which fills the History of Herodotus —information
about  the  great  diversity of human beliefs and practices which anyone
could discover for himself if he traveled, as Herodotus did, from people
to  people,  observing  their institutions and collecting their legends.
Herodotus himself does not explicitly draw the skeptical conclusion, yet
his  own suspended judgment on many matters betokens a turn of mind made
cautious  by the impact of contrary opinions and conflicting customs. In
the  Hellenistic period when the main stream of Greek philosophy divides
into  a  number  of  Roman  schools  of  thought, the skeptical position
receives what is perhaps its fullest and most explicit statement. But in
the  writings  of  Lucian and Pyrrho, to take two examples, it is not so
much  the conflict of customs as it is what Lucian calls "the warfare of
creeds,"  which  occasions  universal  doubt. Yet whatever the source of
doubt, Pyrrhonism states the traditional denials of the skeptic in their
most extreme form. The senses are entirely untrustworthy. Reason is both
impotent  and  self-deceiving.  Men  possess no knowledge or science. No
truth  is self-evident; none can be demonstrated. The critical temper of
the  Greek  sophists,  and  of  an  observer  of  men  and  manners like
Herodotus,  reappears  later  in the questionings of Montaigne—sharpened
somewhat,  perhaps,  by his acquaintance with the Roman skeptics. In his
case,  perhaps  more  than  any  other, it is the implications of custom
which, everywhere expatiated on in his Essays, give them their skeptical
tone. Not himself a traveler in distant

[329a]
parts,  Montaigne  traverses  the world of time and space by reading. He
becomes conversant with the strange customs of the aborigines and of the
Orient  through  the  reports  of  returned explorers. He culls from the
historians and geographers of antiquity every difference in custom which
their  books set forth as fact or fable. Montaigne's insatiable appetite
for  collecting  and  comparing customs is not an aimless fascination on
his  part  with the spectacle of human variety. It steadfastly leads him
to  the  conclusion  which is for him the only one possible. Since every
belief  or  practice  can  be paired with its opposite in the customs of
some  other  time or place, no belief or practice can demand unqualified
or  universal  assent. "There is nothing," he writes, "which custom does
not,  or  may  not  do; and therefore, with every good reason it is that
Pindar  calls  her  the  ruler of the world." To say, as Montaigne does,
that  "the taste for good and evil depends in good part upon the opinion
we have of them" and that "everyone is well or ill at ease, according as
he  so  finds  himself,"  amounts to saying that all moral judgments are
matters  of  opinion,  either individual or customary in origin. Beauty,
too,  is  a  matter  of  taste.  "We fancy its forms," Montaigne thinks,
"according  to  our  own  appetite  and  liking."  As may be seen in the
chapter  on Beauty, Montaigne assembles an abundance of evidence to show
that  standards  of  beauty  vary  with different peoples. The tastes or
preferences  of  one  group  are as unaccountable as they are frequently
revolting to another. Even in the field of speculative thought about the
nature  of  things,  Montaigne regards the things men hold to be true as
nothing  more  than  prevailing  opinions— the cultural conventions of a
time  or  place.  "We  have  no  other  level  of  truth and reason," he
declares,  "than the example and idea of the opinions and customs of the
place  wherein  we live: there is always the perfect religion, there the
most  perfect government, there the most exact and accomplished usage of
all  things."  Of all human deceptions or impostures, none is worse than
that which flows from a man's unwillingness to qualify every remark with
the  admission that this is the way it seems to me. In Montaigne's eyes,
"there  is  no greater folly in the world" than the failure to recognize
that

[329b]
Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND CONVENTION 271 we reduce truth and falsity "to
the  measure of our capacity and the bounds of our sufhcicncy." When new
ideas  or  the strange beliefs of others at first seem incredible simply
because  they  are  not our own, "we shall find that it is rather custom
than  knowledge  that  takes  away their strangeness." For his own part,
Montaigne  makes  his  "emblem" the question, "What do I know?" This, he
says,  sums up his Pyrrhonian philosophy. According to the modern social
scientist who claims that custom is the ultimate standard of conduct and
that  it provides the only criterion of moral judgment, no questions can
be  raised about the goodness or evil of particular customs. The customs
of  one  people cannot be judged by another, at least not objectively or
impartially,  for  those  who judge must do so on the basis of their own
customs.  Since  there  is  no  arbiter above conflicting customs to say
which  is  right, a particular custom has validity only for the group in
which  it prevails. Within that social group the character or conduct of
its  individual  members  is  measured  by  conformity to the prevailing
customs.  The  descriptive science of sociology or comparative ethnology
thus   tends  to  replace  the  normative  science  of  ethics—or  moral
philosophy.  The  only  scientifically  answerable questions about human
conduct  take  the form of "How do men behave ?" or "How have they acted
individually  or  in  groups  ?"  but not "How should theyV The study of
morality, as in Sumner's Fol]{waySy becomes a study of the mores—how the
customs  which  measure  conduct  develop  and  dominate;  or, as in the
writings  of  Freud,  it  becomes  a  study  of  how  the  individual is
psychologically  formed  or  deformed  by  the  mores  of  his tribe and
culture,  according  to the way in which the growing child reacts to the
pressures  which the community imposes through parental discipline. With
these views, many philosophers and theologians, both ancient and modern,
take  issue.  But  their opposing doctrine seldom goes so far as to deny
that  morality  has  certain conventional aspects. In arguing that there
are   "no   innate  practical  principles,"  Locke,  for  example,  like
Montaigne,  cites instances of contradictory customs to show that "there
is scarce that principle of morality to be named, or rule of virtue

[330a]
272  THE  GREAT  IDEAS to be thought on . . . which is not, somewhere or
other,  shghted  and condemned by the general fashion of whole societies
of  men,  governed  by  practical  opinions  and  rules  of living quite
opposite  toothers."  But  Locke  does not leave this observation of the
diversity  of  customs  unqualified.  He  goes on to assert that "though
perhaps,  by  the  different  temper,  education,  fashion,  maxims,  or
interest  of  different sorts of men, it fell out, that what was thought
praiseworthy  in  one  place,  escaped not censure in another; and so in
different  societies,  virtues  and  vices  were changed: yet, as to the
main,  they  for  the  most  part  kept  the same everywhere. For, since
nothing can be more natural than to encourage with esteem and reputation
that   wherein   every  one  finds  his  advantage,  and  to  blame  and
discountenance  the contrary; it is no wonder that esteem and discredit,
virtue  and vice, should, in a great measure, everywhere correspond with
the  unchangeable  rule  of  right  and wrong, which the law of God hath
established.  .  .  .  Even  in  the  corruption  of  manners,  the true
boundaries  of  the  law of nature, which ought to be the rule of virtue
and  vice,  were  pretty  well  preferred." For Locke, then, as for many
others,  there  appear  to  be, underlying the variety of customs, moral
principles  of  universal validity that draw their truth from the nature
of  man  which  represents  a  constant and common factor throughout the
diversity of cultures. Accordingly, it would seem to follow that just as
habits are modifications of instinct or developments of the individual's
native  capacities  for action, so customs are conventional elaborations
of  what  is  natural  to  man  as  a social animal. On this theory, the
conventional  cannot  be  understood except by reference to the natural,
i.e.,  the  nature  of  man or society. The view that conventions have a
natural  basis  is  most  readily  exemplified  by Aristotle's theory of
natural  and  legal  (or  conventional)  justice, and by the teaching of
Aquinas  concerning  natural  and positive law. For the Greeks the legal
and  the  conventional  are  almost  identical,  so that it is a kind of
justice rather than a kind of law which Aristotle calls "natural." Roman
philosophers  like Cicero, and Roman jurists like Gains and Ulpian, make
what seems to be an

[330b]
equivalent  distinction  in  terms  oflaw  rather  than  justice. In his
analysis, Aquinas follows the Latin, not the Greek vocabulary. The Roman
system  of  jurisprudence.  Gibbon tells us, distinguished between those
laws   which   are  "positive  institutions"  and  those  which  "reason
prescribes,  the  laws  of nature and nations." The former are man-made—
the  "result  of  custom and prejudice." This holds true of both written
and unwritten laws, although only the unwritten precepts are now usually
called  "customary laws." These customary laws are positire in the sense
that  they  are humanly instituted or enacted—posited by the will of the
legislator   rather   than  merely  discovered  by  the  reason  of  the
philosopher. They are conventional in the sense that they represent some
voluntary  agreement  on  the  part of the members of the community they
govern,  whether that consist in obeying the edicts of the emperor or in
giving  consent  to  the  enactments  of  the  senate.  So  far as it is
conventional,  the law of one community differs from another; and within
the history of a single community, the positive law changes from time to
time.  But such bodies of law, "however modified by accident or custom,"
the  Roman  jurists,  Gibbon  says, conceived as "drawn from the rule of
right."   The   fact  that  "reason  prescribes"  this  rule  was  their
explanation  of certain common elements which all bodies of positive law
seem  to  contain.  The  principles  underlying  all codes of civil law,
whether  discovered  directly by reason or drawn inductively, as Grotius
later  suggests,  from  the  comparative study of diverse legal systems,
comprise  the  precepts  of  what  the  Romans,  and later Aquinas, call
"natural  law." Thus these writers seem to re-affirm, though in somewhat
different language, Aristotle's point that what is naturally just is the
same  for  all  men  everywhere and always, while the laws of Greece and
Persia  represent  diverse  conventional determinations of the universal
principles  of  justice. The theory of natural right and natural law, as
expressed  in the writings of Hobbes, Locke, and Kant, as well as in the
ancient  and  mediaeval  tradition, is, of course, more fully treated in
the  chapters  on  Justice  and  Law. But one example of the distinction
between natural and conventional justice may be instructive here.

[331a]
Aquinas  conceives  positive  rules  as "determinations" of, rather than
"deductions"  from,  natural law. He treats such precepts as "Thou shalt
not kill" and "Thou shalt not steal" as conclusions that reason can draw
deductively  from the first principle of natural law, which is sometimes
stated  in  the form of the command: Do good, harm no one, and render to
each  his  own.  Because  these precepts are the prescriptions of reason
rather  than  enactments  of  the  state,  they  can  be  interpreted as
declaring  that murder and larceny are always and everywhere unjust. But
what  -sort  of  killing  and  taking  of what is not one's own shall be
defined  as  murder and theft; and how offenders shall be tried, judged,
and punished— these are matters which natural justice or the precepts of
natural  law  leave  open for determination by the positive laws of each
community,  according to its own constitution and its local customs. The
theory  thus  exemplified,  of  the  relation  between  conventional and
natural  justice,  or between positive and natural law, applies to moral
rules  and  ethical  standards  generally.  For  the  same reason that a
positive law which violates natural justice cannot be called "just" even
though it is harmonious with the customs of the community, so no rule of
conduct,  however  much it represents prevailing custom, can be approved
as  morally  right  if  it  violates  the  right  as reason sees it. The
defenders  of  natural  law,  which is also sometimes called "the law of
reason,"  proclaim  the  existence  of  an  absolute standard, above the
diversity and conflict of customs, by which their soundness is measured.
Conflicting  ethical  doctrines  raise many issues concerning what it is
right for men to do or good for them to seek; but the moralists at least
agree  that morality is based on reason or nature. For them the facts of
human  nature  or  the  intuitions  of reason will ultimately decide the
points  in  issue.  However  far  apart Plato and Aristotle, Aquinas and
Hegel,  Kant  and  Mill  may  be in their conceptions or analyses of the
right  and  the  good,  they stand together, at least negatively, on the
question  of how their disputes can be resolved: not by appealing to the
mores  of  the tribe, not by looking to the conventions of the community
as a measure, not by letting the customs of the majority decide.

[331b]
:  Chapter 14: CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 273 The deepest of all moral issues
therefore  exists  between those who think that moralitv somehow derives
from  nature  or  reason  and  those  who,  like the ancient sophists or
Montaigne  or  Freud, find its source in custom and convention. Accordmg
to  the  side  a man takes on this issue, he does or docs not believe it
possible  to  discover standards independent of custom, thereby to judge
whether  customs  are  good,  bad, or indifferent. On one belief, public
manners  are conventional determinations of moral principles or they are
sometimes   violations  of  them,  just  as  positive  laws  are  either
determinations  or  violations  of natural law. On the other belief, the
individual   may   be   approved  or  condemned  for  conforming  to  or
transgressing  the  manners  or mores of his group; but those manners or
mores,  whether  they are liked or disliked by the individual, arc above
any   tenable,  objective  critiThe  controversy  in  jurisprudence  and
morality  between  the  naturalists  or rationalists who appeal to man's
nature or reason, and the positivists who hold that human customs cannot
be  appealed from, parallels a controversy in the theory of knowledge or
science.  The  parallel  issue,  considered  at  greater  length  in the
chapters  on  Hypothesis  and  Principle,  can be stated by the question
whether  the  foundation  of science —even of such sciences as logic and
mathematics— consists of postulates or axioms. Axioms, like the precepts
of  natural  law,  are  supposed to have a universality derived from the
nature of human reason. They are self-evident truths, compelling assent.
Postulates, on the contrary, are like rules of positive law— voluntarily
accepted assumptions which, when agreed upon by the experts in a certain
science,  become  its  conventional  basis.  In  science  as in law, the
positivists  recognize  nothing beyond the agreement of men to determine
what  shall  be takenfor granted as true or just. The difference between
nature and convention also enters into the traditional discussion of two
of  the  most  characteristic  activities  of  man  speech and political
association. No one disputes whether the faculty of speech is natural to
man.  It  is as natural for man to speak as for dogs to bark or birds to
sing. But the question is whether any human language,

[332a]
274  THE  GREAT IDEAS having a certain vocabulary and syntax, is natural
or conventional. The answer seems to be dictated at once by the facts of
the  matter.  Human  languages exist or have existed in great number and
diversity, and those which still endure have gradually developed and are
undoubtedly   subject   to  further  change.  Hence,  according  to  the
traditional  understanding  of  the  natural and the conventional, these
various   tongues  must  represent  conventional  languages  —originally
invented  by this human group or that, perpetuated by custom, altered by
the   conventions   of   usage.   In  contrast,  the  expressive  sounds
instinctively made by other animals show themselves to be natural by the
fact  that they are common to all members of a species and do not change
as long as the species endures. Nevertheless, as the chapter on Language
indicates,  the  writers of the great books consider the hypothesis of a
natural human language. The Old Testament story of the Tower of Babel is
sometimes  interpreted as implying the existence of one language for all
men  before  God  confounded their speech and diversified their tongues.
The  story  of  Adam's giving names to the various species of plants and
animals in the Garden of Eden is also cited by those who think there can
be  natural  as  well  as  conventional  signs.  In Plato's Cratylus the
attempt is made to discover the natural names for things, or at least to
discern some natural basis for the words of a conventional language like
Greek.  These  who reject the hypothesis of a single human language from
which  all others have developed by diversifica tion , orwho regard a pu
rely  natural  language  as  impossible  in the very nature of the case,
sometimes    acknowledge    the    possibility    of    certain   common
elements—principles  of  syntax,  if  not  words—present  in  all  human
languages. The discovery of the common rules of speech was the object of
the  speculative  grammarians in the Middle Ages, and of those who, like
Arnauld  and  others, later tried to formulate a "universal grammar." On
their  view,  all languages, even if they are conventional as written or
spoken,  may  have  the same natural basis in the fact that they are all
used to express what men can naturally perceive or think. As in the case
of language, so in the case of so-

[332b]
ciety,  the  question  is  whether  the  family and the state are wholly
natural,  wholly conventional, or partly one and partly the other— their
institutions  being  erected  by choice and custom upon a natural basis.
And as in the case of language, here too the great books do not, for the
most  part, give either of the extreme answers. They do not say that the
state  is  entirely natural, that it is the expression of human instinct
as  the  bee-hive  and  the ant-mound are instinctive formations. Nor do
they  say  that the state is completely conventional, that it comes into
existence only as the result of voluntary association on the part of men
contracting  to  live together in a political community. While Aristotle
says  that "man is by nature a political animal," and that the state is,
therefore,  "acreationof nature, "he also distinguishes between the ways
in which men and other animals are gregarious. Unlike the association of
animals,  which  he  attributes to instinct, the society of men rests on
reason  and  speech.  "Man is the only animal," he writes, "endowed with
the  gift  of  speech  . . . intended to set forth the expedient and the
inexpedient, and therefore likewise the just and the unjust." Because of
these things, cities differ from one another, as bee-hives or ant-mounds
do  not.  The  diversity of states represents for Aristotle a deliberate
inventiveness  on  the  part  of  reason and an exercise of free choice—
certainly  insofar  as states are politically constituted, each with its
own  constitution.  Aristotle's  remark  that while "a social impulse is
implanted in all men by nature," yet "he who first founded the state was
the  greatest  of  benefactors," may look selfcontradictory; but its two
parts  can be read as quite consistent with one another, if the first is
taken  as  signifying  the  natural  basis  of  the  state  (in a social
impulse),  and  the  second  as  saying  that  a  certain  convention (a
constitution)  is  required  to  shape  that impulse before any state is
actually  established.  As  Aristotle is sometimes interpreted to uphold
the  theory  that  the  state is entirely natural, so Hobbes, Locke, and
Rousseau  are often read as maintaining the opposite extreme— that it is
entirely  conventional.  The  extreme  interpretation  is  based  on the
sharpness  with which each of them distinguishes between men living in a
state of nature and in a state of civil society.

[333a]
Though  they  differ  among  themselves in their exposition of these two
conditions  of man, they seem to agree that for men to pass from a state
of  nature,  whether  hypothetical  or  historical, in which men live in
anarchy or at least in isolation, it is necessary for them to enter into
a  contract  or  compact with one another. Since this social contract is
the  original,  or  originating, convention by which the commonwealth or
civil  society  is  established,  it would seem to follow that, on their
view,  the  state  is  entirely  a  product of convention, and in no way
natural.  Yet  Hobbes,  Locke,  and Rousseau, each in his own way, add a
qualification  in  favor  of  the  naturalness  of  the  state,  just as
Aristotle  qualifies his remark that "the state is a creation of nature"
by  praising the man "who first founded the state." The exponents of the
social  contract  theory of the state's origin find in the nature of man
or  in his reason an instinct, a need, or a law which impels or bids him
to  seek  association  with  others  for the sake of advantages which he
cannot  enjoy  apart  from  civil  society.  This suffices to affirm the
existence  of  a  natural  basis  for  the  convention or contract which
establishes  the  state.  These  apparently  opposed theories of what is
natural  and  what  conventional about the state thus appear to approach
each   other,  though  one  starts  from  an  emphasis  on  the  state's
naturalness,  the  other from its conventional origin. The whole problem
is,  of course, further treated in the chapters on Family and State; but
one  point  which  the  foregoing  discussion  suggests receives special
consideration  in still another chapter. The point concerns the relation
between  th.e  idea of a constitution and the idea of a social contract.
Both  are conceived as the basic or primary convention which establishes
the  state.  The  question  whether the two ideas are interchangeable or
only  analogous  is  examined  in the chapter on Constitution. Custom is
both  a  cause  and  an  effect  of  habit. The habits of the individual
certainly reflect the customs of the community in which he lives; and in
turn, the living customs of any social group get their vitality from the
habits  of  its  members.  A  custom  which  does  not  command  general
compliance is as dead as a language no

[333b]
Chapter  14:  CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 275 longer spoken or a law no longer
observed.  This  general  compliance  consists  in  nothing  more than a
certain  conformity  among  the  habits  of  individuals. The continuity
between  custom and statute as parts or phases of the positive law rests
upon the relation of both to habit. "Custom," according to Aquinas, "has
the  force  of  a  law,  abolishes  law,  and is the interpreter of law"
precisely  because  it  operates  through  the habits of the people. "By
repeated  external  actions,"  such  as  produce  a  custom, "the inward
movement  of  the  will  and  the  conceptions  of  the  reason are most
revealingly declared," and, according to Aquinas, "all law proceeds from
the reason and will of the lawgiver." The law which a prince or a people
enacts,  to  become  effective  as  social  regulation,  must  develop a
particular habit of conduct in many individuals. Then and only then does
a  new  enactment  obtain  the full force of law. To remain effective it
must  continue  to  have  the support of "the customs of the counWithout
that  support  it may be a law on the books but not in practice, for the
authority of a law cannot long prevail against a contrary custom, except
through a degree of coercion so oppressive as to produce rebellion. That
is  also why the customary or unwritten rule— usually the primitive form
of   positive  law—  is  less  flexible,  less  amenable  to  change  or
modification.  Custom  is  a conservative factor. "There is nothing more
difficult  to  take in hand," writes Machiavelli, nothing "more perilous
to  conduct,  or more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in
the introduction of a new order of things. The innovator has for enemies
all  those  who  have  done  well under the old conditions, and lukewarm
defenders  in  those  who may do well under the new." Just as custom may
either support the written law or render it ineffective, so custom works
in opposite directions as a social force. It is both a factor ofcohesion
and  of division among men a cause of what is called "social solidarity"
and  a  barrier  separating peoples from one another. When the Athenians
refuse  to  ally  themselves with the Persians, they chide the Spartans,
according to Herodotus, for fearing that they "might make terms with the
barbarian." For all the gold on earth, they tell the Spartan

[334a]
276  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ary line, the line drawn between those who their
manners  and  customs." 3. The conflict of customs: their variation from
place  to  place 5. Custom and convention in the moral order conventions
6.  Custom  in  relation  to  law 7. Custom in social life ya. Custom as
unifying  a  community  yc.  Custom  as  determining  economic  needs or
standards  yd.  The influence of custom on the liberty of the individual
9. The bearing of custom on thought

[334b]
envoys,  they  could  not "take part with the The FederaUsts, advocating
the  poHtical  union  Medes."  To  do so would betray "our common of the
thirteen  American  states,  could urge its brotherhood with the Greeks,
our common feasibility on the ground that a social union allanguage, the
altars  and  sacrifices  of which we ready existed. "Providence has been
pleased  to  all  partake,  and the common character which give this one
connected  country," Jay writes, we bear." "toone united people—a people
descended  from  The  barbarians  or  the  gentiles— to use the the same
ancestors,  speaking  the same language, traditional names for aliens or
foreigners—  are  professing the same religion, attached to the excluded
by  a social, not a geographic, boundsame principles of government, very
similar  in  share a set ofcustoms and all outsiders. When the Those who
today advocate world federal stranger is assimilated, the group does not
adopt union cannot similarly point to a world society him; he adopts the
customs  of the community. already in existence. They can only hope that
The ver\^ word "community" implies a multiif the separate states were to
unite politically, tude having much in common. More important the social
cohesion  of  the world's people might than the land they occupy are the
customs  they  subsequently develop as a result of the fostering OUTLINE
OF TOPICS PAGB state and of language 277 2. The origin, development, and
transmission  of  customs  278 4. The change of customs: their variation
from  time  to  time  279  5<7.  The conventional determination of moral
judgments:  the  moral  evaluation  of  5^.  The effect of custom on the
training  and  character of men 280 6b. The force of custom with respect
to law 281 7/?. Custom as a barrier between communities 282 8. Custom in
relation  to  order and progress: the factors of tradition and invention
283  9J.  Custom  as  a  source  of opinion and belief: its influence on
judgments  of  beauty  gb.  The  conventionality  of truth: postulation,
choice among hypotheses 284

[335a]
REFERENCES  To  find the passages cited, use the numbers in lieavy type,
which  are  the vokime and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homrr:  Iliads hk ii [265-283) 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  vohime  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James :Pi3'<:-^o/o^v,116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  relcr to the upper and low cr halves of the lefthand side of the
page, theletters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand
side  of  the  page.  Forexample,in7  Plato;  Symposium,  163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (Z)),  follows; e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  U  Esdras,  7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The distinaion between nature
and  convention:  its  application  to  the  origin  of the state and of
language  6  Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49a-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52b /
Cratylus   85a-114a,c   esp  104d-105a,  106b-c,  llOc-lllc  /  Gorgias,
271b-272b  / Republic, bk ii, 311b-c / Theaetetus, 528b-c / Laws, bk hi,
663d-666c; bk x, 760a-b 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 12
[i73V3o]238b-c
9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7 [1134^18-1135* 7] 382c-383a / Politics,
bk i, ch 2 445b-446d esp
[i253''2-3i]
446b-d;  ch  6 448c-449b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1:5 [1373^1-17] 617c-d; ch
15
[i 375^25-^^3] 619d-620a
10  Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 14 15a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things, bk iv [823-857] 55a-b; bk v [925-1090] 73b-75b 18 Augustine:
City  of  God, bk xix, ch 7 515a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 19-27
646b-650a  passim,  esp  ch  24 648d-649a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  2  227c-228c; a 4, ans 229b-230c; q 96, a 2, ANs
231c-232b; q 97, a 3, rep i 237b-238b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xxvi [70142] 146c-147b esp [124-138] 147a-b

[335b]
Chapter  14:  CUSl  OM  AND  CONVENTION 277 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro,
47a-b;  part  i, 84c-87b; 91a-b; 94b-c; 95a; part ii, 99a-101a esp 100c;
113c;  131a-c;  136d-137a  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Paniagruel, bk i,
lld-14b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-47c;  63d-64b;  93b94a; 102a-103a;
'218a-c;  278a-279a;  424d426b; 489b-490c 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act
i,  sc  ii  [1-22]  247d-248a;  act  ii,  sc iv [267-274] 261c 30 Bacon:
Advancetnent  of  Learning, 20c-d; 94d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
37, schol 2 435b-436a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 89-98 189b-190b; 294 225b226b;
306 228a 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch i-ix 25a-54d
passim;  ch  xix, sect 211, 73d / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxviii,
SECT  2-3 228c-229b; bk hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c; ch ii, sect i 252d-253a
38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, led; 2b-3a; bk viii, 52a; bk xvi,
119d-120a; bk xxvi, 215b-217b passim; 219d-221c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
329a-331d;  340a-342c; 348b,d-363a,c / Political Economy, 367b; 369a-b /
Social  Contract,  bk  1 387b,d-394d; BK II, 399b-c; 405d-406a 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk \ . 397a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 409d-410a

[336a]
(1.  The  distinction  between nature and convention: its application to
the  origin  of  the  state and of language.^ 42 Kant: Science of Right,
402c;  405d-406c;  433c-434d  esp  433d-434a; 435a-436b; 437c-d 43 Mill:
Liberty,   294b-295b   /   Representative   Government,  327b,d-332d  44
Boswell:/o^«50/2,  363c-364a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par
75  31d-32b; part hi, par 168 60b-c; additions, 47 124a-b; 97 132c-133a;
108  134b-c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 170d-171d; part ii, 260b 49
Darwin:  Descent of Man, 298a-b; 349d ^i]\MY.s\ Psychology, 733b-734b 54
Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  20c-d  /  General
Introduction, 452c-d; 573c / War and Death, 757d-759d / Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  776b-802a,c esp 776b777a, 778a, 780b-781d, 783c-784b,
787a-c,  788d-789b, 791b-792a, 799b-802a,c / Netv Introductory Lectures,
853a-b  2.  The  origin,  development,  and  transmission  of  customs 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 31a-b; 38a-b; bk II, 58a-b; 59d-60a; 62b-c;
66c-d;  69b-d;  87ab; BK III, 107b-c; bk iv, 125d-126a; 129c-130a; BK V,
177a-b;  183d-184a;  bk  vi, 201b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk
ii, 395cd; BK III, 442c-443a 7 Plato: Latvs, bk hi, 663d-666c esp 666a-b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk v [42-83] 188a-189a; bk VII
[601-615]
252b-253a; bk viii
[152-279]
263a-266b  14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  passim  / Romulus 15a-30a,c
passim  /  Lycurgus,  36a-47c  passim  / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d passim /
Solon,   70c-74b   /  Poplicola,  80d;  84d-85a  /  Camillus,  116a-c  /
Coriolanus,  175c-d  / Marcellus, 254c256b 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk ii,
214d-215a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 2425 648d-649d; bk
hi,  ch 12 662c-663c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, A 3
237b-238b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 278a-279a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
the  affects,  def 27, EXPL 419a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 80a-b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  309b-310a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xiv,  107ab;  BK  XVI,  116a-117c;  118a-119c;  bk xviii, 132a-b; bk xx,
146a-b; bk xxi, 169a-170b; BK xxiii, 187b,d-189d; bk xxiv, 205d-206a; BK
XXV,  209a-b  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 416c-417a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  154b-155a: 583d584b; 704d [n 79] 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 227b; 389b-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 308b [fn ij

[336b]
278  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2/0  3  46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part ii,
259c-d;  265c-266a;  part  iv,  315d-316b;  347b-d;  351d-353a;367a-b 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 228b-229b 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 317a-c; 318b-c
54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 799a800c / Netv Introductory
Lectures,  834b-c 3. The conflict of customs: their variation from place
to  place 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk i [1-5] 183a; bk viii [234255] 224c-d; bk
ix  [82-115]  230a-b  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [234-245]  3d 5
Euripides:  Andromache  [147-245]  316c-317b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
22d-23a;  31a-33a;  35b-c; 39a-c; 44b-45b; 48a,c; bk ii, 56c-68a; 80a-c;
bk  hi,  93d-94a;  97d-98a; lllb-113d; bk IV, 128c-d; 129c-130b; 132a-b;
134a;  137a138c;  142b-144b;  154b-158d  passim; bk v, 160b-161c; BK VI,
195d-196c;  bk  vii, 238c; 253b-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
350b-d  7  Plato:  Symposium,  154a-155c  /  Laivs,  bk  iv, 678c-679a 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3 [994^32995^5] 513c 134^ 9 Aristotle
:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  1135^4]  382c-d 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters,
Places,  par i 9a-b; par 14-18 15a-16c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [520-543]
117b-118a;  bk  IX  [590-620]  295a-b;  bk  xii  [791-842]  375a376b  14
Plutarch:  Themistocles,  99b-c  /  Marcellus,  254c-256b  esp 256a-b 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 23d-24a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch  25  649b-d  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, A 2, ANS
231c-232b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 22-23 3b-4a; bk
ii, stanza 6-7 22a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 44a-47a; 91d-98b esp 93b-94a;
102a-103a; 230b-231a; 246b-257d passim; 278a-279c; 281a-284c; 415a-416b;
524b-d 26 Shakespeare: Henry V, act v, sc i
[1-84]
562c-563b  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part ii, 46b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees,
294  225b-226b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch ii, SECT 8-12
105d-107d  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii, div 66, 480b 36
Swift:   Gulliver,  part  ii,  76b-  78b;  part  hi,  98b-99a;  105a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  38b;  bk  XV,  llOa-b; bk xvi,
116a-119c;  bk  xix,  139c-140a;  bk  xxi,  153a-c;  bk  xxv,  209a-b 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 416c-417a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
89d-94b passim; 99c; 260d-261a; 409d-415a passim; 670d-671a

[337a]
4  to  5a 41 Gibbcin: Decline and Fall, 33d-36c passim; 85c-d; 223c-227b
passim;  337c-339b  passim  43  Federalist:  number  6o,  184d  43 Mill:
Liberfy,  269c-d;  301b 302c; 307b 312a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  i,  250c-d;  PART  IV,  347b-d;  35id-353a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
43b-44a;  60b-65a;  351b-352a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 571b-577d 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazoi',BKy , 122d125c 4. The change of customs:
their  variation  from  time  to  time 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [957-1002]
500a-d   6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  31a-b;  39a-b  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 350b-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 344b-d; bk v,
357d358a  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  678c-679a;  bk  vii,  717d718c 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 8
[1268^231269*28] 464d-465b
10  Hippocrates:  Airs, Waters, Places, par 14, 15b 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk v [925-1027] 73b-74c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xii [791-842]
375a-376b  14  Plutarch:  Lysander,  361a-d  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
58b-d;  bk  iv,  67d68a;  bk xi, 105d-107b; bk xii, lllb-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk hi, par 13 16c-d / City of God, bk xv, ch 16 410b-411d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  25  649b-d  esp  649d;  bk III, ch 12
662c-663c; ch 18-22 664d-666c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
97, A 2 236d-237b; a 3, rep 1-2 237b-238b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xvi
[64-78]
23a-b; purgatory, vi
[58-151]
61b-62c; xi
[73-117] 69c-70a; paradise, xv [97]-xvi [154]
129b-132a;  xxvi  [124-138] 147a-b 22 Chaucer : Troilus and Cressida, bk
11,  stanza  4 22a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 131b-132a; 143c-145c 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  294  225b-226b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect 157
61c-d  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect viii, div 66, 480b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  hi,  105a-106b; 128a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xiv,  104c;  bk  XIX  135a-146a,c  esp  136c; bk xx, 146a-b 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  402b-c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 545c-d;
638c639a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  6b;  107b; 485b486b 43 Mill:
Liberty,  269c-d;  300d-302c/  Representative  Government,  377d-378a 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  204c-205b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 528c-529a;
579b582a  passim  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  403a-c; bk xi,
498a-499a; epilogue i, 647b-c

[337b]
Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND CONVENTION 279 5. Custom and convention in the
moral  order  5a. The conventional determination of moral judgments: the
moral  evaluation  of  conventions  5 Euripides: Hecuba [798-805] 359d /
Phoenician Maidens [499-522] 382b-c 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[1031-1114]
501a502b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32a;  bk hi, 92c93a;97d-98a 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 368b-c 7 Plato: Symposium, 154a-
155c/  Gorgias,  27  Ih284b  /  Republic,  bk v, 357d-358a / Theaetetus,
525c-526a;  527b-528c  esp  528b-c  / LawSy BK X, 759d-760c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^12-28]
339d-340a; ch 8
[1098^9-29] 344a-b; bk
v,  ch  7  [ii34^i8-ii35'*4]  382c-d / Politics, bk i, ch 6 448c-449b 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[14121435] 79b-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 2, 107a-b; ch II, 117b-c; bk ii, ch
ii,  150a-151a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 18 264d 14 Plutarch
:  Themistocles,  99b-c  / Marcus Cato^ 285c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk h,
24a;  bk  hi, 58b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14-16 4c5b; par
19-30  5d-8d  esp par 25-27 7a-d; bk III, par 13 16c-d; par 15 17a-b; bk
vi, par 2 35a-c; par 11-13 38b-39c / City of God, bk xv, ch 16 410b-411d
/  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 19-26 646b-650a; ch 39-40 654c-656a; bk
hi,  ch 10, 661d-662a; ch 12-14 662c-663d; CH 18-22 664d-666c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  61d-62a;  75a-b;  78b-c;  96a;  part  ii,  140b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  141d-142b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  46b-47c;  93b-c; 102a103a; 143c-144a; 281a-284c; 307b; 424d426b
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [249-259] 43b / Troilus and
Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [1-206] 113c-115c / King Lear, act i, sc ii
[1-22]  247d248a  / Henry VUI, act i, sc hi [3-5] 555b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 32c-33a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 46b-c; part
HI,  48b-49d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, the affects, def 27 419a-b 33
Pascal: Pensees, 309 228b; 312 229a; 325 230b-231a; 381-385 238b-239a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90a-d;  bk  i, CH II, sect 8-12 105d-107d
passim;  sect  21-26  llla-112b; bk h, ch xxi, sect 71, 197d; ch XXVIII,
SECT  10-13  230b-231c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 132,
509c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 21b-23a; part ii, 76b'77a

[338a]
(5.  Custom  atuf  convention  in  the moral order. 5a. Tbe conventional
determination  of moral judgments: the moral evaluation of conventions.)
36  Sterne:  Tristram Shatidy, 261a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 295b; 303d
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  xviii, 132c; BK XIX, 139b-140d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  362a-b  /  Political Economy, 369a-370a / Social
Contract,  bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 346c-347a
42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals,210d271a / Practical Reason,
307a-b  / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387b; 387d-388a 43 Mill: Liberty,
269b-271d;  286b-287a;  293b302c  passim;  307b'312a  /  Utilitarianism,
457c458a;   475a-d  44  Bos\VELL:/oA/7yo;2,  197a-b;  198b-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, pref, 2b-c; part II, par 132, 46c-d; par 138 48c-d;
part hi, par 150-152 56c-57b; par 339 110b; par 355 112d113a; additions,
i  115a-d;  89  129d-130a;  91  131a-d;  96-97 132c-133a / Philosophy of
History,  INTRO,  166a-b;  170d-171c;  part  ii, 271d272d; 273c; 279c-d;
280b-281b;  part  hi,  311a-b; part iv, 333b-d 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan,
305a;  313b-d;  314c316a;  317a-d;  592d-593a 50 Marx-Engels: Co7nmunist
Manifesto,  427ab;  428b-d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15d-16a; bk
IV,   177d-178a;  bk  vi,  263a-265d  passim;  bk  VIII,  303a-305b  esp
304c-305a;  bk  x, 403a405a; 442c-443b; bk xi, 476c-480a passim; 514c-d;
bk  xii,  542d; bk xiv, 589a-c; 611a-c; epilogue I, 645a-646c; 647b-649d
53   James:   Psychology,   190a-191a;   886b-887a   54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  625a  /  War and Death, 757d-759a esp 759a / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents,  792 b-c 5b. The QS.QCt of custom on the training
and  character  of  men  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds [886-1 no] 499b-502b 6
Herodotus: History, bk i, 35c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk 11, 314b-c; bk iv,
344bd;   BK  VI,  377a-379c  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  717d718c  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994^31995^51  513c  10 Hippocrates: Airs,
Waters,  Places,  par  23 18a-c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 18
264d  14  Plutarch:  Lysander,  361a-d / Cleomenes, 663b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 14-16 4c5b; par 19-30 5d-8d; bk vi, par 2 35a-c;
par  11-13  38b-39c  / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 12-13 662c-663c; ch
18-22  664d-666c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, A I, rep
I 213c-214c; a 2, rep 4 214d-215a,c;

[338b]
280 THE GREAT IDEAS 'Sb to 6a Q 95, A I, ANS 226c-227c; a 3 228c-229b; q
97, aa 2-3 236d-238b 21 Dante: Diviyie Comedy, hell, xvi
[64-78]
23a-b;  purgatory,  vi  [58-151]  61b-62c;  paradise,  XV [97]-xvi [154]
129b-132a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i, 78b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
22a-c;  42b-43d;  46b47c;  63d-64b; 131b-132a; 524b-525d 27 Shakespeare:
Ha?nlet, act hi, sc iv
[161170] 56b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 78d-80a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
ii,  46b-c;  part III, 48b-49d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 6 173a; 97-98 190b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 8-12 105d-107d passim;
sect  20  110c111a;  sect  25 llld-112a; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 71, 197d 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 66, 480b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  303d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk v, 21d-22b; bk VII, 50c;
BK  XIX,  138c-140d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 347a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  337c-338c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92c-94b; 101b;
291d-292d;  409d-413b passim 41 Gibbon: Decline afid Fall, 389h-390h esp
389d   42   Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b;  387d-388a  43
Federalist:  number  49,  159d-160a;  number  60, 184d 43 Mill: Liberty,
269b-c;  293b-302c passim / Utilitarianism, 449c-d; 458a-b; 460a-461c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 150152 56c-57b; par 164 59a-d;
par  257  80b;  ADDITIONS,  96-97  132c-133a;  106  134a / Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  271c-273c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 313a-314b;
317a-d;  328c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v, 221b-d; bk VIII,
303a-305b  esp  303d-304b;  309b-c;  bk  XII,  542d; bk xv, 640d-641a 53
James: Psychology, 733b-734b 54 Fke^jt): Sexual Enlightenment ofChildren
119a122a,c  passim  /  War  and  Death, 757d-759d / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  799c-801a  esp  800c-801a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,
834b-c;  843c; 854d-855a 6. Custom in relation to law 6a. Constitutions,
social  contracts,  positive  laws,  and manners as conventions 7 Plato:
Sy7nposium,  154a-c  /  Crito,  216d219a,c  /  Republic,  bk h, 311b-c /
Theaetetus,  528b-c;  531a-532a  /  Statesman,  600a-b  /  Laws,  bk HI,
665c-666c;  bk vii, 716a-b; 718b-c; 730d-731d; bk viii, 736c-737a; bk x,
760a-b 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 12
[173=^27-31] 238c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
[ii34'*i81135^7] 382c-383a
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 16

[339a]
6b to la Chaptir 14: CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 281
[1287^5-7] 486a / Rhetoric, bk
i,   ch   i  ^  [iT^y^i17]  617c-d  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  33d'34b  /
Themistocles, 99b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, hk hi, par 15 17a-b/ City
of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  4 190d; uk xix, en 17, 522d-523a; ch 24 528b c 20
Aquinas:  Siimmu Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, AA 2-3 227c-229b; a 4, ans
229b-230c  23HoBBi:s:  Leviathan,  part  1,  78b-c; part h, 99a-101b csp
100c,  lOla-b;  140b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-48b:  93b-94a; 102ab:
281a-283c;  426a-b; 462d 463b; 519a-520b 27 Shakespeare: Kifig Lear, act
i, sc ii
[1-22]
247d-248a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part ii, 45b-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 291-338 225a-233a csp 294
225b-226b,  312  229a,  325-326 230b-231a 35 Locke: Civil Govermnent, ch
ii,  sect 12 27d28a; sect 14-15 28b-c; ch vii, sect 94-cH VIII, sect 122
46a-53c  esp ch viii, sect 95-99 46c-47c; ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch xiii,
sect  157-158  61c-62b:  ch  xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch XIX, sect 243 81d 36
Swift:  Gulliver, part i, 22a-23a; 28a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  i,  Ic-d;  2d-3d;  bk  xix, 140C'142b; bk xxvi, 214d215a; bk xxviii,
240b;  261a-262a,c  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk i 387b,d-394d esp
391a-d  40  Gibbon: Declifie and Fall, 616d'617a 41 Gibbon: Declifie and
Fall,  71d-73a  passim;  75b-d;  86d-89c  esp 87a, 87d 42 Kant: Scie?ice
ofRight,  419a-420b;  435a-436c;  437c-d;  450d-451c  43  Declaration of
Independence: [7-28] la-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 269c-d; 270c-271b; 305b-312a
passim,  esp  307 b-d / Representative Government, 327b,d-332d passim 44
B0SWEI.1.:  Johnson,  276a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
211  70a-c; par 217 72b-c; par 234 75d-76a / Philosophy of History, part
ii, 271c-273c; part IV, 365b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1972-1979] 46b-47a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a esp 294a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto, Ml3.-\i 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 680b684a €>h.
The force of custom with respect to law 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
[877-911]
347b-c  /  Hecuba  [798-805] 359d 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 97d-98a 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk iv, 344b-d;BK vii,401c-d / Laws, bk hi, 665c-666c;
bk  iv,  678d-679a;  BK V, 692b-c; bk vii, 713c-714c; 716a-b; 718b-c; bk
viii,  736c-737a  8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3 [995*4-6] 513c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  6 448c-449b; bk ii, ch 8 [1269^14-23]
465b; bk hi, ch 16

[339b]
[i28/'5-8] 486a; BK v,ch 8 [i307*'3o-38] 509d510a; CH 9 [1:510*12-19] 512b-c
14  Phtarch:  Lycurgus,  36b-37b; 38b d; 46b c; 47a-48a / Lycurgus-Numa,
63d-64a  /  Solon,  73d-74b  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 57d-58b; bk iv,
67d-68a;  bk  xi,  106a-107b;  bk  xir,  lllb-c;  BK  XIV,  151d-152c 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b; BK V, par 14 30c-31a / City
of God, bk xv, CH 16 410b-411d 20 Aquinas: Sumrna Theologica, part i-ii,
q 95, A 3 228c-229b; q 96, a 2, ans 231c-232b; q 97, AA 2-3 236d-238b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 78b-c; part ii, 108c; 130d-131a; 131c; 136d
25   Montaigne:   Essays,   47a-51a;   131b-132a;   283c;  462c-465c  27
Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, sc I [1-4] 178d-179a 30 Bacon:
New  Atlantis,  205d-206b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part ii, 45b-d 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  308 228b; 312 229a; 325-326 230b-231a 35 Locke: Human
Understatiding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  10-13  230b-231c  36 Swift:
Gulliver, part i, 22a-23a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3c-d; BK
X,  65b;  bk xiv, 106b; bk xviii, 127c; BK xix, 135b-136b; 137c-140c; bk
xxi,  168d169a;  bk  xxiii, 188b-189a; 189d; 197c-198a; BK XXV, 212a; bk
xxvi,  218d;  221a-c; 223a-c; bk XXVIII, 237a-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
324d / Social Contract, BK II, 402b-c; 406c-d; bk iii, 419d-420a; bk IV,
434b-435a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 464c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  77c-d;  80a;  96b-c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  448d-449c 43
Declaration of Independence: [15-22] lb 43 Federalist: number 27, 95C-d;
number 49, 159d-160a 43 Mill: Liberty, 270c-271b; 308b
[fn
i]  /  Representative  Government,  329d-330a;  330d-331a  44 B0SWEI.1.:
Johnson, 204c-205b; 276a-b; 277b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par 257 80b; par 274 92a; par 339 110b; par 355 112d113a; additions, 132
137d-138b / Philosophy of History, part ii, 271c-273c; 277c-d; part III,
294c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1972-1979]
46b47a  48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 292a-297a esp 294a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  317a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk hi, 137c-139a 7. Custom in
social  life la. Custom as unifying a community 6 Herodotus: History, bk
viii,  287c-d  7  Plato: Laws, bk iv, 678c-679a; BKvii,716a-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk xii [791-842] 375a-376b

[340a]
(7.  Custom  in  social  life.  la.  Custom as unifying a community.) 14
Plutarch:   Lycurgus,^6h-c   /   Alexander,  562h'  563c  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 15 17a-b/ City ofGod, bk xix, ch 7 515a-c; ch
17,  522d523a;  ch  24  528b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, CH 25-26
649b-650a;  ch 39-40 654c-656a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  95,  A  3  228c-229b; q 97, aa 2-3 236d-238b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, vi [58151] 61b-62c; paradise, xv
[97]-xvi
[154]
129b-132a passim 23 Hobbes: Letnathan, part i, 54c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
46b-47a;  131b-132a  30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  205d-206b 31 Descartes:
Discourse, part ii, 45b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xv 448c
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofhatvs, bk
xix,  137cd;  138c-140c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, la; 15d-16c 41
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 389c-d 43 Federalist: number 2, 31c-d; number
27,  95c-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  424c-425b; 428b-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  274  92a / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  176b;  part  i,  240d-241a;  part  ii,  260b-c;  277c;
280b-281b  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 421a-b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi,  254c-260a;  263a-265d;  bk  vii,  288c-290b; bk x,
403a405a;  bk  xi,  499c-500c;  bk xii, 533a-534d; 538d-539c; 556c-557b;
epilogue  i,  647b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, epilogue, 406a-c
54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  756a-d  lb.  Custom  as  a barrier between
communities  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  vii  [27-36]  218b  5  Aeschylus :
Suppliant  Maidens  [825-965]  lld13b  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 2a;
31d-32a;  bk iv, 137a-138c; 143b-144b; bk vih, 287c-d 7 Plato: Latvs, bk
iv, 678c-679a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[520-543]
117b-118a;  BK  IX  [590-620]  295a-b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46b-c /
Themistocles,  99b-c  / Marcus Cato, 287d-288c / Alexander, 562b-563c 15
Tacitus:  Histories,  bk v, 295b-296a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch  7  515a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 14 663c-d 22 Chaucer: Tale
of  Man  of  Law  [4638-4644]  238a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 96a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  44b-c;  46b-47a;  91d-98b  esp  93b-94a; 477d-478a;
524b-d 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc hi [154173] 325b / Merchant
of Venice, act i, sc hi

[340b]
282 THE GREAT IDEAS Ih to Id
[41-53] 410a; [106-138] 410c-411a; act iv, sc i
[35-62] 425d-426a
30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  205d-207b  32 Milton : Areopagitica, 385b 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  21b-23a;  25b-26a;  part  iv,  149b-150b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  xv, llOa-b; BK XIX, 139c-140a; bk xx,
146a-b;  bk  xxiv,  206c;  207c-208a,c;  bk  xxv,  209a-b  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  355b-c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 15d-16b; 179d-183a esp
179d,  180d-181a; 207b-211c esp 208b-d; 638d-639a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   224b-225a;   423d   43   Mill:   Liberty,   300a-302c  passim  /
Representative  Government,  424c-428a  passim,  esp  42  7d;  437b-c 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 60b-65a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vih, 309b-c;
BK  IX,  362d'363a;  bk  xi,  515c-521c passim 52 Y^osto-evsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  epilogue, 406a-c 54 Freud: War and Death, 755c-757a passim /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  788b-c  7c.  Custom as determining
economic  needs  or  standards  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  318a-d 14
Plutarch:  Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Lysander^ 361a-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi,  58b-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 131b-132a; 489b-490c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  v,  sect  46-49  35a-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  184  68b-d  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit ofLaws, bk xviii, 128bc; BK XIX, 136c-137b; bk xxi,
153a-c  39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk i, 10b-12c; bk v, 383c-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  17d-18a;  28d-29b;  44d-45c;  66c-67a;  81b-c;  112a-c Id. The
influence  of  custom  on  the  liberty  of the individual 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,396c-d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 22a-c; 42b-c;
46b-47c;  143c-144a  ;  307b  ;  424d-426b  esp  426a-b  27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus,  act  ii, sc ii [136164] 365c-366a; sc iii [119-131] 367b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit ofLaws, bk xii, 84b,d; BK XIX, 138a-c; 142a; 145b-c
38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324a-b 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk i, 41a 43
Mill:   Liberty,   269b-271d;   293b-302c;  307b312a  passim  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  355  112d-113a;  additions,  123
136d-137a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  279c-281b;  part III,
310d-311b; part iv, 333b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 303a-305b
54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 20c-d / General
Introduction,   452c-d;   573c  /  War  and  Death,  755d;  757c-759d  /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 776b-802a,c

[341a]
8  to  % Chapter 14: CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 283 esp 780d-781d, 783b 785a,
788d  789b,  796b  c,  799a-801c  / New Introductory Lectures, 853a b 8.
Custom  in  relation to order and progress: the factors of tradition and
invention  7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 344b-d / Laws, bk ii, 654c-655b; bk
iv, 678c-679a; bk v, 692b-c; BK VII, 717d-718c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk  ii,  ch 3 [995''3-6] 513c 10 Hippocrates: Fractures, par i 74b,d-75a
14  Plutarch:  Agis  648b,d-656d passim / Cleomenes, 663 b-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  xi,  105d-107b;  bk  xii,  lllb-c;  bk  XIV,  151d-152c  16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  506a-b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-850a  passim  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica^ part
i-ii,  q  97,  A  2  236d-237b  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xiv
[91126]  74c-75a; xxviii [76-126] 96d-97c; paradise, xv-xvi 128b'132a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch vi, 9b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 154b-c
25  Montaigne: Essays, 46b-51a; 131b-132a; 143c-144a; 208b-c; 318c-319b;
458b-c; 462c465c 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act ii, sc hi [119128] 367b
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, first day, 166cd; third day, 203c-d 28
Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 285b-c / Circulation ofthe Blood, 306a-c;
319c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation, 364a-c; 457b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  14c-15d  esp  15a-b; 16c; 29b-c; 65b-c / Novum Organum, bk I,
aph  39-46  109c-110c; aph 74 118b; aph 77 118d-119b; aph 90 124d-125a /
New  Atlantis,  205d-207b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part ii, 45c-d 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b;  325  230b231a / Vacuum, 355a-358b 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect 157 61c-d; ch XIX, sect 223 76c-d
/  Human  Understanding, 85a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, pref 404a-b
36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 105a-106b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk v, 22a-b; bk XIV, 104c; bk xix, i37c-138c; 139b-140a; BK XXVI, 217b-c
38  Rousseau: Inequality, 324a-b / Social Contract, BK II, 402b-403a; bk
iii,  419d-420a  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 96b-97b esp 97a-b 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 23d-24a; 459a-c 42 Kk-^t: Judgement, 513d-514b
43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [15-22] lb 43 Federalist: number 14,
62a-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  293b-302c  esp  300a-302c  / Rjepresentative
Government,  329a-b;  330d-331a;  344a-b;  352d-353a: 357c; 377b-378a 44
BoswELh: Johnson, 189d-190b

[341b]
45  Lavoisii.r:  Elements of Chemistry, part i, 33a 46 Hecll: Philosophy
of  Right, part hi, par 274 92a; par 355 112d-113a; additions, 166 145bc
/ Philosophy of History, intro, 166d; 187d188b; PART I, 209b; 222a 224a;
235d  236c;  257a-c;  part  ii,  260b-c;  280b 281b; part iv, 315d-316b;
351d-353a;  367a-b  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [796^-7964]  194a  48
Melville:  Moby Dic{, 228b-229b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 323a 50 Marx:
Capital, 6d-7a; 234a-235a; 239b241a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
426b428d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 132b-c; bk VI, 239a-240d; bk
vhi,  305b-d;  307d-309c;  BK  IX,  354b-c;  bk  x, 403a-c; bk xv, 639c;
EPILOGUE  I,  645a-646c;  647b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  79b 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  776c778a;  785c / New Introductory
Lectures, 834c; 849d 9. The bearing of custom on thought 9a. Custom as a
source  of  opinion  and  belief: its influence on judgments of beauty 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 44b; bk ii, 56c-d; BK III, 92c-93a; 97d-98a;
bk iv, 137a; 142c; 144a-b; 157b 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 116b-d / Republic, bk
hi,  333b-334b / Laws, bk hi, 675c-676b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ii,
ch 3 [994^32995^14] 513c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281*43-
^10]  479b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 1:5 16c-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  10,  661d-662a;  ch  12-14  662c-663d;  ch 18-22
664d-666c passim 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi [73117] 69c-70a;
xxvi  [91-126]  93d-94b  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza
4-7  22a-b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 78b-c; 96a; part IV, 274b-c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 12d-13b; bk iv, 273d-274a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  43d-44c;  46b-48b;  80bd;  93b;  143c-144a; 208b-c;
209c-212a  esp 211b-c; 230b-231a; 259d-261c; 281a-284c passim; 497d-502c
passim 26 Shakespeare: As You Lil^e It, act ii, sc i
[1-20] 603c-d
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [454-471] 45a 28 Harvey: Motion of
the Heart, 285b-c / Circulation of the Blood, 306a-c; 319c-d / On Animal
Generation, 411c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, xia-xvid; part ii,
251a-252b  30  Bacon:  Adva?]cement  of  Learning,  61b-c  31 Descartes;
Discourse, part ii, 45b-46c

[342a]
(9.  The bearing of custom on thought. 9a. Custom as a source of opinion
and  belief:  its  influ'  ence  on  judgments  of  beauty.^  32 Milton:
Areopagitica, 408b-409a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 33 176b; 89-96 189b-190a; 98
190b;  245 218b; 252 219b-220a; 291-338 225a-233a passim 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  85a-c;  bk  i,  CH  II,  SECT  8  105d-106a;  sect 20-26
110c-112b  passim; bk ii, ch xxxiii, sect 5-18 248d-251c passim 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 132, 509c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
i,  21b-23a;  27b-28a;  PART  II,  76b-77a;  part  hi,  95a-b 36 Sterne:
Tristram   Shandy,  309b-310a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  223a-225a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk xix, 135bd; 136c; 139b-140c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  296b  -c;  464c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 221b-222a /
Judgement,  513d-514b  43  Federalist:  number 49, 159d-160a; number 60,
184d  43  Mill:  Liberty, 269b-271d 44 B0SWEL.L: Johnson, 202b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 160 142d-143a / Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  265c-266a;  273c;  part iv, 351d-353a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
60b-65a;  229a-b  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 95a-d / Descent of Man,
302a-b; 462d-463a; 569c; 571b-577d esp 577b-d 50 Marx-Engels: CoTmnunist
Manifesto^ 427ab; 428b-d CROSS-REFERENCES

[342b]
284  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9a  to  9i?  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vi,
247a-248a;  260b-c;  bk  viii,  304c-d;  309b-c;  313d-314a;  318a-320b;
324b-325a;  bk  x,  403a-405a;  bk XIV, 611a-c; epilogue i, 645a-646c 53
James:  Psychology,  642a;  886b-887a 54 Freud: Psycho-Analytic Therapy,
125a-126d / General Introduction, 452c-453a / New Introductory Lectures,
849d;  864a-865a  9b,  The conventionality of truth: postulation, choice
among  hypotheses  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  85d-86d;  107d-109a / Phaedrus,
131b-133b  /  Theaetetus,  525c-528c esp 528b-c; 531a-532a 8 Aristotle :
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72^5-14] 99b /
Metaphysics,  bk  iv, ch 5-6 528c-531c 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  505a-506a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  65c 25
Montaigne:   E^/^jy^,   44b-c;   46b-d;240c-246a;   259c-261c;   267c-d;
276b-278a;  281a-284c;  318a-319b  27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii
[2'^^-2'yj]  43b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 57d-58b / Novum
Organum,  bk i, aph 41 109c-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 46b-c 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b  esp  182b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
118a-119a  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  362c-d  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, pref, 2b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i,
645a646c  53  James:  Psychology,  884^-886a 54 Freud: Instincts, 412a-b
'iTO<:-ba  For:  Other discussions of the distinction between nature and
convention, and for the examination of related distinctions, see Art 2c;
Habit  1,7;  Nature  2a—2c.  The  consideration  of  the natural and the
conventional  in  language  and  society,  see Family i ; Language 2-2b;
Nature  2b, 5c; Sign and Symbol la— if; State 3b-3d. Applications of the
distinction  between nature and convention in law and jurisprudence, see
Justice  6a-6b,  9a, loa; Law 4-4!!, 5c, 7c; and for the relation of law
to  custom  and habit, see Habit 7; Law ^L The discussion of custom as a
conservative  force in relation to progress, see Change 12b; History 4b;
Progress  4a,  5.  The bearing of custom and convention on the issues of
morality,  see Good and Evil 3a, 6d; Nature 5a; Opinion 6a; Relation 6c;
Universal  and  Particular 7b. The relativity of truth to the customs of
the  time  and place, and for the theory that the foundations of science
are  conventional,  see  Hypothesis  3;  Knowledge  4b,  5c; Opinion 3c;
Principle  30(2),  5;  Relation 6b; Truth J-jh; Universal and Particular
7a. Matters relevant to the influence of custom on taste or judgments of
beauty,  see  Beauty 5; Nature 5d; Relation 6c; Universal and Particular
7c.  The  significance  of  nature  and custom in the sphere of economic
activity, see Nature 5b; Wealth i, lob.

[343a]
ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not incliuicd in Great Boof^s
ofthe  Western  World,  but  relevant lo the idea and topics with whicii
this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection,  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  F.  Bacon.  "Of  Custom  and  Education Montesquieu. Persian
Letters  Hume. Of Some Remarf^able Customs n Essays A. Smith. The Theory
of  Moral  Sentiments,  part  v Sterne. A Sentimental Journey Hegel. The
Phenomenology  of  Mind, v (b) Melville. Typee . Omoo DosTOEVsKY. A Raiv
Youth  Freud.  ''Civilized'"  Sexual  Morality  and Modern Nervousness .
Totem  and  Taboo  Horace. Satires Juvenal. Satires Beowulf Volsung Saga
Spenser.  The Faerie Queene Gracian y Morales. The Art of Worldly Wisdom
Browne.  Hydriotaphia  Pepys.  Diary Le Sage. The Adventures of Gil Bias
Defoe. Moll Flanders Richardson. Pamela Chesterfield. Letters to His Son
Voltaire.  "Customs  .  .  .  Usages,"  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary
Smollett.  The  Expedition  of Humphry Clinker Goldsmith. The Citizen of
the   World   .  She  Stoops  to  Conquer  Bentham.  a  Comment  on  the
Commentaries,  sect  13-20  Sheridan. The Schoolfor Scandal Lamb. On the
Custom  of  Hissing at the Theatres Austen. Pride and Prejudice Manzoni.
The Betrothed T. Carlyle. Sartor Resartus, bk i Lermontov. a Hero of Our
Own Times

[343b]
Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND CONVENTION 285 Savigny. Vom Beruf unserer Zeit
fi'ir  Gesetzgebung  imd Rechtswissenschaft jural Relations Gogol. Taras
Bulba  .  Dead  Souls  Dickens.  Blea}{^ House Thackeray. The History of
Henry  Esmond,  Esq.  LoTZE.  Microcosmos,  bk vi, ch 3 Flaubert. Madame
Bovary  Trollope. Barchester Towers Daudet. Lettersfrom My Mill Bagehot.
Physics  and  Politics  Tylor.  Primitive Culture H. James. Daisy Miller
Meredith.  The  Egoist L. Stephen. The Science of Ethics Maine. Anciejjt
Law  .  Lectures on the Early History of Institutions . Dissertations on
Early  Law and Customs Lang. Custom and Myth Wundt. Ethics, part i, ch 3
Frazer.  The Golden Bough Tarde. The Laws of Imitation KovALEVSKY. Modcm
Customs  and  Ancient Laws of Russia Duguit. Uetat, le droit objectif et
la   hi   positive  Mann.  Buddenbroo\s  Westerm.\rck.  The  Origin  and
Detclopment  of  the  Moral Ideas Sumner. Folkways T. Veblen. The Vested
Interests  and  the  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts, ch 2 T. S. Eliot.
"Tradition  and  the  Individual  Talent,"  in  The  Sacred  Wood Dewey.
Reconstruction  in  Philosophy, en i, 5 . Human Nature and Conduct, part
i-ii S. Lewis, Babbitt Undset. Kristin Lavransdatter Vinogradoff, Custom
and  Right  Malinowski.  Crime and Custom in Savage Society . The Sexual
Life of Savages Diamond. Primitive Law

[344a]
DEFINITION  has  been  variously  defined  in the tradition of the great
books.  These  diverse  conceptions  of  what a definition is raise many
issues.  At  one  extreme,  writers  Uke  Hobbes look upon definition as
nothing more than an attempt to say what a word means—how it has been or
is  being  used. At the other, writers like Aquinas regard definition as
that  act  of  the  mind  by which it expresses the nature of a thing or
formulates  its  essence. In one technical view associated with the name
of  Aristotle,  to define is to state the genus and differentia by which
the  species  of a thing is constituted. In another theory of definition
advanced   by   Locke  and  others,  any  combination  of  traits  which
distinguishes  one  class  or  kind  of  thing  from another defines the
character common to all members of that class. In still another view, to
be  found in Spinoza, definition consists in giving the cause or genesis
of  a  thing,  in  saying  how  the  thing  originated  or was produced.
Sometimes  definition  through  causes employs the final rather than the
efficient or productive cause, and characterizes the thing by the end it
naturally  serves.  And  sometimes,  as  with William James, definitions
simply  express  the purposes or interests which we have in mind when we
classify  things to suit ourselves. In the tradition of the liberal arts
of grammar, rhetoric, and logic, these various conceptions of definition
are  connected  with  controversies concerning the power and activity of
the  human  mind,  the relation of language to thought, the structure of
science   or,   more   generally,  the  nature  of  knowledge,  and  the
constitution  of  reality, with particular reference to the existence of
universals  and  individuals  and  their  relation to one another. These
connections appear in the thought of

[344b]
Chapter 15: DEFINITION \' INTRODUCTION Aristotle and Spinoza, Hobbes and
Locke,  Aquinas  and  William  James.  Their  views  of the way in which
definitions  should  be constructed or their conceptions of the function
of  definitions  determine and reflect lines of agreement and opposition
on  many  other  matters.  The  use of definitions in the great works of
mathematics  and  natural science—by Euclid, Descartes, Galileo, Newton,
Lavoisier, and Darwin tends to exemplify now one, now another, theory of
definition. Modern discussions of the nature of science and mathematics,
especially  discussions  influenced  by  the development of mathematical
logic—from  Whewell, Mill, and Poincare to Whitehead, Russell, and Dewey
focus  critical  attention  on  the nature and role of definitions. Many
other  chapters  provide an illuminating context for topics discussed in
this one, especially the chapters on Language and Logic, Idea, Principle
and  Reasoning,  Philosophy  and  Science,  and Truth. Though the issues
concerning  definition cannot be resolved apart from this larger context
of   controversy   about  the  mind,  reality,  and  knowledge,  we  can
nevertheless  formulate  these  issues  in isolation. But in doing so we
ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  they  can be more readily understood in
proportion   as   they   are   seen  in  the  fight  of  other  relevant
considerations. There is, first of all, the question about the object of
definition.  What  is being defined when men make or defend definitions?
This  question  broadens  into the problem of nominal as opposed to real
definitions.  That is a complex problem which raises a number of further
questions.  Are all definitions arbitrary, expressing the conventions of
our  speech  or  the particular purpose we have in mind when we classify
things ? Or do some, if not all, definitions ex286

[345a]
press  the  real  natures of the things defined? Do they classify things
according  to  natural  kinds which have reality apart from our mind and
its  interests? These issues are in turn related to the issue concerning
the limits of definition and its ultimate principles—whether all things,
or  only some, are definable, and whether the indefinable terms, without
which definition is itself impossible, can be arbitrarily chosen or must
always be terms of a certain sort. The sense in which definitions may be
true  or  false  and  the  sense  in which they cannot be either, have a
bearing  on  all  these  issues;  and through them all run the divergent
conceptions of how definitions can or should be constructed. When in the
course  of  argument one man dismisses the opinion of another by saying,
"That is just a matter of definition," the usual implication is that the
rejected  opinion  has  no truth apart from the way in which the man who
proposed  it uses words. He may even be accused of begging the question,
of  framing  definitions  which  implicitly  contain  the  conclusion he
subsequently  draws  from them. The underlying supposition here seems to
be  expressed by Pascal when, in his essay On Geometrical Demonstration,
he  asserts  that  "there is great freedom of definition and definitions
are never subject to contradiction, for nothing is more permissible than
to  give  whate\-er  name  we  please to a thing we have clearly pointed
out."   He   calls   "true  definitions"  those  which  are  "arbitrary,
permissible,  and geometrical." The only restriction he would place upon
our  freedom to make definitions is that "we must be careful not to take
advantage of our freedom to impose names by gi^'ing the same name to two
different  things." And even this case, he claims, is permissible "if we
avoid  confusion by not extending the consequences of one to the other."
If  we are free to make whatever definitions we please, it would seem to
follow  that  definitions cannot be matters of argument; and differences
of  opinion which result from differences in definition would seem to be
irreconcilable  by any appeal to reason or to fact. Such a conception of
definition as verbal does not seem to prevent Hobbes from holding

[345b]
Chapter   15:   DEFINITION   287   thatdefinitionsarefirstprinciplcs  or
foundations  of science. "In Geometry (which is the onlv science that it
hath pleased (jod hitherto to bestow on mankind), men begin," he writes,
"at  settling  the  signification  of  their  words;  which  settling of
significations,  they call Definitions'^ and place them in the beginning
of their reckoning." This shows, Hobbes thinks, "how necessary it is for
any  man  that  aspires  to true knowledge to examine the definitions of
former  authors;  and either to correct them, where they are negligently
set  down;  or  to  make  them  himself.  For  the errors of definitions
multiply  themselves,  according as the reckoning proceeds." For Hobbes,
then,  definition  is verbal; yet definitions can also be true or false,
and  on  the  truth  of  definitions  depends  the  distinction  between
knowledge  and  opinion.  "In  the  right definition of names," he says,
"lies  the  first  use  of speech; which is the acquisition of science."
Only  when discourse "begins with the definitions of words" can it reach
conclusions  that  have the character of knowledge. "If the first ground
of such discourse be not definitions . . . then the end or conclusion is
opinion."  Hobbes accurately reports the nature of geometry when he says
that  in  that  science  definitions serve as principles in reasoning or
proof. The words "by definition" mark one of the steps in many Euclidean
proofs.  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  proceeding in the geometrical manner,
place  definitions  at the head of their works as ultimate principles to
be  used  in  validating  their  conclusions.  But, unlike Hobbes, these
writers do not seem to regard their definitions as merely verbal. Euclid
goes  further,  as  we  shall  presently see, and offers what amounts to
proofs  of  his  definitions,  or at least of their geometrical reality.
Aristotle  and  Aquinas  certainly  take  the  position  not  only  that
definitions  are  principles,  but  also that definitions themselves are
capable  of  being  demonstrated.  But  they  complicate  the  matter by
insisting  that  definitions  are  neither  true  nor  false,  since, as
Aristotle  says,  they  do  not  involve  "the  assertion  of  something
concerning  something."  At  least  two questions seem to be involved in
this  familiar  dispute  about  the arguability of definitions and their
role in argumentation. To avoid confusion, they should be kept distinct.
One is the question of the truth and falsity of

[346a]
288  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  definitions.  It  should be separated from, even
though   it  is  related  to,  the  other  question  about  whether  all
definitions are nominal, i.e., concerned only with assigning meanings to
the  words  by  which  we name things. To understand what is involved in
this  second  question,  it  may  be helpful to consider the relation of
words,  thoughts,  and things in the process of definition. A DICTIONARY
IS  supposcd  to  Contain  definitions.  It  does in part—insofar as the
meaning  of  any  word  is  expressed in a phrase containing other words
which  are  not synonyms for the word in question. The combined meanings
of  these  other  words determine the meaning of the word being defined.
For  example,  one definition of the word "brother" is "a male relative,
the  son  of the same parents or parent." Another is "a male member of a
religious  order." These two definitions give different meanings for the
same  word.  The  dictionary  is  here recording two ways in which, as a
matter  of  historical fact, the word has been used. It has been and can
be  used  in still other ways. No one of these definitions can be called
"right" and the others "wrong." Dictionary definitions seem to be verbal
and  arbitrary in a number of ways. That the word "brother" should carry
any  of  the  meanings  which  the  dictionary records is an accident of
English usage. It is arbitrary that that particular sound or mark should
be  the  name for a male relative who is the son of the same parents. It
would be equally arbitrary to restrict the meaning of the word "brother"
to any one of its definitions. Nothing about a word limits the number of
distinct  meanings  with which it can be used. As Locke says, "every man
has  so  inviolable  a  liberty  to  make  words stand for what ideas he
pleases,  that  no one hath the power to make others have the same ideas
in  their minds that he has, when they use the same words that he does."
A  word  is  thus  a  conventional sound or mark, which can be given any
meaning  convention  assigns  to  it.  When that meaning is expressed in
other  words,  we  have  a  \'erbal definition, and such definitions are
certainly nominal in this sense— that they state the meaning of

[346b]
But  are  they  merely nominal ? Are they entirely arbitrary ? That this
word should be used to name this thing is arbitrary, but that when it is
so  used  a  certain definition also applies may not be arbitrary. Among
the  several  verbal definitions of a word, the one which applies in any
particular  case  will  depend upon the character of the thing which the
word  is  used  to  name. For example, if John and James are sons of the
same  parents,  the  name  "brother"  applies,  but  not  with  the same
definition which is required for the application of the name to Mark and
Matthew who, unrelated by blood, are members of the same monastic order.
What the word "brother" is used to mean may be arbitrary, but when it is
used  now  of  John  and James, and now of Mark and Matthew, it would be
misapplied  if  it  did  not  carry  the  appropriate  definition. Which
definition  is  appropriate  in each case does not seem to be arbitrary,
since  that appropriateness depends not on our will but on the objective
facts of the case— the actual relation of the persons called "brothers."
Precisely  because  the w ord is used to name a thing, the definition of
the  word  as  so  used does more than state the meaning of the word. It
states  something  about  the  character of the thing named. Definitions
remain  merely  verbal  only  so  long  as the words they define are not
actually used to name or to signify things in some way. Whenever a thing
is  named  or  signified,  the definition which gives the meaning of the
word  must also signify something about the nature of the thing. "In the
natural  order  of  ideas,"  writes Lavoisier, "the name of the class or
genus  is  that  which  expresses  a quality common to a great number of
individuals;  the  name  of  the  species,  on the contrary, expresses a
quality  peculiar  to  certain  individuals only. These distinctions are
not,  as  some  may imagine, merely metaphysical, but are established by
Nature." Yet it may be said that the definition is still nominal, for it
depends  entirely  on  the  meanings  of the words which express it. For
example, one definition of "brother" involves the meanings of such words
as "male" and "relative," "son," "parent," and "same." If we were to

[347a]
Chapter  15:  look  these  words  up in a dictionary, the definitions ue
found  would  involve the meanings of still other words, and so on in an
endlessly  circular  fashion.  Furthermore, we would find the account of
certain words, such as "relative" and "same," somewhat unsatisfactory as
definitions   because   the  meaning  of  the  defining  \\  ords  would
immediately  involve  the meaning of the word to be defined. To say that
"same"  means  "not  other"  or "not different" seems the same as saying
"same"  means  "same."  Yet  we  must  know  the  meaning of "same," for
otherwise  we  could  not  understand  the  meaning of "brother," in the
definition  of  which  the  word "same" appears. That some words seem to
have  indefinable  meanings  suggests  that  not all meanings are merely
verbal or nominal, and that the meaning of every word cannot be found in
the  meanings  of  other  words.  In  the Preface to his dictionary, Dr.
Johnson  observes  that  "as  nothing  can  be  proved  but by supposing
something  intuitively  known, and evident without proof, so nothing can
be  defined  but  by the use of words too plain to admit of definition."
The  circularity  of  the  dictionars^  is  thus  avoided. When we trace
meanings  from  one  word  to  another,  we  finally come to words whose
meanings  we  seem  to  understand  immediately,  or  at  least  without
reference  to  the  meanings  of  other  words.  Just  as the arbitrary'
character of verbal definitions seems to be removed by the consideration
of  the  things  which  words  name  or  signify,  so the purely nominal
character  of  definitions  seem  to  be removed by recourse to meanings
which  are  understood without further verbal explanation—meanings which
may in fact be incapable of such explanation. Not all writers agree with
Dr.  Johnson.  All  of  them  would  admit  that some words must be left
undefined  in  order  to  define  others,  but  which  shall  be used as
indefinable  and  which  shall  be defined is, in the opinion of some, a
matter  of  choice.  It  is not something which can be determined by the
order  intrinsic  to  our  ideas  or  meanings.  The  issue  between the
mathematical  logicians  who  think  that  w^e  are  free  to choose our
primitive  or indefinable terms, and those who, like Aquinas, think that
certain terms, such as being, same, one, and rela-

[347b]
DEFINITION  289  tion,  impose  themselves upon our minds as principles,
leaving  us  no  choice,  parallels  the issue between the view that the
principles  of  a  science consist of postulates voluniarilv assumed and
the view that they are axiomatic or unavoidable. Far from regarding such
basic  indefinable  terms  as clearest and most indisputable in meaning,
Spinoza  thinks  that  "these  terms signify ideas in the highest degree
confused." For him "the true definition of any one thing . . . expresses
nothing  but the nature of the thing defined." But to arrive at the true
definition,  it  is  necessary  to  discover the cause of the thing. For
"every  existing  thing,"  he  writes,  "there  is some certain cause by
reason  of which it exists." This cause "must either be contained in the
nature  itself and definition of the existing thing ... or it must exist
outside  the  thing."  In  the  latter case, the definition of the thing
always  involves  a  statement  of  the external cause of its existence.
Accordingly,  Spinoza  rejects  the  traditional  type  of  Aristotelian
definition  as  purely  subjective—a  matter  of  individual memor)' and
imagination. "Those who have more frequentlv looked with admiration upon
the  stature  of  men,"  he  writes, "by the name man will understand an
animal  of  erect  stature,  while  those  who have been in the habit of
fixing  their  thoughts on something else will form another common image
of  men, describing man, for instance, as an animal capable of laughter,
a  biped  without  feathers,  a  rational animal, and so on; each person
forming  universal  images of things according to the temperament of his
own  body." However the issue between Spinoza and Aristotle is resolved,
both  seem  to  agree that more is involved in the process of definition
than  the  statement  of  verbal  equivalences.  "We have a definition,"
Aristotle  says,  "not  where  we  have a w'ord and formula identical in
meaning  (for  in  that  case  all  formulae  or sets of w ords would be
definitions)." The formula which is expressed in a phrase or combination
of  words  must  state  the  nature  or essence of a thing, not just the
meaning  of  a  word.  "The  formula ... in which the term itself is not
present but its meaning is expressed, this," according to Aristotle, "is
tlie formula of the essence of each thing" and, he

[348a]
290  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  adds,  "there is an essence only of those things
whose  formula  is  a  definition."  Even  supposing  the truth of these
statements,  which Hobbes or Locke certainly would question, the problem
of  real  as opposed to nominal definition requires further examination.
To  explore  the  matter  further,  let  us  take two of the most famous
definitions  to be found in the great books. Both are definitions of man
—  "featherless  biped"  and  "rational  animal." As we have seen, these
definitions  must  remain purely nominal—only stating the meaning of the
word  "man"—  until  that  word  is used to name some kind of thing. If,
however,  we apply the word "man" to existing entities which combine the
characteristics   of   having   two  legs  and  lacking  feathers,  then
"featherless  biped"  defines,  not the word "man," but a class of real,
that  is,  existing things. In addition to being nominal, the definition
is now also real in the sense that the class or kind which it determines
has  existing  members.  That  animals  exist may similarly be a fact of
observation.  But  "animal"  is  only  one of the two terms in the other
nominal  definition  of  "man."  In order to make "rational animal" more
than  a  nominal  definition, it is necessary to verify the existence of
animals   which  possess  a  certain  characteristic,  rationality,  not
possessed  by all animals. If rationality in some degree belonged to all
animals,  then  the  word "man" (nominally defined by "rational animal")
would be synonymous with "animal." But, unlike feathers, the presence or
absence  of  which  seems  readily observable, the possession or lack of
rationality  is  difficult to ascertain. Here we face two possibilities.
One is that we can never be sure that some existing animals are and some
are  not  rational.  Then  the  definition  "rational animal" will never
become  real.  It  will always remain merely nominal, the statement of a
possible meaning for "man," but one which we cannot employ when we apply
the word to name any existing thing. The other possibiUty is that we can
infer  the existence of a special class of animals (distinguished by the
possession  of  reason)  from  such  evident  facts as the activities of
reading  and  writing,  activities  not  performed by all animals. Then,
members  of  the  class  defined  having  been found to exist, "rational
animal" becomes a real definition of

[348b]
the  beings  to  which  we  also  arbitrarily assign the name "man." The
process  of  verification  by  which  a nominal is converted into a real
definition  can  be  regarded  as  the  demonstration  of  a definition.
Strictly  speaking, it is not the definition which is thereby proved. It
is  rather  a  proposition  in  which  the  subject of the definition is
affirmed  to exist, or in which a subject already known to exist is said
to  have  a  certain  definition.  For example, it is not the definition
"rational  animal" which is proved, but the proposition "there exists an
animal  which  differs  from  other  animals  in being rational," or the
proposition  "the  real  being which we call 'man' is both an animal and
rational,  and  he  alone  is rational." If these propositions cannot be
proved,  "rational  animal"  remains  a  purely nominal definition. That
definitions  are  not  as such either true or false is unaffected by the
distinction  between  real  and nominal definitions. The point is simply
that a definition, which is always linguistically expressed by a phrase,
never  a sentence, neither affirms nor denies anything, and so cannot be
either  true  or false. "Featherless biped" or "son of the same parents"
makes  no  assertion  about reality or existence. Yet there is a special
sense  in  which  definitions  can  be  true or false, which does have a
bearing  on the distinction between real and nominal definitions. Pascal
suggests  three  alternatives  with  regard  to  the truth or falsity of
definitions.  "If  we  find  it  impossible,"  he writes, "it passes for
false;  if we demonstrate that it is true, it passes for a truth; and as
long  as  it cannot be proved to be either possible or impossible, it is
considered a fancy." According to Aquinas, there are two ways in which a
definition  can  be false. In one way, when the intellect appUes "to one
thing the definition proper to another; as that of a circle to a man. In
another  way,  by  composing  a  definition  of parts which are mutually
repugnant. A definition such as 'a four-footed rational animal' would be
of  this  kind  ...  for  such a statement as 'some rational animals are
four-footed'  is  false  in  itself."  But  the truth or falsity of that
statement can conceivably be argued, and therefore it is not so clear an
example of a false definition as one

[349a]
which,  in  Pascal's terms, plainly represents an impossibility. Suppose
someone   offered   "round   square"   as   the  nominal  definition  of
"rectacycle."  The phrase "round square" expresses a self-contradiction,
and in consequence the definition is false. Its falsity is tantamount to
the  impossibility  of there being any such figure as a rectacycle which
has  the definition proposed. The truth of a definition—which is nothing
more  than  its  freedom  from self-contradiction — is equivalent to the
possibility,  as  opposed to the impossibility, of the thing defined. To
call  the  definition  "son  of the same parents" or "featherless biped"
true  is  to  say  that  the  words defined— "brother" or "man"— signify
possible  existences. In short, only those nominal definitions which are
true  can  ever  become  real,  and  they  become  real  only  when  the
possibility  they signify is actually known to be realized in existence.
The method of Euclid's Elements illustrates the foregoing points. Euclid
defines  certain  geometrical  figures, such as triangle, parallelogram,
square.  These definitions may appear to be free from contradiction, but
that  does  not  tell us whether they are more than nominal. The defined
figures  are  possible,  but  the  question is whether they exist in the
space  determined  by  Euclid's  postulates. To show that they do exist,
Euclid  undertakes  to  construct them according to his postulates which
permit  him  the  use  of  a straight edge and a compass for purposes of
construction.  When in Proposition i Euclid proves that he can construct
an  equilateral  triangle, he establishes the geometrical reality of the
figure defined in Definition 20. A geometrical construction is thus seen
to  be what is called an "existence proof." It converts a nominal into a
real definition. Figures which cannot be constructed must be postulated;
as,  for  example,  the straight line and the circle. Postulates i and 3
ask  us  to  assume  that  a  straight line can be drawn between any two
points  and  that  a circle can be described with any center and radius.
These  postulates  give  Definitions 4 and 15 their geometrical reality.
Though  the method of construction is peculiar to geometry, the relation
of definitions to proofs or postulates of existence is the same for

[349b]
Chapter 15: DEFINITION 291 all sciences. Until a definition ceases to be
nominal  and  becomes  real,  it  cannot  be  used scientifically in the
demonstration  of  other conclusions; to use a merely nominal definition
in  llie  proof begs the question. If the existence of the thing defined
is  either  directly observable or self-evident, no proof or postulation
of  existence is required. In theology, for example, there are those who
think that the existence of God is immediately seen in the definition of
God.  Descartes and Spinoza seem to be of this opinion. Descartes argues
that  "eternal  existence" is necessarily included in the idea of God as
"a  supremely  perfect  Being."  This  is  so evident, he declares, that
"existence can no more be separated from the essence of God than can its
having  its three angles equal to two right angles be separated from the
essence  of  a  triangle,  or  the idea of a mountain from the idea of a
valley."  Concerning  substance  or  God,  Spinoza  holds that, since it
pertains  to its nature to exist, "its definition must involve necessary
existence, and consequently from its definition alone its existence must
be  concluded."  On  the  other hand, there are those who think that the
existence  of  God  must  be  proved  by inference from effect to cause.
Supposing  that a man understands the meaning of the word "God," Aquinas
maintains  that  it  "does not therefore follow that he understands that
what  the  name  signifies  exists  actually,  but  only  that it exists
mentally." Hence, he declares, it is necessary to prove the existence of
God,  "accepting as a middle term the meaning of the name," but using an
effect  in  "place of the definition of the cause in proving the cause's
existence."  The  difference between these two positions might be summed
up  by saying that Descartes and Spinoza, like Anselm before them, think
the  definition  of God is intrinsically real, whereas Aquinas thinks we
must  begin  with  a  nominal definition of God, which becomes real only
with  proof  of  God's  existence.  For  some  confirmed  atheists,  any
definition  of  God is not only nominal, but false— the definition of an
impossible  being,  incapable  of existing. There is still another issue
about nominal and real definitions. The point involved is the one raised
by Locke's discussion of nominal and real

[350a]
292  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  essences.  It  Is  also  raised  by  Aristotle's
discrimination  between  essential  and  accidental  unities,  i.e., the
difference between the unity signified by the phrase "featherless biped"
and  by the phrase "black man." Both phrases look like definitions. Each
designates  a  possible  class of individuals and sets up the conditions
for  membership  in  that  class  or  exclusion from it. The distinction
between  them does not rest, according to Aristotle, on the criterion of
existence.  Both of the objects defined may exist, but whereas the first
is  truly  a  species,  the  second  is only, in Aristotle's opinion, an
accidental  variety  within  the species 7nan. Man, being a species, can
have  a  real essence, and so any definition of man—whether "featherless
biped"  or  "rational  animal"—can  be a real definition, constituted by
genus and differentia. But negro or aryan, not being a species, but only
a race or variety, has no essence as such. The definitions — "black man"
and "white man"— indicate this in that they are constituted by two terms
which   are  related  as  substance  and  accident,  not  as  genus  and
differentia.  Though Aristotle distinguishes these two types of formulae
as  essential and accidental definitions rather than as real and nominal
definitions,  the one principle of distinction is closely related to the
other,  for  only essential definitions can have real essences for their
objects.  Accidental  definitions do little more than state the meanings
of  words, or express what Locke calls the "nominal essences" of things.
He  doubts  that the definition of anything except a mathematical object
can  ever grasp the real essence of a thing. For him all definitions are
nominal,  which is equivalent to saying that we never define by means of
the  true  genus  and differentia, but always by accidental and external
signs,  or  by stating the component parts of a complex whole. "Speaking
of  a  man,  or  gold," Locke explains, "or any other species of natural
substance,  as  supposed constituted by a precise and real essence which
nature regularly imparts to every individual of that kind, whereby it is
made  to  be  of  that species, we cannot be certain of the truth of any
affirmation  or  negation  made  of  it.  For man or gold, taken in this
sense,  and  used  for  species  of things constituted by real essences,
different from the complex idea

[350b]
in  the  mind of the speaker, stand for we know not what; and the extent
of these species, with such boundaries, are so unknown and undetermined,
that  it  is  impossible  with any certainty to affirm, that all men are
rational,   or   that   all   gold  is  yellow."  This  issue  has  many
ramifications.  In  one direction it leads into Aristotle's quarrel with
Plato  over  the  method  of definition by division or dichotomy. In the
Sophist  and  the  Statesman, the search for definitions proceeds by the
division of a class of things into two sub-classes, one of which is then
further  subdivided,  and  so  on until a class is reached which has the
characteristics  of  the  object  to be defined. The attempt to define a
sophist,  for  example,  starts with the notion that he is a man of art,
and  proceeds  by  dividing and subdividing the various kinds of art. At
one  point in the course of doing this, the Athenian Stranger summarizes
the  process  to  that  point. "You and I," he says to Theaetetus, "have
come  to  an  understanding not only about the name of the angler's art,
but  about  the  definition of the thing itself. One half of all art was
acquisitive—  half  of  the  acquisitive  art  was conquest or taking by
force,  half  of  this  was  hunting,  and  half  of hunting was hunting
animals, half of this was hunting water animals—of this again, the under
half  was  fishing, half of fishing was striking; a part of striking was
fishing  with  a  barb, and one half of this again, being the kind which
strikes  with  a  hook and draws the fish from below upwards, is the art
which  we  have been seeking, and which from the nature of the operation
is denoted angling or drawing up . . . And now, following this pattern,"
he  continues,  "let  us  endeavor  to  find out what a Sophist is." The
pattern as illustrated indicates that, in the course of division, one of
the  two  classes  is  discarded  while  the other is subject to further
subdivision. Aristotle's criticism of this procedure turns partly on the
fact  that  the  division is always dichotomous, or into two subclasses,
and  partly  on the fact that the terms which Plato uses in a succession
of  subdivisions  do  not  seem  to  have any systematic relation to one
another.  If  the  class  of animals, for example, is divided into those
with and those with-

[351a]
Chapti,r  15:  out  feet, it makes a difTcrence, according to Aristotle,
what  terms  are  then  used  to differentiate footed animals into their
proper  subclasses. "It is necessary," he insists, "that the division be
by  the  differentia  ofthe  differentia\ e.g.y 'endowed with feet' is a
differentia  of  'animal'; again the differentia of 'animal endowed with
feet' must be of it qua endowed with feet. Therefore we must not say, if
we  are  to  speak  rightly, that of that which is endowed with feet one
part has feathers and one is featherless (if we do this we do it through
incapacity);  we  must  divide it only into cloven-footed and notcloven;
for  these  are differentiae in the foot; cloven-footedness is a form of
footed  ness.  And  the process wants always to go on so till it reaches
the  species that contains no difference. And then there will be as many
kinds  of  foot  as  there  are  differentiae,  and the kinds of animals
endowed  with  feet will be equal in number to the differentiae. If then
this  is  so,  clearly  the  last differentia will be the essence of the
thing  and its definition." As Aristotle quarrels with Plato's method of
division,  so  William  James takes issue with Aristotle's theory that a
real  essence  is  defined when the right differentia is properly chosen
within a certain genus of things. He tends to follow Locke's notion that
definitions indicate no more than the nominal essences of things, but he
gives  this  theory  a  special  twist by adding the notion that all our
definitions  merely  group  things according to the interest or purpose,
whether  theoretical or practical, which motivates our classification of
them.  This  has come to be known as the pragmatic theory of definition.
"My  thinking," writes James, "is first and last and always for the sake
of  my doing." After pointing out that Locke "undermined the fallacy" of
supposing  that we can define the real essences of things, he goes on to
say  that  "none  of  his  successors,  as far as I know, have radically
escaped  it,  or  seen that the only meaning of essence is teleological,
and  that  classification and conception are purely teleological weapons
of  the mind. The essence of a thing is that one of its properties which
is so importantfor my interests that in comparison with it I may neglect
the rest. . . . The properties which are important

[351b]
DEFINITION  293  vary  from  man  to  man  and  from hour to hour." In a
footnote  James  adds:  "A  substance  like  oil  has  as many different
essences as it has uses to different individuals." The classification ol
natural as well as artificial objects should therefore proceed according
to  the  advice Mepiiistopheles gives to the student in Cjocthe's Faust.
"You will have more success," he sa\s, "if you will learn to reduce all,
and  to  classify each according to its use." But if this is so, then no
one  scheme  of classification, more than any other, represents the real
structure  or  order  of nature. Nature indifferently submits to any and
all  divisions  which  we  wish  to  make  among  existing  things. Some
classifications  may  be  more  significant  than  others,  but  only by
reference  to  our  interests,  not  because they represent reality more
accurately  or  adequately.  It  does  not matter, therefore, whether we
define   by   genus   and   differentia,  by  other  characteristics  in
combination, or by reference to origins or functions. Darwin's scheme of
classification  provides  evidence  relevant  to  this  whole  issue. As
indicated  in  the chapters on x\nimal and EvoluTiox, Darwin thinks that
his  genealogical  classification  of plants and animals comes nearer to
the natural system of living organisms than the classifications proposed
by his predecessors. "The Natural System," he writes, "is a genealogical
arrangement,  with  the  acquired  grades  of  difference, marked by the
terms,  varieties,  species,  genera,  families,  etc.;  and  we have to
discover  the lines of descent by the most permanent characters whatever
they  may  be  and  of  however  slight  vital  importance." Henceforth,
following  his  method,  "systematists  will  have  only to decide . . .
whether any form be sufficiently constant and distinct from other forms,
to  be  capable of definition; and if definable, whether the differences
be  sufficiently  important  to  deserve  a specific name." But Darwin's
statement re-opens rather than resolves the great traditional questions.
Are  the  various  groupings  made in classification divisions which the
classifier  finds useful to impose on nature, or do they represent lines
of real distinction in the very nature of things.'^ If the latter is the
case,  either wholly or in part, are we able to do more than approximate
real  distinction  by  whatever  method of definition we employ.? Can we
discover real species, essen-

[352a]
294  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  pute.  Definition also makes it possible for any
Organum. cerned with essence ir. The limits of definition: the definable
and  the  indefinable  le.  The  truth and falsity of definitions 2. The
various methods of definition or classification 2.a. The use of division
or  dichotomy  in  definition  2b.  Definition by genus and differentia:
properties  2d.  The  appeal  to  genesis,  origin,  cause,  or  end  in
definition  26.  Definition  by  reference to purpose or interest 4. The
search  for  definitions and the methods of defending them 5. Definition
and demonstration: definitions as principles and as conclusions 6b. 1 he
use of definition in speculative philosophy and empirical science

[352b]
1 tially distinct from one another, and can our mind to submit itself to
the  test  of agreement definitions formulate the essence of each ? with
reality.  Definition helps man to ask nature or experience the only sort
of  question  to  which  The search for definitions basically belongs to
answers can be found. the activity of the human mind in all its scienThe
search for definitions has, perhaps, its tific or dialectical efforts to
clarify  discourse,  to  most  dramatic exemplification in the dialogues
achieve  precision  of  thought,  to focus issues and of Plato. Socrates
usually leads the conversation to resolve them. in quest of them; though
it  is  only  in  certain  Men  have  no  other  way  of coming to terms
dialogues,  such  as  the Sophist and the Stateswith one another than by
defining  the  words  w^;2,  that the making of definitions is practiced
they  use  to  express  their concepts or meanings, in detail. Two other
books  in  this set are largely They make terms out of words by endowing
concerned  with  ways  of reaching and defending words with exactness or
precision  of  meaning,  definitions—Aristotle's Topics (which should be
Definition does this and makes possible the considered together with the
opening  chapters  meeting  of minds either in agreement or in disof his
Parts of Animals) and Bacon's Novum OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. The theory
of  definition  295  lb. The purpose of definition: the clarification of
ideas  296 id. The unity of a definition in relation to the unity of the
thing  defined 297 2c. Definition by accidental or extrinsic signs or by
component  parts  298 3. The grammatical or verbal aspects of definition
299  6.  The character of definitions in diverse disciplines 300 6c. The
role  of  definitions  in  practical  or moral philosophy and the social
sciences 301

[353a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homilr: Iliad, hk ii [265-28^] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  ot page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half  of page 119. When the text is prmted in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, y:^6. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 1. The theory of definition 7
Plato:  Meno,  174a-177d  /  Theaetetus,  544d549d / Sophist 551a-579d /
Statesman  580a608d  /  Laws, bk x, 763c-d / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  3-10  123c-128d;  ch  13
131b-133c  /  Topics, bk viVII 192a-211a,c / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 4-^
552b-555a;  ch  10-17  558a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  566d-568d; ch 6
569d-570d  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk i, ch 2-4 165d-168c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect ii 262a-b 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  35 653b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-d 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii  137a-195d  esp APH 17 149b-d, aph 22-51
153b-194c 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 23c-24a 31 SpIxNoza: Ethics, part i,
prop 8, schol 2 356d-357d; part ii, prop 40, schol i 387b388a 33 Pascal:
Geometrical   Demonstration,   430b434b;   442a-443b   35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  iii-vi  254d-283a  passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect vii, div 48-49 470d-471d

[353b]
Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 295 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 44c-45b; 215d-217a 44
Boswei.'l:  Johnson,  82a-c  53 James: Psychology, 314a-b; 668a-673b la.
The  object  of definition: definitions as arbitrary and nominal or real
and  concerned  with essence 7 Plato: Cratylus, 104d-105b; 113a-114a,c /
Gorgias,  252d-253b  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  384a387d; bk ix, 426d-427b /
Timaeus, 457b458b / Theaetetus, 514b-515c; 547c-549c / Sophist, 551a-d /
Philebus,  610d-613a  / Laws, BK X, 763c-d / Seventh Letter, 809a-810b 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2^19-3^24] 6b8a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 22 113b-115b;
CH  33  [88^30-89^1]  121b-c; BK II, ch 3-10 123c128d; ch 13 131b-133c /
Topics, bk i, ch 4
[101^17-23]
144b-c; ch 5
[101^37-102*5]
144d; CH 8 [103^1-11] 146d; ch 18
[108*38-^9]
152d;[io8^i9-32]153a,c;BKvi,  CHI  [139*24-34] 192a; bk vi, ch 4-BK vii,
ch 5 194c-211a,c passim / Physics, bk ii, ch i
[193*30-*^ 19]
269c-270a  /  Generation  and  Corruption, bk i, ch 2 [317*17-27] 413b /
Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5
[986^8-987*1]
504c-505a;
[987*19-27]
505b; CH 6
[987^1-10] 505c;
[987^30-33] 506a; bk
II,  CH 2 [994^16-27] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 2 [996^ 12-21] 515a-b; bk iv, ch
4 525a-528b; bk vi,

[354a]
(1.  The theory of definition, la. The object of definition: definitions
as arbitrary and nam' inal or real and concerned with essence.) CH I
[1025^28-1026-^6]
547d-548a; bk vii, CH I
[io28''3i-37] 550d; ch 4-6 552b-555a;
CH 10-17 558a-566a,c; bk viii, ch 2-3 566d568d; CH 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch
i
[1052^115]
578d-579a; bk xi, ch 5 590a-d; bk XIII, ch 4 [1078^18-32] 610b-c / Soul,
BK I, ch I 631a-632d; bk hi, ch 6
[430^26-31]
663b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[641^*14-31] 163d-164a; ch 2-4 165d-168c
19  Aquinas:  Su?nma Theologica, part i, q i, a 7, REP I 7a-c; Q 2, A I,
REP  2  lOd-lld;  a  2,  REP  2  lld-12c;  Q 3, A 3, ANS 16a-d; a 5, ans
17c-18b; Q 17, A 3 102d-103c; q 29, a i, REP 1,3-4 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3
163b-164b;  Q  44,  A I, REP I 238b-239a; a 3, rep 3 240b241a; q 58, a 5
303c-304c;  q  75,  a 4, ans 381b-382a; q 85, a 6 458d-459c; Q 116, a i,
contrary 592d-593d 20 Aquinas : Stimma Theologica, part ii-ii, q 4, a I,
ANS  402a-403d;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  2, ans 711d-712d; q 60, a 4, rep i
849c-850b  23  HoBBES  : Let'iathan, part i, 55b-c; 56b; 59c-d; PART IV,
270a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 518d-519a 28 Galileo: Ttvo New Sciences,
first  day,  142d143a  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 4 137d138b 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  26b-c  / Objections and Replies, postulate iv
131a-b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 8, schol 2 356d-357d; part ii,
prop  40,  schol  i  387b388a;  part  hi, prop 4 398d 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
372b-373b;  376b-377a  /  Geometrical Demonstration, 430b-431b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXXI, sect 6-13 240d-243b; ch xxxii, sect
18  246c-247a;  sect  24  247c-d; bk hi, CH HI, sect 11-20 257a-260a esp
sect  18-20 259b-260a; ch v, sect 14 267b-c; ch vi 268b-283a; ch x, sect
17-21  295d-297b;  ch XI, SECT 15-24 303b-305d; bk iv, ch iv, sect 11-17
326b-328d  passim;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16 331d-336d passim; ch xii, sect 9
360d361b  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 18 410a-c 42 Kant:
Pure Reaso?i, 179d-182b; 215d-216c / Science ofRight, 404d; 423d-424b 45
Lavoisier:  Elements of Chemistry, part i, lOa-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  176c;  184d-185a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 27b-29a
esp  29a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 694b-d 53 James:
Psychology, 106a; 185a-b; 668a-671a; 882b-883a

[354b]
296  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  la  to  \c  lb.  The  purpose of defiaition: the
clarification  of  ideas  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120a-b / Me?2o, 174a-179b /
Euthyphro,  193c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b  8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 14
[98*1-2]
133c-d / Topics,'BK i, ch 18
[io8«
17-37] 152b-d; bk vi, ch i
[139^*1 1-15]
192b-c; ch 4 [141*26-32] 194c; bk viii, ch 3
[158^31-159*2]
214d-215c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  IV, ch 4 525a-528b; bk xi, ch 5 590a-d /
Soul, BK I, CH I [402^15-403*2] 631d-632a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk ii, ch 2
[648^1-5] 172d / R/tetoric, bk
ii,  ch  23  [1398* 15-27] 646c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii
262a-b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 85, A 3, REP 3 455b-457a
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58d-59a; PART IV, 269b-c 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  142d-143a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  60b-c;  61b-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  59  112b-c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c  33 Pascal: Geometrical
Demonstration,  430b434b  passim  34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,
schol,  8b  35  Locke:  Human  Understaiiding,  bk  hi, ch iv, sect 6-14
260d-263a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, Div 62 478b-c; div 74
484a-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 113b-c / Practical Reason, 293c-294b 44
Boswell: /oAwi^ow, 377d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 4a5c;
PART  I, lOa-b; 21a-22c 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 361a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2  9b-10a 49 Darwin: Origin
ofSpecies,  207d-208a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 694b-d 53
James:   Psychology,   314a-b;  669a-671a;  871a-b  ic.  The  limits  of
definition:  the definable and the indefinable 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi,
384a-388a   /  Theaetetus,  544c-547c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b  8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992^
24-993*1] 511a-b; bk ii, ch 2
[994^16-27]
513a-b;  bk v, ch 3 [1014^3-13] 534d; bk vii, CH 4-5 552b-554a; ch io-ii
558a-561a; ch 13
[1039*15-23] 563a; ch
15 563c-564c; bk VIII, CH 3
[1043^23-33] 568b; bk x, ch 8-9
585b-586c 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 6 231b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q i, a 7, REP I 7a-c; q 2, a I, rep 2 lOd-lld; a 2,
REP  2  11d-12c; q 3, A 3, ANS 16a-d; a 5, ans 17c-18b; Q 29, A I, REP I
162a-163b;  a  2, REP 3 163b-164b; q 44, a 3, rep 3 240b241a; q 85, a i,
rep 2 451c-453c

[355a]
1^/0 2^ Chapter 15: DEFINITION 297 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 59
112b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xii, 23c-24a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, i'art i,
axiom  2  355d 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 431b434b; 442a 443b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ii, SECT I 127d-128a; ch iv,
sect 6 131a; ch XX, SECT I 176b-c; bk hi, ch iv, sect 4-17 260b-263c; ch
vi  268b-283a  passim,  csp  SECT  7-10  270b-271b;  ch  xi,  sect 13-25
302d-306c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 49 471c-d 42 Kant:
Pure   Reason,  29d-33d;  53b-54b;  179d-182b;  2l5d-216c  /  Judgement,
603a-604b 43 Federalist: number 37, 119b-120b 44 Bos-w ell: Johnson, 82b
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  242a/  Descent  of  Man, 346d-347b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue 11, 694b-d 53 James: Psychology, 314a
Id.  The  unity  of  a  definition in relation to the unity of the thing
defined  7  Plato:  Laches,  32a-33a  / Cratylus 85a-114a,c esp 85a-89a,
104b-114a,c  / Meno, 174a-179b / Theaetetus, 514b-515d / Sophist, 559a-c
8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 6
[92^28-33] 126b; CH
10
[93^28-94^7] 128b-c;
ch 13
[97^6-25] 133a-b /
Topics, bk vi, ch 4
[141^26-^2]
194c-d; CH 5
[142^30-143^12]
196b-c; CH 13-14 204c-206d; bk vii, ch 3
[i53'*6-22] 208a-b; [154^3-11] 209b /
Physics,  bk  I,  CH  3  [186^14-30]  261c-d  /  Metaphysics, BK I, CH 5
[986^8-987^1] 504c-505a; bk v, ch 6
[1016^33-^11]
536d-537a;  bk  vii, ch 4-6 552b-555a; ch 10-17 558a-566a,c; bk viii, CH
2-3 566d-568d; ch 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch I
[1052^28-37] 578d / Soul, bk
ii, ch 3
[414^20-415^14] 644d-645b
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35  162a164a  35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxii, sect 4 201c-d; ch xxiii, sect 1-2 204a-c;
bk hi, ch v, sect 4 264b; ch vi, sect 21 273c-d; sect 28-30 276a-277b 35
Berkeley:  Hitman  Knowledge, sect i 413a-b 53 James: Psychology, 503a-b
Xe.  The  truth  and falsity of definitions 7 Plato: Cra/>'/«^85a-114a,c
esp 85a-89a, 104b114a,c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk  vi-vii  192a-211a,c  passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  4-14  194c-  206d  /
Metaphysics, BK V, ch 29 [1024^27-38] 546d-547a; BK VI, ch 4
[1027^17-28] 550a,c; bk
ix,  ch 10 [1051^18-33] 577d-578a / Soul, bk hi, ch 6 [430^26-30] 663b-c
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a I, rep 2 lOd-lld; q 17, a 3
102d-103c;  q  58,  A  5  303c-304c;  q  85,  a  6  458d-459c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 56b-d

[355b]
b  28  ( I ALT LEO : Two New Sciences, third day, 200a-b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  hk  i,  aph  59  112bc;  bk ii, aph 35 162a-164a 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xiii, 26b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 8, schol 2, 357b-d;
part   11,   prop   40,   schol  1-2  387b388b  33  Pascal:  Geometrical
Demonstration,  430b431b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxii
243c-248b   passim   42   Kant:   Pure   Reason,   179d-182b   43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  469a44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 82a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, intro, par 2 9b10a 53 James: Psychology, 669a-671a 2. The various
methods  of  definition  or  classic fication 2a. The use of division or
dichotomy  in definition 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 134a-c / Sophist, 552b-561d;
577c-579d / Statesman 580a-608d / Philebus, 610d-613a 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 31 64b-65a / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 5 125bd;
CH  13  [96^^25-97^6]  132a-133a  /  Topics,  bk VI, CH 6 [143^11-144*4]
197b-c / Metaphysics, BK VII, CH 12
[1037^28-1038*35]
561c-562a  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk i, ch 2-4 165d-168c 17
Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4 lla-c / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 8-10
285a-286d;  ch  16-18 289c-291d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch  35  653b-c  2h.  Definition  by  genus and differentia: properties 7
Plato: Theaetetus, 548c-549d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 3
[1^16-24]
5d; CH 5
[2*11-3^24]
6a-8a; ch 13
[14^32-15*8]
20c-d  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  27 [43*25-44] 60c-d / Posterior
Analytics,  bk i, ch 22 113b115b; bk ii, ch 13-14 131b-134a / Topics, bk
I, ch 4-9 144b-147b; ch 18 [108*38-^9] 152d;
[108^19-32]
153a,c; bk iv-vii 168b,d-211a,c / Physics, bk i, ch 3
[186^14-34] 261c-262a /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch i
[995^27-31] 514b;
ch 3 517a-518a; bk v, ch 3 [1014^3-13] 534d; ch 25 [1023^22-25] 545c; ch
28 [1024*37-^9] 546b-c; bk vii, ch 4
[1030*7-14] 552d; ch
12-14  561b-563c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1043^24-1044*  14]  568b-d;  ch  6
569d-570d; bk x, ch 8-9 585b-586c; bk xi, ch i
[1059^21-1060*1]
587d-588a / Soul, bk i, ch i
[402^15-403*2]
631d-632a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[486*15-487*1] 7b-d / Parts of Animals, bk
i,

[356a]
298  THE  GREAT IDEAS (2. The various methods of definition or classifi'
cation.  2b.  Definition  by  genus  and  difierentia: properties.) CH I
[641^14-31] 163d-164a; ch 2-4 165d-168c Ethics, BK II, CH 5
[iio5^i9]-cH
6
[1107^9]
351b-352c  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Efinead,  tr  hi, ch i, 281a-b; CH 8-10
285a-286d; ch 16-18 289c-291d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3,
a  4,  REP  I 16d-17c; a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 29, a i, REP 3-4 162a-163b; q
50,  a  2,  rep  i  270a272a;  a  4,  rep  i 273b-274b; q 66, a 2, rep 2
345d-347b;  q  75,  a  3,  rep  i  380c-381b; Q 76, A 3, ANS and rep 2,4
391a-393a;  q  77, a I, rep 7 399c-401b; q 85, a 3 455b-457a; Q 88, a 2,
rep 4 471c-472c; part i-ii, q i, a 3 611b-612a; q 18, aa 5-1 i 697a-703a
passim,  esp  a 7 698c-699c; q 23 723c-727a passim, esp a I 723c-724c; q
35,  a  4  774d775d;  a  8,  ans  and rep 3 779c-780c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49,  AA 1-2 lb-4a; q 52, a i, ans and rep 2
15d-18a;  q 53, a 2, rep 3 21a-d; q 54 22d25d passim; q 55, a 4, ans and
rep  1-2  28c-29d;  qq  60-61  49d-59d passim; q 71, a 6 llOb-lllb; q 72
lllb-119b  passim;  g  95,  A  4,  ANS  229b-230c;  part ii-ii, q 4, a i
402a-403d;  part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a-711c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
ii  137a-195d  passim,  esp aph 20-52 150d-195d 31 Descartes: Objections
and  Replies,  154a-b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch hi
254d-260a  passim,  esp sect 6-10 255c-257a; ch VI 268b-283a passim, esp
sect  6  269d270a, sect 30-32 276d-278b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 193a-200c;
215d-216c  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 4a5c; part I, 21d;
25c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 176c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  98a-b;  104a  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 12c-13a; 25d-29a esp
28b-29a;  30d-31d;  207d-210b  esp 207d208a / Descent of Man, 331b-332a;
346d347c  53  James:  Psychology,  344b-345b;  669a-671a;  869a-871a esp
870a-871a  2c.  Definition  by  accidental  or  extrinsic  signs  or  by
component parts 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[144^23-27]
197d; [144^145^33] 198a-199c; ch 13 [150^1]- ch II
[151^32]
204c-206a   /  Metaphysics,  bk  VII,  CH  12  [1038^8-30]  561d-562a  9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4 [1290^25-36] 489d-490a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 29, A I, rep 3 162a-163b; q 77, a i, rep 7
399c401b;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a 8, ans and rep 3 779c-780c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol 1-2, 387b-388a

[356b]
2c  to  2e 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXII, SECT 3 201b-c;
sect  9  202c-203a; ch xxiii, sect 3-10 204c-206d; sect 14-18 208b-209a;
sect  37  213d-214b;  bk hi, ch HI, sect 10 256c-257a; ch iv, sect 12-14
262b-263a;  ch vi 268b-283a passim, esp sect 2-3 268c-d, sect 29 276b-d;
ch   xi,   sect  1922  304b-305a;  sect  25  305d-306c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements of
Chemistry,  part i, 21a-22c; 25c-29d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 95b-105b 49
Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 207a-210b esp 207a, 208b, 210b; 212d-215a /
Descent  of  Man,  332b-c  53  James: Psychology, 503a-b; 742a-b 2d. The
appeal  to  genesis,  origin,  cause,  or  end  in  definition  7 Plato:
Theaetetus, 544c-548d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 5
[143^9-12]
196c; CH 6
[145*19-27]
198d-199a;
[145*32-
^20] 199a-b; ch 8
[146^9-147*11]
200c-201a; CH 12
[149^31-39] 204b-c
/ Meteorology', bk IV, CH 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[983*24-29]
SOlc; bk V, CH 28
[1024*29-^9]
546b-c; bk viii, ch 2
[1043*2-17]
567b-c; CH 4
[1044*^12-15] 569b; bk xii, ch 3
[1070*
21-24] 599c / Soul, BK I, ch I
[403*25-^7]
632b-c;  bk  ii, ch 2 [413*11-19] 643a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch
1-2 445a-446d; BK III, CH 9 [1280*25-1281*2] 477d-478c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  44,  A I, rep i 238b-239a; part i-ii, q i, a 3
611b-612a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, A 4 28c-29d 30
Bacon  :  Advancement  ofLearning,  43a-d / A^ovmn Organum, bk i, aph 63
113d-114a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  8,  schol 2 356d-357d;
appendix  369b-372d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch IV, SECT 10
261b-d;  sect  16  263b-c;  ch  vi,  sect  23 274b-c 42 Ka^t: Judgement,
574a-b:  579b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 207a-229a,c esp 207d-208a,
211b-c,  217d-218a,  228c-d;  238b239a  /  Descent  ofMan, 331b-333a esp
332b-c;  337a-341d passim 53 James: Psychology, 742a-b 2e. Definition by
reference  to  purpose  or interest 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix
369b-372d;  PART  II,  PROP  40,  SCHOL  I  387b-388a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xviii,  SECT  7 174d-175a; ch xxh, sect 5-7
201d-202b;  bk  iii, ch v 263d-268a passim, esp sect 6 264c-265a; ch vi,
sect 30 276d277b esp 277a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1942-1945] 46a

[357a]
3/0  5  Chapter 15: DEFINITION 299 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 27c 29a
passim, esp 29a 53 James: Psychology, 184a-186a; 314a b; 668a671a 3. The
grammatical  or  verbal aspects of definition 7 Plato: Charmides, 6b-d /
CraA'///^-  85a-114a,c  /  Theaetetus, 544d-545b / Laivs, bk x, 763c-d /
Set'enth Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i 5a-b; ch 5
[3*
32-^9] 7c-d / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 13 [97^27-39] 133b-c; CH 14
[98*13-23] 133d134a / Topics, bk i, ch 5
[101^37-102*11]
144d; ch 15 149d-152a; ch 18
[io8«i7-37]
152b-d; bk iv, ch 3
[123*27-29] 171d; ch 6
[127^5-6] 177a; bk vi, ch
i  [139^12-18]  192bc; CH 2-14 192c-206d passim, esp ch io-ii 202b-203d;
bk  vii  206b,d-211a,c  passim;  bk  VIII,  CH  3 [158^8-159*2] 215b-c /
Metaphysics, bk IV, CH 4 525a-528b; ch 7
[1012*22-24]
532b; BK VII, ch 4-5 552b-554a; ch 15
[1040*9-14]
564a; bk x, ch i
[1052^1-15]
578d-579a;  bk  xi,  ch  5 590a-d / Soul, bk i, CH I [402^5-8] 631c-d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 4, A I, ANs402a-403d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, part i, 56b-57c; part IV, 269b-c; 270a-c 31 Descartes: Rules,
xii,  23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c  35  Locke: Human Understandi?ig, bk ii, ch
XXII,  SECT  3-10 201b-203c passim; bk hi, ch III, SECT 10 256c-257a; ch
iv,  sect 6-7 260d; ch V, sect 4 264b; sect io-ii 266b-d; ch vi, SECT 32
277c-278b 43 Federalist: number 37, 119b-120b 44 BoswELh: Johnson, 82a-c
45  Lavoisier:  Elements of Chemistry, pref, 4a5d; PART 1, 10a; 21a-22c;
25c-29d  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  361a362c  53 James:
Psychology,  171b-172a  4. The search for definitions and the methods of
defending  them  7  Plato:  Channides,  4a-13d  / Laches, 31c-37c / Meno
174a-190a,c  esp  174a-179b  /  Republic,  bk  i-iv 295a-356a esp bk iv,
346a-355a  /  Theaetetus  512a-550a,c  /  Sophist, 552b-579d / Statesman
580a-608d  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch i-io 122b,d-128d;
ch  13-14  131b-134a  /  Topics,  bk  i-vii 143a-211a,c esp bk i, ch 4-9
144b-147b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5 [987*19-27] 505b; ch 6
[987^1-10] 505c;
[987^30-33] 506a; bk
ix, CH 6
[1048*25-^9] 573c-574a; bk
xiii, ch 4
[1078^18-32] 610b-c /
Soul, bk i 631a-641d esp CH I 631a-632d; bk ii, ch i [4I2*i]-ch 4
[415*23] 642a-645c
9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i, ch 2-4 165d-168c 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b

[357b]
17  Pi.oiiNi s: first Ennead, tr mi, ch 4 11a c / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch
U  231b  d  /  Sixth Enncad, TR III, ch 6 10 284a-286d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q id, A I 40d-41d; q 29, a i 162a 163b 20 Aqitinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, aa 12 lb 4a; q 55, a 4 28c 29d; q 71,
a  6  llOb-lllb;  Q  90  205a-208b:  part  ii-ii,  q 4, A I 402a-403d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  518d-519a  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
200a-203d  esp  200a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 61b-c / A^ovum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  59  112b-c;  aph  105  128b-c;  BK  II, APH 10-20
140c-153a;  aph  24-25  154c-155d  31  Descartes: Rules, xii, 23c-24a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 40, schol 1-2 387b-388b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,   bk   hi,   ch   xi,  SECT  24  305b-d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  vii  470d478a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 330a-d 42
Kant:   Pure   Reason,   215d-216d  /  Practical  Reason,  293c-294b  43
Federalist: number 37, 119b-120b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 241d-242a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 683d-684c; 690b 5. Definition
and  demonstration:  definitions  as  principles  and  as  conclusions 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk i, ch 31 64b65a; ch 43 68d / Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[72*19-24] 98d; CH
8
[75^21-32]
104a; ch 10
[76^35-77*4]
105c-d; CH 22 113b-115b; ch 33
[88*^30-89*1]
121b-c;
[89*17-^5]
121d122a,c;  bk  ii, ch 3-10 123c-128d / Topics, bk VI, CH 4 [141*26-32]
194c;  BK  VII,  CH  3 208a209b; CH 5 [154*23-^13] 209d-210a; [155*1723]
210d; BK VIII, CH 3
[158*31-159*2] 214d215c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 9 [992*^30-993*1] 511b; BK III, CH 2 [996*^8-21] 515a-b; bk iv, CH
4 525a-528b; ch 7
[1012*18-24] 532a-b;
CH 8
[1012*^5-8]
532c; bk xi, ch 5 590a-d; BK xiii, ch 4
[io78*'i7-3o]
610b-c / Soul, bk I, CH I
[402*10-23] 631b;
[402*^15-403*2]
631d-632a; ch 3 [407*22-30] 636d-637a; ch 5
[409*3i-*'i8] 639b-c; bk
ii, ch 2
[413*11-19]
643a-b 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639V642*'5] 161d-165c
17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  2  306a-b  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q i, a 7, REP I 7a-c; q 2, a i, rep 2 lOd-lld; a 2,
rep  2  lld-12c;  Q 3, A 5, ANs 17c-18b; q 17, A 3, rep 1-2 102d-103c; q
58,  a  5  303c-304c;  q 85, A 6 458d-459c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
56b-60c; 65c-d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 128c129a

[358a]
(5.  Definition  and  demonstration:  definitions  as  principles and as
conclusions.)   33   Pascal:   Pensees,   i  171  a-172a  /  Geometrical
Demonstration,  430b-434b  passim,  esp  430b,  431b'432a;  442a-443b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch ix, SECT 15-16 288d-289c; ch xi,
sect  15-17  303b-304a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  sect  20, 319b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xh,  div  131  508d-509a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,
179d-182b;  211c-218d  esp  215d-216d  /  Practical Reason, 293c-294b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2 9b10a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue h, 690b 54 Freud: Instincts, 412a-b 6. The character of
definitions in diverse disciplines 6a. The formulation of definitions in
physics, mathematics, and metaphysics 7 Plato: Seventh Letter, 809c-810b
8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 4 [i4i^26-''24] 194c-195a; bk vii, ch 3
[153*6-11] 208a-b /
Physics, BK I, ch 9
[i92*25-'^2]
268c-d;  bk  II,  ch  2  270a-271a;  bk  hi,  ch  1-2  278a-279c;  ch  6
[206^33-207*14]  285b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  1-5  287a-292c; ch ii 298c-300a /
Meteorology,  BK  IV,  ch  12  493d-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  CH 4
525a-528b; bk v, ch i-bk vi, ch i 533a-548c; bk ix, ch 6
[1048*25-^9]
573c574a;  bk xi, ch 5 590a-d; ch 7 592b-593a; BK xiii, ch 2 [io77^i]-CH
3
[1078*32] 608d609d / Soul, BK
I,  CH  i-BK  II,  CH  3 631a-645b esp BK I, CH I 631a-632d 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 2-4 165d-168c / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098*20-^8]
343c-344a  11 Euclid: Elements, bk i, definitions la-2a esp 1-2,4,10 la,
15  lb, 23 2a; bk ii, definitions 30a; BK III, definitions 41a-b esp 2-3
41a;  BK IV, definitions 67a-b; bk v, definitions 81a-82a esp 3-7 81a-b;
bk  vi,  DEFINITIONS  99a;  BK  VII,  definitions 127a128a esp 1-2 127a,
11-12,20  127b;  bk x, definitions 1 191a-b esp 1,3 191a; definitions ii
229a;  definitions  hi  264b;  bk xi, definitions 301a-302b esp 14 301b,
18,21  302a 11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, definitions 404a /
Conoids  and  Spheroids,  452a454a passim; definitions 455a-b / Spirals,
definttions  490a / Equilibrium of Planes, bk II, 511a / Sand'Recl^oner,
524a-b / Quadrature ofthe Parabola, def 534b-535a 11 Apollonius: Conies,
bk  i,  first  definitions 604a-b esp i 604a; second definitions 626a 11
NicoMACHUs:   Arithmetic,  bk  i,  814b-c  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,
986b-1004a passim 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch i, 281a-b

[358b]
a 300 THE GREAT IDEAS 6 to 6b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i,
A 7, rep I 7a-c; q 2, a 2, rep 2 lld-12c; q 3, A 5, ANs 17c-18b; Q 10, A
I 40d-41d; q 29, A I 162a-163b; q 75, a 4, ans 381b-382a; q 85, A I, rep
2 451c-453c; a 8, rep 2 460b461b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; part
iv,  269b-c  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, first day, 142d-143a; third
day,  197b-c;  200a-203d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 43a-d 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23c-24a;  xni, 26b-c / Objections and Replies,
128c-129a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b372d; PART II, PROP
40,  schol  1-2  387b-388b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  i  171a-172a/ Vaaium,
372b373b;  376b-377a  / Geometrical Demonstration, 430b-434b passim, esp
430b-43ib  34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions  5a-13a / Optics, BK I,
379a-380b  35  Hume : Human Understanding, s ect vii, div 4849 470d-471d
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 68a69c; 215d-217a; 245c-248d 6h.
The  use of definition in speculative philosophy and empirical science 7
Plato:  Theaetetus,  544c-549d  /  Statesman,  595b-c  / Seventh Letter,
809c-810b  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 13-14 131b-134a /
Soul,  bk  i  631a-641d  esp  ch  i 631a-632d; bk ii, ch 1-3 642a-645b 9
Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch 1-4 161a-168c passim / Politics,
bk iv, ch 4
[1290^25-40] 489d-490a
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  43c-44d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
third  day, 200a-203d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 63 113d114a; BK
II,  aph  10-20  140c-153a;  aph  48 179d-188b 31 Descartes: Rules, xii,
23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, sciiol 1-2
387b-388b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 372h-373h; 376h-37 7 34 Newton: Principles,
definitions   5a-13a   /   Optics,  BK  I,  379a-380b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii,  SECT  3-10  204c-206d;  sect  14-18
208b209a; sect 37 213d-214b; bk iii, ch ix, sect 15-17 288d-290a; ch xi,
sect  10  302b;  sect 19-25 304b-306c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
ii, div 17, 457b,d
[fn i]; sect
vii,  div 48-49 470d471d; SECT VIII, div 74 484a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
15c-16c;  215d-216d;  243c-244c  /  Practical Reason, 293c-294b / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-c /Judgement, 603b-d 43 Federalist: number
37,  119b-120b  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 10ab;
21a-22c; 25c-29d

[359a]
6c  Chapter  15:  45  Fourhr:  Theory  of  11ejt.  184a-187b 45 Farap.w:
Researches  in Electricity, 361a-d 46 Hec.il: Philosophy of Rights imro,
par  2 9b 10a 51 Toi.srov: War and Peace, ki'iloc;lk ii. 690b; 694b-d 53
James:  Psxchologw  3b-4a: 869a-871a csp 870a871a 54 Freuo: \arcissisni,
400d-401a  /  Instincts,  412a-413b  6c.  The  role  of  definitions  in
practical or moral philosophy and the social sciences 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
120a-c / Seventh iMter, 809c-810b 9 Arisiotle: Ethics, bk i, ch i-bk ii,
ch  6  339a-352d passim; bk x, ch i-8 426a-434a / Politics, BK I, CH 1-2
445a-446d; bk hi, ch 1-6 471b,d-476c; en 9 [i28o''25-i28i^2] 477d478c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk xix, ch 21-24 524b-528c esp ch 21 524b-525a, ch 24 528b-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 49 la-6a; q 55, a 4 28c-29d; q 71, a 6
110bCROSS-REFERENCES  For:  The linguistic aspects of definition and the
general theory of the meaning of words, see Language la; Sign and Symbol
4a. The logical aspects of definition, see Idea 4a. Other discussions of
the object of definition and the problem of essences or universals, see

[359b]
DEFINITION 301 lllb; Q 90 205a-208b; part ii-ii, q 4, a i 402a 403d 23 I
Iobbes:  leviathan,  pari i, 57d-58a 35 LocKi;: Human Understanding, i;k
in,  en  xi,  sect  17  303d-304a;  bk iv, cii m, sect 20, 319b 35 Hume:
fIt/man  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 48-49 470d-471d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Imws, bk ii, 4a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330a-d 42 Kant: Pund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 271ac; 280d-281a / Practical Reason, 297a
314d;  330d-331a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 386bd; 390b.d-391a /
Science of Right, 398c-399c 43 I'ederalist: number 37, 119b 120b; number
39   125a-128b   passim,   esp   125b-c;  number  42,  137a-b  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  469a  -b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, tniro, par 2
9b10a / Philosophy of History, iniro, 158a-162a 50 Marx: Capital, 6c-lld
passim;  178d-179c  passim; 265a-266a; 267c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  ix,  365a-b;  epilogue  ii,  683d-684a;  690b  53 James: Psychology,
887a-888a

[360a]
302  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I. Aquinas. On Being and Essence, ch 2-3 HoBBES.
Concerning Body, part i, ch 2 Spinoza. Correspondence, ix Locke. Conduct
of  the  Understanding Kant. Introduction to Logic, viii Hegel, Sciefice
of  Logic,  vol i, bk ii, sect i, ch i J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk
i,  ch 7-8; bk 4, CH 7-8 II. Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria {Institutes
of  Oratory),  BK VII, ch 3 Sextus Empiricus. Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk
II  loHN  OF Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica,
part  ii,  qq  6-12  Arnauld.  Logic  or the Art of Thinl^ng, part i, CH
12-14;   PART   IV,  CH  4-5  Leibnitz.  Netu  Essays  Concerning  Human
Understanding,  BK III, CH 3 T. Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Potvers
of  Man, I ]. Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, CH 8 W.
Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL II (24)

[360b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences^  VOL  I,  BK  VIII SiGWART. Logic, PART I, CH I, SECT 44; PART
III, CH I, sect 74 Ievons. The Principles of Science, ch 30 . Studies in
Deductive  Logic,  ch  1-2, 7 Venn. Principles of Empirical or Inductive
LogiCy  ch 11-13 Poincare. Science and Method, bk ii, ch 2 Whitehead and
Russell.  Principia Mathematica, INTRO, CH I, esp pp II-I9; PART I, SECT
A,  CSp  pp  91-94  B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics,  part i .
Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  ch  13, 16-17 Whitehead. An
Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch 8-13 . The
Concept  of  Nature, ch 4 W\ E. Johnson. Logic, part i, ch 7-8 Ogden and
Richards.  The Meaning of Meaning Dubislav. Die Definition Maritain. The
Degrees  of Knowledge, ch 3 Carnap. The Logical Syntax of Language, part
i,  sect 8; PART II, SECT 22; PART III, SECT 29 Dewey. Logic, the Theory
of  Inquiry,  ch  13-14,  16-18,  20. Dewey and Bentley. Knowing and the
Known^ CH 7

[361a]
Chapter  i6:  DEMOCRACY  INTRODUCTION  OF  all the traditional names for
forms  of  government, "democracy" has the liveliest currency today. Yet
like  all  the  others,  it  has  a  long  history  in the literature of
political  thought  and a career of shifting meanings. How radically the
various  conceptions  of  democracy  differ  may be judged from the fact
that,  in  one  of its meanings, democracy flourished in the Greek city-
states  as  early as the fifth century B.C.; while in another, democracy
only  began  to  exist  in  recent  times  or perhaps does not yet exist
anywhere  in  the world. In our minds democracy is inseparably connected
with  constitutional  government.  We  tend  to  think  of  despotism or
dictatorship  as  its  only  opposites or enemies. That is how the major
pohtical  issue  of  our  day is understood. But as recently as the i8th
century,  some  of  the  American constitutionalists prefer a republican
form  of  government  to democracy; and at other times, both ancient and
modern,  oligarchy or aristocracy, rather than monarchy or despotism, is
the  major  alternative. "Democracy" has even stood for the lawless rule
of the mob—either itself a kind of tyranny or the immediate precursor of
tyranny.  Throughout  all  these  shifts  in meaning and value, the word
"democracy" preserves certain constant political connotations. Democracy
exists,  according  to  Montesquieu,  "when  the  body  of the people is
possessed  of  the  supreme  power."  As  the  root  meaning of the word
indicates,  democracy  is  the "rule of the people." While there may be,
and  in fact often has been, a difference of opinion with respect to the
meaning  of  "the people," this notion has been traditionally associated
with  the  doctrine  of  popular  sovereignty, which makes the political
community  as  such  the origin and basis of political authority. In the
development  of  the democratic tradition, particularlv in modern times,
this has been accom303

[361b]
panied  by the elaboration of safeguards for the rights of man to assure
that  government  actually  functions for the people, and not merely for
one  group  of  them.  Although  they  are essential parts of democracy,
neither  popular  sovereignty  nor  the  safeguarding  of natural rights
provides  the  specific  characteristic  of  democracy,  since  both are
compatible  with  any  other  just  form  ofgovernment. The specifically
democratic  element  is  apparent from the fact that throughout the many
shifts  of  meaning  which democracy has undergone, the common thread is
the  notion  of political power in the hands of the many rather than the
few  or the one. Thus at the very beginning of democratic government, we
find  Pericles  calling  Athens  a democracy because "its administration
favours  the  many  instead  of  the  few."  Close  to our own day. Mill
likewise  holds that democracy is "the government of the whole people by
the  whole  people"  in  which  "the  majority  .  .  . will outvote and
prevail."  According  as  the  many  exercise legal power as citizens or
merely  actual  power  as  a  mob,  democracy is aligned with or against
constitutional  government.  The quantitative meaning of "many" can vary
from  more  than  thefew to all or something approximating all, and with
this  variance  the  same  constitution  may  be at one time regarded as
oligarchical  or  aristocratic, and at another as democratic. The way in
which  the many who are citizens exercise their power either directly or
through  representatives—occasions the 1 8th century distinction between
a  democracy  and a republic, though this verbal ambiguity can be easily
avoided  by  using  the  phrases  "direct democracy" and "representative
democracy,"  as  was sometimes done by the writers of The Federalist and
their  American  contemporaries. These last two points— the extension of
the

[362a]
304  THE  GREAT  IDEAS franchise and a system of representation—mark the
chief  differences  between  ancient  and  contemporary  institutions of
democracy.  Today  constitutional  democracy tends to be representative,
and  the  grant  of  citizenship  under  a democratic constitution tends
toward  universal  suffrage. That is why we no longer contrast democracy
and  republic.  That is why even the most democratic Greek constitutions
may seem undemocratic—oligarchical or aristocratic— to us. To the extent
that  democracy,  ancient  or  modern,  is conceived as a lawful form of
government,  it  has  elements  in  common  with  other  forms of lawful
government  which, for one reason or another, may not be democratic. The
significance    of    these    common   elements—   the   principle   of
constitutionality  and  the  status of citizenship—will be assumed here.
They  are  discussed  in  the  chapters on Constitution and Citizen. The
general  theory  of the forms of government is treated in the chapter on
Government,  and the two forms most closely related to democracy, in the
chapters  on Aristocracy and Oligarchy. The evaluations of democracy are
even more various than its meanings. It has been denounced as an extreme
perversion  of government. It has been grouped with other good, or other
bad,  forms of government, and accorded the faint praise of being called
either  the  most  tolerable  of  bad governments or the least efficient
among  acceptable forms. It has been held up as the political ideal, the
only  perfectly  just  state—  that  paragon of justice which has always
been,  whether  recognized  or  not,  the  goal  of  political progress.
Sometimes  the  same  writer  will  express  divergent views. Plato, for
example, in the Statesman, claims that democracy has "a twofold meaning"
according  as  it  involves "ruling with law or without law." Finding it
"in  every  respect  weak  and unable to do either any great good or any
great  evil,"  he  concludes  that  it  is  "the  worst  of  all  lawful
governments,  and the best of all lawless ones." The rule of the many is
least  efficient for either good or evil. But in the Republic^ he places
democracy  at  only  one  remove  from  tyranny. On the ground that "the
excessive  increase  of anything often causes a reaction in the opposite
direction," tyranny is

[362b]
said  to "arise naturally out of democracy, and the most aggravated form
of  tyranny  and  slavery  out  of  the  most  extreme form of liberty."
Similarly,  Aristotle,  in  the  Politics,  calls  democracy  "the  most
tolerable"  of  the  three perverted forms of government, in contrast to
oligarchy,  which he thinks is only "a little better" than tyranny, "the
worst   of   governments."  Yet  he  also  notes  that,  among  existing
governments,   "there   are   generally  thought  to  be  two  principal
forms—democracy and ohgarch)', . . . and the rest are only variations of
these." His own treatment conforms with this observation. He devotes the
central  portion  of  his  Politics  to  the  analysis  of oligarchy and
democracy.  In  his view they are equal and opposite in their injustice,
and to him both seem capable of degenerating into despotism and tyranny.
Among the political philosophers of modern times a certain uniformity of
treatment  seems  to  prevail  in  the  context  of  otherwise divergent
theories.  Writers  like  Hobbes,  Locke,  and Rousseau, or Machiavelli,
Montesquieu,  and  Kant  differ  in many and profound respects. But they
classify  the  forms  of  government in much the same fashion. As Hobbes
expresses  it,  "when  the  representative  is  one  man,  then  is  the
commonwealth  a  monarchy;  when  an  assembly  of  all  that  will come
together,  then  it  is  a  democracy,  or popular commonwealth; when an
assembly  of  a  part  only,  then  it is called an aristocracy." Though
Hobbes  favors monarchy and Montesquieu either aristocracy or democracy,
these writers do not make the choice among the three traditional forms a
significant  expression  of  their  own political theories. For them the
more  important  choice  is  presented by other alternatives: for Hobbes
between  absolute  and  limited  government;  for Montesquieu and Locke,
between  government by law and despotism; for Rousseau and Kant, between
a republic and a monarchy. The authors of The Federalist definitely show
their  preference  for  "popular  government"  as  opposed  to monarchy,
aristocracy,  or oligarchy. They usually refer to it as a "republic," by
which  they  mean "a government which derives all its powers directly or
indirectly  from  the  great  body of the people, and is administered by
persons  holding their offices during pleasure, for a limited period, or
during good behavior."

[363a]
Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY  Alexander  Hamilton  and others involved in the
American   constitutional   debates,   as   for  example  James  Wilson,
occasionally  call  this system a "representative democracy," but in The
Federal'  ist a republic is sharply differentiated from a democracy. The
"great  points  of  difference,"  however,  turn  out  to  be  only "the
delegation  of  the  government  (in  a  republic)  to a small number of
citizens  elected by the rest," and the "greater number of citizens, and
greater  sphere  of  country"  to  which  a  republic  may  extend.  The
difference,   as   already   noted,  is  best  expressed  in  the  words
"representative"   and  "direct"  democracy.  In  Mill's  Representative
Government  we  find  democracy  identified  with  the ideal state. "The
ideally  best  form  of  government,"  he  writes, "is that in which the
sovereignty,  or supreme controlling power in the last resort, is vested
in  the entire aggregate of the community, every citizen not only having
a  voice  in  the  exercise  of that ultimate sovereignty, but being, at
least  occasionally, called on to take an actual part in the government,
by  the  personal  discharge of some public function, local or general."
Though  Mill  recognizes  the  infirmities  of  democracy  and though he
readily  concedes that it may not be the best government for all peoples
under  all  circumstances, his argument for its superiority to all other
forms   of  government  remains  substantially  unqualified.  In  Mill's
construction  of  the democratic ideal as providing liberty and equality
for all, the essential distinction from previous conceptions lies in the
meaning  of the word all. The republicans of the 1 8th century, in their
doctrines   of   popular  sovereignty  and  natural  rights,  understood
citizenship  in  terms  of  equality  of status and conceived liberty in
terms  of  a  man's  having a voice in his own government. The ancients,
seeing that men could be free and equal members of a political community
only  when they lived as citizens under the rule of law, recognized that
the  democratic  constitution  alone bestowed such equality upon all men
not born slaves. But generally neither the ancients nor the i8th century
repubUcans  understood  liberty  and equality yor all men to require the
abolition   of   slavery,  the  emancipation  of  women  from  political
subjection, or the eradication of all con-

[363b]
305  stitutional  discriminations  based  on  wealth,  race, or previous
condition  of servitude. With Mill, all means every human person without
regard  to  the  accidents  of  birth  or fortune. "There ought to be no
pariahs  m  a  fullgrown  and  civilized nation," he writes, "no persons
disqualified,  except  through  their  own  default."  Under  the latter
condition,  he  would  withhold  the  franchise from infants, idiots, or
criminals (including the criminally indigent), but with these exceptions
he  would  make  suffrage universal. He sums up his argument by claiming
that  "it  is  a personal injustice to withhold from any one, unless for
the  prevention  of  greater evils, the ordinary privilege of having his
voice  reckoned  in  the  disposal  of  affairs in which he has the same
interest  as other people," and whoever "has no vote, and no prospect of
obtaining it, will either be a permanent malcontent, or will feel as one
whom  the  general  affairs of society do not concern." But it should be
added  that  for  Mill the franchise is not merely a privilege or even a
right; "it is," he says, "strictly a matter of duty." How the voter uses
the  ballot "has no more to do with his personal wishes than the verdict
of  a juryman. ... He is bound to give it according to his best and most
conscientious  opinion of the public good. Whoever has any other idea of
it  is  unfit  to  have  the suffrage." The notion of universal suffrage
raises  at  once the question of the economic conditions prerequisite to
the  perfection  of  political democracy. Can men exercise the political
freedom  of  citizenship without freedom from economic dependence on the
will  of other men ? It was commonly thought by i8th century republicans
that  they  could  not.  "A  power  over  a man's subsistence," Hamilton
declares, "amounts to a power over his will." On that basis it was urged
by many during the Philadelphia convention that a property qualification
was  necessary for suffrage. Kant also argues that suffrage "presupposes
the independence or self-sufficiency of the individual citizen." Because
apprentices,  servants,  minors,  women,  and  the  like do not maintain
themselves,  each  "according to his own industry, but as it is arranged
by   others,"  he  claims  that  they  are  "mere  subsidiaries  of  the
Commonwealth and not active independent members of

[364a]
306  THE GREAT IDEAS it," being "of necessity commanded and protected by
others."  For  this  reason,  he  concludes,  they  are  "passive,"  not
"active,"  citizens and can be rightfully deprived of the franchise. For
political  democracy  to  be  realized in practice, more may be required
than  the  abolition  of  poll  taxes and other discriminations based on
wealth. In the opinion of Karl Marx, the "battle for democracy" will not
be  won,  nor even the "first step" taken towards it, until "the working
class  raises  the  proletariat  to the position of ruling class." Quite
apart  from  the  merits of the revolutionary political philosophy which
Marx  erects, his views, and those of other social reformers of the 19th
century,  have  made  it  a central issue that democracy be conceived in
social  and economic terms as well as political. Otherwise, they insist,
what  is  called  "democracy"  will permit, and may even try to condone,
social  inequalities  and  economic  injustices  which vitiate political
liberty.  There  is  one  other condition of equahty which the status of
citizenship  demands.  This  is  equality  of  educational  opportunity.
According  to  Mill,  it  is "almost a self-evident axiom that the State
should  require  and  compel the education, up to a certain standard, of
every  human  being who is born its citizen." All men may not be endowed
with  the  same  native  abilities  or talents, but all born with enough
intelligence to become citizens deserve the sort of education which fits
them  for  the  life  of political freedom. Quantitatively, this means a
system of education as universal as the franchise; and as much for every
individual  as he can take, both in youth and adult life. Qualitatively,
this  means liberal education rather than vocational training, though in
contemporary  controversy this point is still disputed. The way in which
it  recognizes  and  discharges its educational responsibility tests the
sincerity  of  modern  democracy.  No  other  form  ofgovernment  has  a
comparable  burden, for no other calls all men to citizenship. In such a
government,  Montesquieu  declares,  "the  whole  power  of education is
required."  Whereas despotism may be preserved by fear and a monarchy by
a  system  of  honor,  a  democracy  depends  on civic virtue. For where
"government  is intrusted to private citizens," it requires "love of the
laws

[364b]
and  of  the  country," and this, according to Montesquieu, is generally
"conducive  to  purity  of morals." Universal schooling by itself is not
sufficient  for  this  purpose. Democracy also needs what Mill calls the
"school  of public spirit." It is only by participating in the functions
of  government that men can become competent as citizens. By engaging in
civic  activities, a man "is made to feel himself one of the public, and
whatever is for their benefit to be for his benefit." The "moral part of
the instruction afforded by the participation of the private citizen, if
even  rarely,  in  pubfic  functions,"  results, according to Mill, in a
man's  being able "to weigh interests not his own; to be guided, in case
of conflicting claims, by another rule than his private partialities; to
apply,  at every turn, principles and maxims which have for their reason
of  existence  the  common  good."  If national affairs cannot afford an
opportunity for every citizen to take an active part in government, then
that  must  be  achieved  through  local  government, and it is for this
reason  that  Mill advocates the revitalization of the latter. There are
other  problems peculiar to modern democracy. Because of the size of the
territory  and  population  of the national state, democratic government
has  necessarily become representative. Representation, according to The
Federalist,  becomes  almost  indispensable when the people is too large
and  too  dispersed  for  assembly or for continuous, as well as direct,
participation   in  national  affairs.  The  pure  democracy  which  the
Federalists  attribute to the Greek city-states may still be appropriate
for local government of the town-meeting variety, but for the operations
of  federal or national government, the Federalists think the republican
institutions  of  Rome  a  better  model to follow. The Federalists have
another  reason  for  espousing  representative  government. The "mortal
disease"  of  popular  government,  in  their  view, is the "violence of
faction"  which  decides measures "not according to the rules of justice
and  the  rights  of  the  minor  party, but by the superior force of an
interested and overbearing majority." Believing the spirit of faction to
be  rooted  in the nature of man in society, the American statesmen seek
to cure its evil not by

[365a]
"removing  its  causes," but by "controlling its effects." The principle
of  representation, Madison claims, "promises the cure." Representation,
by  delegating  government  to a small number of citizens elected by the
rest,  is  said  "to refine and enlarge the public views by passing them
through  the  medium of a chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best
discern  the  true interest of their country." From this it appears that
representation  provides  a way of combining popular government with the
aristocratic  principle  of  government  by the best men. The assumption
that representation would normally secure the advantages of aristocratic
government  is  not  unmixed  with  oligarchical  prejudices. If, as the
Federalists  frankly  suppose, the best men are also likely to be men of
breeding  and  property,  representative  government would safeguard the
interests  of the gentry, as well as the safety of the republic, against
the  demos—  in Hamilton's words, "that great beast." Their concern with
the  evil  of  factions  seems to be colored by the fear of the dominant
faction  in  any democracy— the always more numerous poor. The leavening
of popular government by representative institutions in the formation of
modern  democracies  raises the whole problem of the nature and function
of representatives. To what extent does representation merely provide an
instrument  which  the people employs to express its will in the process
of self-government? To what extent is it a device whereby the great mass
of  the  people  select  their betters to decide for them what is beyond
their  competence  to decide for themselves ? According to the way these
questions are answered, the conception of the representative's function—
especially  in legislative matters—will vary from that of serving as the
mere  messenger  of  his  constituents  to that of acting independently,
exercising  his  own  judgment, and representing his constituents not in
the sense of doing their bidding, but only in the sense that he has been
chosen  by them to decide what is to be done for the common good. At one
extreme,  the representative seems to be reduced to the ignominious role
of a mouthpiece, a convenience required by the exigencies

[365b]
Chapter 16: DEMOCRACY 307 of time and space. Far from being a leader, or
one  of  the  best  men,  he  need  not  even  be  a better man than his
constituents.  At  the other extreme, it is not clear why the completely
independent  representative  need  even  be popularly elected. In Edmund
Burke's  theory  of  virtual  representation, occasioned by his argument
against  the  extension of the franchise, even those who do not vote are
adequately  represented  by  men  who  have  the welfare of the state at
heart.   They,   no  less  than  voting  constituents,  can  expect  the
representative  to  consider  what  is for their interest, and to oppose
their wishes if he thinks their local or special interest is inimical to
the  general  welfare.  Between these two extremes, Mill tries to find a
middle  course,  in  order  to  achieve  the  "two  great  requisites of
government:  responsibility  to  those for whose benefit political power
ought to be, and always professes to be, employed; and jointly therewith
to  obtain,  in  the  greatest  measure  possible,  for  the function of
government   the   benefits  of  superior  intellect,  trained  by  long
meditation  and practical discipline to that special task." Accordingly,
Mill  would  preserve  some  measure  of  independent  judgment  for the
representative  and  make  him  both  responsive  and responsible to his
constituents,  yet without directing or restraining him by the checks of
initiative,  referendum,  and Mill's discussion of representation leaves
few  crucial  questions  unasked,  though  it  may  not  provide clearly
satisfactory  answers  to  all  of  them.  It goes beyond the nature and
function of the representative to the problem of securing representation
for  minorities by the now familiar method of proportional voting. It is
concerned  with  the  details  of  electoral procedure the nomination of
candidates,  public  and  secret balloting, plural voting—as well as the
more  general question of the differences among the executive, judicial,
and    legislative   departments   of   government   with   respect   to
representation,  especially  the  difference  of  representatives in the
upper  and  lower houses of a bicameral legislature. Like the writers of
The  Federalist,  Mill  seeks  a  leaven  for the democratic mass in the
leadership  of  men  of  talent or training. He would qualify the common
sense of the many by the expertness or wisdom of the few.

[366a]
308  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  The ancient issue between the democratic and the
ohgarchical  constitution  turns primarily on a question of justice, not
on  the relative competence of the many and the few to rule. Either form
of  government may take on a more or less aristocratic cast according as
men  of  eminent  virtue or ability assume public office, but in neither
case  does  the  constitution  itself  guarantee  their  choice,  except
possibly  on  the  oligarchical assumption that the possession of wealth
signifies  superior intelligence and virtue. The justice peculiar to the
democratic  constitution,  Aristotle  thinks, ''arises out of the notion
that  those  who  are  equal  in  any respect are equal in all respects;
because  men  are  equally  free, they claim to be absolutely equal." It
does  not  seem to him inconsistent with democratic justice that slaves,
women,  and  resident  aliens  should  be  excluded from citizenship and
public   office.   In   the   extreme   form  of  Greek  democracy,  the
qualifications   for   public   office   are   no   different  from  the
qualifications  for  citizenship.  Since  they  are equally eligible for
almost every governmental post, the citizens can be chosen by lot rather
than  elected by vote. Rousseau agrees with Montesquieu's opinion of the
Greek  practice,  that  "election  by  lot  is democratic in nature." He
thinks  it  "would  have few disadvantages in a real democracy, but," he
adds,  "I have already said that a real democracy is only an ideal." The
justice  peculiar  to  the  oligarchical  constitution  is, according to
Aristotle,  "based  on  the  notion  that  those  who are unequal in one
respect  are  in  all  respects  unequal;  being  unequal,  that  is, in
property,  they  suppose  themselves  to  be  unequal  absolutely."  The
oligarchical  constitution  consequently  does  not grant citizenship or
open  public  office  to all the freeborn, but in varying degrees sets a
substantial  property  qualification for both. Though he admits that the
opposite  claims  of  the  oligarch  and  the  democrat  "have a kind of
justice,"   Aristotle  also  points  out  the  injustice  of  each.  The
democratic  constitution,  he  thinks,  does  injustice  to  the rich by
treating  them  as equal with the poor simply because both are freeborn,
while  the  oligarchical  constitution  does  injustice  to  the poor by
failing to treat all free men, regardless of wealth, as

[366b]
1  equals.  "Tried  by  an absolute standard," Aristotle goes on to say,
"they  are faulty, and, therefore, both parties, whenever their share in
the  government does not accord with their preconceived ideas, stir up a
revolution."  Plato,  Thucydides,  and  Plutarch,  as well as Aristotle,
observe  that  this  unstable  situation  permits demagogue or dynast to
encourage  lawless  rule  by the mob or by a coterie of the rich. Either
paves  the  way  to  tyranny.  To  stabilize  the  state  and  to remove
injustice, Aristotle proposes a mixed constitution which, by a number of
different  methods,  "attempts  to unite the freedom of the poor and the
wealth  of  the  rich."  In  this  way  he  hopes  to  satisfy  the  two
requirements  of  good  government.  "One  is  the  actual  obedience of
citizens  to  the laws, the other is the goodness of the laws which they
obey."  By  participating  in the making of laws, all free men, the poor
included,  would  be  more inclined to obey them. But since the rich are
also  given  a  special  function, there is, according to Aristotle, the
possibility of also getting good laws passed, ^ince "birth and education
are  commonly  the  accompaniments  of  wealth."  To Aristotle the mixed
constitution is perfectly just, and with an aristocratic aspect added to
the   blend,  it  approaches  the  ideal  polity.  Relative  to  certain
circumstances it has "a greater right than any other form of government,
except  the  true and ideal, to the name of the government of the best."
Yet  the true and the ideal, or what he sometimes calls the "divine form
of  government,"  seems to be monarchy for Aristotle, or rule by the one
superior  man; and in his own sketch of the best constitution at the end
of  the  Politics—  the  best  practicable,  if  not the ideal—Aristotle
clearly  opposes  admitting  all the laboring classes to citizenship. As
INDICATED IN thc chapter on Constitution, Aristotle's mixed constitution
should  be  distinguished  from  the mediaeval mixed regime, which was a
combination   of  constitutional  with  non-constitutional  or  absolute
government,   rather   than   a   mixture  of  different  constitutional
principles.  The  mixed regime—or "royal and political government"—seems
to have come into being not as an attempt to

[367a]
reconcile  conflicting  principles  of  justice,  but  as the inevitable
product  of a decaying fcutlalism and a rising nationalism. Yet Acjuinas
claims  that a mixed regime was established by divine law for the people
of Israel; for it was "partly kingdom, since there is one at the head of
all;  partly  aristocracy,  in  so far as a number of persons are set in
authority;  partly  democracy, i.e.y government by the people, in so far
as  the  rulers  can  be chosen from the people, and the people have the
right  to  choose  their  rulers."  In  such  a  system, the monarchical
principle  is  blended  with  aristocratic  and  democratic  elements to
whatever  extent  the  nobles  and  the  commons  play  a  part  in  the
government. But neither group functions politically as citizens do under
purely constitutional government. The question of constitutional justice
can,  however,  be  carried  over  from  ancient to modern times. Modern
democracy  answers  it  differently, granting equality to all men on the
basis  of their being born human. It recognizes in wealth or breeding no
basis for special political preferment or privilege. By these standards,
the mixed constitution and even the most extreme form of Greek democracy
must be regarded as oligarchical in character by a writer like Mill. Yet
Mill, no less than Aristotle, would agree with Montesquieu's theory that
the  rightness  of  any  form  of  government  must  be  considered with
reference  to the "humor and disposition of the people in whose favor it
is  established." The constitution and laws, Montesquieu writes, "should
be  adapted in such a manner to the people for whom they are framed that
it  would  be  a great chance if those of one nation suit another." Mill
makes  the  same  point  somewhat differently when he says, "the ideally
best  form of government . . . does not mean one which is practicable or
eligible  in  all states of civilization." But although he is willing to
consider  the forms of government in relation to the historic conditions
of a people, not simply by absolute standards, Mill differs sharply from
Montesquieu  and Aristotle in one very important respect. For him, as we
have  seen,  representative  democracy founded on universal suffrage is,
absolutely  speaking,  the  only  truly  j  ust government— the only one
perfectly suited

[367b]
CuAPTHR 16: DEMOCRACY 309 to the nature of man. Peoples whose accidental
circumstances  temporarily  justify  less  just  or even unjust forms of
government,  such  as  oligarchy  or  despotism,  must  not  be  forever
condemned to subjection or disfranchisement, but should rather be raised
by  education,  experience, and economic reforms to a condition in which
the  ideal  polity  becomes appropriate for them. Thi: basic problems of
democratic  government—seen  from  the point of view of those who either
attack  or  defend it— remain constant despite the altered conception of
democracy  in  various  epochs.  At  all times, there is the question of
leadership and the need for obtaining the political services of the best
men  without  infringing  on  the political prerogatives of all men. The
difference  between the many and the few, between the equality of men as
free  or human and their individual inequality in virtue or talent, must
always  be given political recognition, if not by superiority in status,
then  by  allocation of the technically difficult problems of statecraft
to  the  expert  or specially competent, with only certain broad general
policies  left  to  the  determination of a majority vote. Jefferson and
Mill  alike  hope that popular government may abolish privileged classes
without   losing   the  benefits  of  leadership  by  peculiarly  gifted
individuals.  The  realization  of  that  hope,  Jefferson writes Adams,
depends  on leaving "to the citizens the free election and separation of
the  aristoi  from  the pseudo-aristoi, of the wheat from the chaff." At
all  times there is the danger of tyranny by the majority and, under the
threat  of  revolution,  the  rise  of  a demagogue who uses mob rule to
establish a dictatorship. Hobbes phrases this peculiar susceptibility of
democracy  to the mischief of demagogues by saying of popular assemblies
that they "are as subject to evil counsel, and to be seduced by orators,
as  a  monarch  by  flatterers," with the result that democracy tends to
degenerate  into  government by the most powerful orator. The democratic
state has seldom been tempted to undertake the burdens of empire without
suffering  from  a  discordance  between  its  domestic  and its foreign
policy. Again and again,

[368a]
310 THE GREAT IDEAS Thucydides describes the efforts of the Athenians to
reconcile their imperiahsm abroad with democracy at home. In his oration
at  the end of the first year of the Peloponnesian war, Pericles praises
the democracy of Athens and at the same time celebrates the might of her
empire.  "It  is  only  the  Athenians,"  he  says,  "who,  fearless  of
consequences, confer their benefits not from calculations of expediency,
but  in  the  confidence of liberality." But four years later, after the
revolt  of  Mitylene,  Cleon  speaks  in  a  different  vein. Thucydides
describes  him  as being "at that time by far the most powerful with the
commons."  He tells his fellow citizens of democratic Athens that he has
"often  before  now  been  convinced  that  a  democracy is incapable of
empire,"  but  "never more so than by your present change of mind in the
matter  of  Mitylene." He urges them to return to their earlier decision
to  punish  the Mitylenians, for, he says, if they reverse that decision
they  will  be  "giving  way  to the three failings most fatal to empire
—pity,   sentiment,  and  indulgence."  Diodotus,  who  in  this  debate
recommends  a  policy  of leniency, does not do so in the "confidence of
liberality"  which  Pericles  had  said was the attitude of a democratic
state  toward  its  dependencies.  "The  question  is  not  of justice,"
Diodotus  declares, "but how to make the Mitylenians useful to Athens. .
.  .  We must not," he continues, "sit as strict judges of the offenders
to  our  own  prejudice, but rather see how by moderate chastisements we
may  be  enabled to benefit in the future by the revenueproducing powers
of  our  dependencies. ... It is far more useful for the preservation of
our  empire,"  he concludes, "voluntarily to put up with injustice, than
to  put  to death, however justly, those whom it is our interest to keep
alive."  Twelve  years later, Alcibiades, no democrat himself, urges the
Athenians to undertake the Sicilian expedition by saying, "we cannot fix
the  exact  point  at  which  our  empire  shall stop; we have reached a
position in which we must not be content with retaining but must scheme

[368b]
to extend it, for, if we cease to rule others, we are in danger of being
ruled  ourselves."  In  the  diplomatic  skirmishes  which  precede  the
invasion  of Sicily, Hermocrates of Syracuse tries to unite the Sicilian
cities  so  that  they may escape "disgraceful submission to an Athenian
master."  The  Athenian ambassador, Euphemus, finds himself compelled to
speak  at first of "our empire and of the good right we have to it"; but
he  soon finds himself frankly confessing that "for tyrants and imperial
cities  nothing  is  unreasonable  if  expedient." The denouement of the
Peloponnesian  war,  and  especially of the Syracusan expedition, is the
collapse of democracy, not through the loss of empire but as a result of
the  moral  sacrifices  involved  in  trying to maintain or increase it.
Tacitus,  commenting  on  the  decay of republican institutions with the
extension  of  Rome's  conquests, underlines the same theme. It is still
the same theme when the problems of British imperialism appear in Mill's
discussion   of   how   a   democracy  should  govern  its  colonies  or
dependencies.  The  incompatibility of empire with democracy is one side
of  the  picture  of the democratic state in external affairs. The other
side  is the tension between democratic institutions and military po\\er
or  policy—in  the  form  of  standing armies and warlike maneuvers. The
inefficiency   traditionally  attributed  to  democracy  under  peaceful
conditions  does  not, from all the evidences of history, seem to render
democracy  weak  or  pusillanimous in the face of aggression. The deeper
peril  for  democracy  seems  to  lie  in  the  effect  of  war upon its
institutions and on the morality of its people As Hamilton writes in The
Federalist:  "The  violent  destruction of life and property incident to
war,  the  continual  effort and alarm attendant on a state of continual
danger,  will compel nations the m.ost attached to liberty to resort for
repose  and  security  to  institutions which have a tendency to destrov
their civil and political rights. To be more safe, they at length become
willing to run the risk of being less free."

[369a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  I.  Conceptions  of  democracy:  the  comparison of
democracy with other forms of government 2. The derogation of democracy:
the  anarchic  tendency of freedom and equaHty 313 2a. Lawless mob-rule:
the  tyranny  of the majority 2b. The incompetence of the people and the
need  for leadership: the superiority of monarchy and aristocracy 3. The
acceptance  of  democracy as one of several good forms of government 314
3^.   Comparison   of  democratic  and  oligarchic  justice:  the  mixed
constitution  as a compromise between the interests of the poor and rich
3^.  Comparison  of  the  political  wisdom of the many and the few: the
mixed  regime  as  including  both 4. The praise of democracy: the ideal
state 4«. Liberty and equality for all under law (i) Universal suffrage:
the  abolition  of  privileged classes 4^. The democratic realization of
popular  sovereignty:  the  safeguarding  of  natural  I  rights 4c. The
infirmities  of  democracy  in  practice and the reforms or remedies for
these  defects  /\d.  The suitability of democratic constitutions to all
men  under all circumstances: 5. Democracy and representative government
5a.  The  distinction  between  direct  democracy and representative, or
repubhcan,  government:  the  territorial  limits  of  democracy 5^. The
theory of representation I (2) Ultimate limitations on the franchise (3)
Methods  of  election  and  voting  (4)  The  role of political parties:
factions  5c.  The  distribution  of  functions  and  powers: checks and
balances  in  representative  6.  The educational task of democracy: the
training of all citizens 7. The growth and vicissitudes of democracy yb.
The  dangers  of  imperialism:  the  treatment  of  dependencies yc. The
challenge of war and peace: the citizen army

[369b]
6  Chapter 16: DEMOCRACY 311 PAGE 312 conditions favorable to democracy;
progress toward democracy 317 democracy 319

[370a]
d  312  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage cited. 1.
Conceptions  of  democracy: the comparison of democracy with other forms
of government 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462]
261d-262b   6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-108c  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d399a  esp 396c7 Plato: Republic, bk i,
301c-d;  bk  viii, 408b413d / Statesman, 598b-604b esp 603d-604b / Laws,
BK  III, 667c-676b esp 672d-676b; bk IV, 679c-682c; bk vi, 699d-700c; bk
viii, 733d-734a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch i 471b,d-472c; CH 6
[1278^14]
475d;  ch 7-8 476c-477c; bk IV, ch 2-6 488b-493a; ch 11-12 495b-497b; CH
16
[1301^10-15]
502c;  BK V, CH I 502a503b; BK VI, CH 1-6 520a-524c / Rhetoric, bk I, CH
8  608a-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-c / Solon, 70d-71c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans
307d-309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104b-106d; 114b115a; 150c-151a;
154b-c;  part iii, 228b; part IV, 273a-b 35 Locke: Civil Goverfiment, ch
ii 25d-28c; ch IV, SECT 21 29d; ch vii, sect 87-89 44a-d;

[370b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119h,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation  '*esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. ch
viii  46c-53c  passim;  ch  x,  sect 132 55a-b; CH XI 55b-58b passim; ch
xiii, sect 149 59b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii-iii 4a13d esp
BK  II,  4a-6b, bk hi, 9b-10c; bk v, 18d-25a; 31b-33a,c; bk vi, 34d-35c;
bk vii, 44d-45b; 47c-48a; bk viii, 51a-52c; bk ix, 59c; BK XI, 68b,d-69c
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 359a-b / Social Contract, BK I, 391a-393c; bk
ii, 395a-398b: BK III, 410b-411c; 413c; 420a-424d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  81  d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right, 436c-d;
445a-c;  450a-452a  esp  450a-d 43 Federalist: number 9, 47a-48d; number
10,  51c-53a; number 14, 60a-61b; number 39, 125b-126b; number 48, 157c;
number  63,  193d-194a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c  / Representative
Government   327a-442d  passim,  esp  341d-350a,  355b-356a,  366c-367a,
370a-372b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273 90c-92a; par
279,  93d-94c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172d-175c;  part ii,
271c-274a  esp  271d-272d,  273d-274a; 275b-276d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
84b-85a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428d429c

[371a]
b  Itolb  CiiAFTLR 16: DEMOCRACY 313 2. The derogation of democracy: the
anarchic tendency of freedom and equality 5 Euripides: Suppliants 1^()()
425]  261d-262a  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 107c- 108c 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk vi, 533a-c 7 Plato: Republic, hk \m, 408b-414b /
Laws,  BK  III,  674c  676b;  bk  iv,  681b  682c;  bk VIII, 733d-734a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch 10 [1161*7 9] 413b / Politics, bk iv, ch
2
[i289''35-''uj
488b-c;  ch 4 [i292''4-37] 491b-d; ch 6 [1292^ 40-1293*9] 492c; BK V, CH
9
[1310*25-36]
512c; ch II
[1313^33-1314*1]
516c; bk vi, ch 4
[1319^2-32]
523a- b / Athenian Constitution, ch 28 565c-566b 14 Plutarch: Dion, 800c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114b-115a; 150c-151a; part iv, 273a-b 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vi, sect 57, 37a-b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  hi,  10a;  bk viii, 51a-52c; bk xi,
68b,d-69c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 424b 43 Federalist:
number   10,   51c-d   43  Mill:  Liberty,  298b-299a  /  Representative
Government,  354b-355b;  387b-c;  403d  44  ^osw Y.\A.: Johnson, 125c-d;
127b-c;  211b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 301 lOOb-
lOla; par 308 102c-103a / Philosophy of History, intro, 175b-c; part iv,
366c367a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist ManifestOy 431c 2a. Lawless mob-rule:
the tyranny of the majority 5 Euripides : Suppliants [409-427] 261d-262a
6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 108a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk vi,
525a-b;  533a-c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  411d-412d / Statesman,
598b-604b  esp  603d-604b  / Laws, bk III, 675c-676b; bk iv, 681b-682c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12 [1274*5-14] 470c-d; bk hi, ch 10
[1281*11-28]
478d479a; ch ii
[1281^^9-1282*41]
479d-480b;  bk IV, ch 4 [1292*4-37] 491b-d; ch 6 [1292^ 40-1293*9] 492c;
bk v, ch 9
[1310*25-36]
512c; ch 10
[1312*40-^8] 514d-515a; bk
vi,  ch  4  [1319^2-32] 523a-b 14 Plutarch: Agis, 648b,d-649b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  n,  114d-115a; part IV, 273b 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry
VI,  act  iv, sc vi-viii 6la-63b 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-225]  351a-353d; act hi, sc i [140-161] 370d-371a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
878  345a38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; bk vi, 35c-36a; bk
viii, 51a-52c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 419b

[371b]
d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b c;
94d 43 Imidkralist: number 9, 47a-c; number 10, 50b d; number 22, 84c-d;
number  51,  164a 165a; number 58, 181b-c; number 63, 192c-193a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  268d  271c;  298b-299a;  302b-c  /  Representative Government,
3b6c380h  passim,  esp376b-c;406c-d  44  BoswELh: Johnson, 260b; 422c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 303 101c-102a; additions, 180
148b  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 172d-173a; part hi, 300a-b; part
iv, 365a 2b. The incompetence of the people and the need for leadership:
the  superiority  of  monarchy  and  aristocracy 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462]  261d-262b  5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470aA87a,c 6 Herodotus:
History, bk hi, 107c-108c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 425a-d;
bk  v,  504c-505a;  bk  vi,  520b-c;  533a-c  7  Plato: Republic, bk iv,
346c-347a;  bk  vi,  375d-376c;  bk viii, 409a-d; 411d-414b / Statesman,
598b-604b / Laws, bk hi, 674d676b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[1270*^7-17]
466d; BK III, CH 10-13 478d-483a; ch 15
[1286*22-^8] 484c-d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 28 565c-566b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
xi, sect 23 306a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d / Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-64a,c /
Agis, 648b,d-649b / Dion, 792d802a,c esp 800c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  94b-c;  part  ii,  104d-106d;  129b-130a; 152b-c; part iv, 273a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a  26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc
i-ii  568b,d-572c  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i [1-225]
351a-353d; act ii, sc i
[1-106]
361a-362a;  act  III,  sc  I [140-161] 370d-371a; act iv, sc VI [74-156]
383a-384a  31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 44d-45a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
878  345a-b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect 223 76c-d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4d-5a; bk hi, lOc-d; BK V, 25c-d; bk
viii,  51a-52c; bk xi, 71a-c; 72b; bk xix, 142c-143a 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk ii, 401c-d; BK HI, 411a; 412a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
68b,d-69a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a43 Federalist: number 55,
172d-173a;  number  58,  181b-c;  number  63,  192c-d  43 Mill: Liberty,
298b-299a;  319d-323a,c  passim  / Representative Government, 353b-354b;
363b-366a; 375a-377a

[372a]
(2.  The  derogation  of  democracy: the anarchic tendency offreedom and
equality. 2b. The incompetence of the people and the needfor leadership:
the  superiority  of  monarchy  and  aristocracy.) 44 ^oswEiA.: Johnson,
86a-b;  172d-173a;  178a-c;  220a-d;  414c; 422c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part hi, par 281 95b-d; par 308 102c-103a; par 317-318 104d105b;
ADDITIONS,  186 149b / Philosophy of History, intro, 173a'175c; part ii,
272c273a;  part  hi,  300a-301c 3. The acceptance of democracy as one of
several  good forms of government 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c
7 Plato: Statesman, 600c-604b esp 603d604b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi,
ch i 471b,d-472c; CH 6
[1278^6-14] 475d; ch
7-8 476c-477c; CH II 479b-480c; bk iv, ch 11-12 495b-497b / Rhetoric, bk
i,  ch  8 608a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ans
229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
154b-c;  part  III,  228b;  PART  IV, 273a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government.
55a-b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of haws CH X, SECT 32 BK II, 4a-6b; bk hi,
9b-10c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk hi,
410b-411c  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 450a-d 43 Federalist: number 10,
51c-53a;  number 14, 60a-d; number 39, 125b-126b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  273  90c-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
173a-175c;  part  ii, 271c-274a passim 3<«. Comparison of democratic and
oligarchic  justice: the mixed constitution as a compromise betw^een the
interests  of  the  poor  and  rich  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-462]
261d-262b  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 396b-c; bk vi,
520a-d;  bk  viii, 575d-576b; 590a-b 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 681b-682c; bk
vi, 699d-700b 9 Aristotle: Politics^ bk ii, ch 6
[1265^261266*30] 461 b-d; bk hi, ch 8-13 477a-483a;
bk IV, ch 3
[i289^26]-CH 4
[1290^21] 488d489d; CH 8-9 493c-494d; ch 11-12 495b-497b;
bk  IV,  CH 14-BK V, CH I 498b-503b; bk vi, ch 2 [1318^41-cH 3 [i3i8''5]
521b-522a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Solon, 71c / Dion, 800c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 156b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
ii, bk XI, 71d-72b

[372b]
5i4  THE  GREAT IDEAS Itolh 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iii, 412b-c
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 90d-91a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81d;
94c-95b; 96b-d; 403b-404d 43 Federalist: number 54, 171b-172b; number 57
176d-179b passim 43 Mill: Representative Government, 384a-387d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Historv,  part ii, 275b276a 50 Marx-Engels: Cow;?2w;2/V/
Manifesto,'\Z2h'd 5b. Comparison of the political wisdom of the many and
the  few:  the  mixed  regime  as including both 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462] 261d-262b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c; bk V, 180c-d
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 425a-d; bk vi, 520a-d 7 Plato:
Crito  213a-219a,c  esp  213a-215d  / Republic, BK IV, 346c-347a; bk vi,
375d-376c;  377a-379c  / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, BK HI, 674d-676b 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 10-13 478d483a; ch 15 [1286*7-^8] 484b-d;
ch  16 [1287*^ 8-36] 486a-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Agis, 648b,
d649a  /  Dion, 800c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4,
ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  and  REP  1-2 307d-309d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part ii, 105d-106b; 129b-130a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 303c-304a
27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus 3Sla.-3923i,c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
ii,  44d-45a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch xix, sect 223 76c-d; sect
240-242  81b-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 4d-5a; bk XI,
71a-c;  bk  xix,  145c-d is Rousseau: Political Economy, 369c-d / Social
Contract,  bk hi, 411d-412a; 413c; 414d-415b; BK IV, 427a-428a passim 41
Gi  B  BON  :  Decline  and  Fall, 94c-95b 43 Federalist: number 3, 33b;
number 10, 51d-52a; number 40, 130d-132a; number 49-50 159b-162c passim;
number  55,  172d173a;  number  57  176d-179b passim; number 58, 181b-c;
number  63,  192c-193a;  number 68, 205b-d; number 71, 214d-215a; number
76,   227a   43   Mill:   Liberty,   298b-299a;   319d-323a,c  passim  /
Representative   Government,  353b-354b;  356b-362c  passim;  363b-366a;
374c-377a; 384a-387d; 401a-406a passim, esp 402b-c; 407d-409c; 410d-412a
44 BoswEi.!.: Johnson, 86a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
281  95b-d;  par  297  99b;  par  301  lOOb-lOla; par 308 102c-103a; par
317-318 104d-105b; additions, 186 149b

[373a]
3cto4a(l)  Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY  315  3c.  Comparison  of  democracy,
aristocracy,  and  monarchy  with  respect  to  efficiency  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk hi, 107c- 108c 7 Plato: Statesman, 603d-604b / Laws, bk IV,
679b  680c;  bk  vi,  699d-700c  QAristotle:  Politics,  bk hi, ch 11-13
479b483a;  ch  15-18  484b-487a,c;  bk  iv, ch ii 495b-496d 15 Tacitiis:
Annals,  bk  i, 4d-5b 23 Hobbhs: Leviathan, part h, 104d-106d; 107d108a;
129b  130a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, lOc-d; bk V, 25c-d; bk
xi,  72b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411d-412a 42 Kant: Science
of  Right,  450b-c  43  Federalist:  number  37,  118d-119b;  number 70,
210c-211a  43 xMill: Representative Government, 344a-d; 363b-366a 4. The
praise  of  democracy: the ideal state 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-462]
261d-262b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-d; bk v, 175b; bk VII,
238b-c  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d-399a esp 396c-397c;
bk  vi,  520a-d  7  Plato:  Repuhlic,  bk  vih,  408b-413d  9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  11-12  479b481b;  bk  IV,  ch 11-12 495b-497b 14
Plutarch:   Lycurgiis-Numa,   62b-c   23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,
114b-115a; 150c-151a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xix, sect 223 76c-d;
sect 240-242 81b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4c-5a; BK III,
9b-10c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-328a,c passim / Social Contract, bk
hi, 411a-c; bk iv, 427d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right,
450d-452a  /  Judgement,  586a-587a  43  Federalist:  number 10 49c-53a;
number  14,  60c-d;  number  39,  125b-126b; number 46, 150c; number 55,
174c-d  43  Mill: Representative Government, 341d-350a esp 344d, 350a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  ii, 276a-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
84b-85a  4a.  Liberty  and  equality  for  all  under  law  5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108d;
bk  VII, 232d-233d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396c-d; bk vi,
520a-d  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  hi,  674c-676c;  bk  iv, 681b-682c; bk vi,
699d-700c  QAristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1134^24-^17]  382a-c  /
Politics, bk hi, ch i 471b,d-472c; CH 6
[1278^30-1279^22]
476a-c; ch 8-13 477a-483a passim; ch 16-17 485b-487a passim; BK IV, ch 4
[1291*^30-38] 491a-b; ch 14

[373b]
[1298*4-34] 498b-d; bk
v, ch i 502a-503b; ch 8
[i^o8"i()-25] 510a-b; ch 9
[i:5i()"25-36]
512c;  BK  VI, ch 2 520d 521b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, iik i, si;f;T 14
254b-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a 37b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xhi, 132a c
23  Machiavelli:  Prince, ch v 8a-c 23 HoBBKs: Leviathan, part 1, 94b-d;
part  ii,  113c 116b; 150c 151a; 156b-c; part iv, 273a c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vi, sect 54-57 36c-37b; ch vii, SECT
87-94   44a-46c;   ch  xi,  sect  1^6-1:59  56c-58a;  sect  142  58b  38
MoNTESQi'iEu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-21a;  BK VI, 34d; BK VIII,
51a-52c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 359a- b / Social
Contract,  BK  II, 396d-398b; 405a-c; bk iv, 427d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 14b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81 d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d
/   Science  of  Right,  398c-399c;  400b,d-402a,c;  408c-409c;  436c-d;
438d-439a;  450d-452a esp 451b-c /Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Declaration of
Independence:
[7-28]
la-b passim 43 Articles of Confederation: iv
[17-36]
5b-c 43 Constitution of the U.S.: preamble lla,c; article IV, sect 2
[519-521]
16a;  amendments, i-x 17a-d; xiii, sect i-xiv, sect 2 18c-d; XV 19b; xix
19d  43  Federalist: number 26 92a-94d; number 37, 118d-119b; number 57,
177d-178a;   number   84,   251b-254b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267a-274a  /
Representative  Government, 346a-c; 365b-366a: 370a-372b; 387b-d; 403d /
Utilitarianism,  460a-c; 467a-b; 474d-476a 44 BoswELi.: Johnson, 125c-d;
127b-c;  211b-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 213b; PART II,
271d-272d;  275b-'276d;  part  iv,  362d-363a  48  Melville : Moby Dic{,
84b-85a  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 429b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,   bk  i,  lOa-b  4a(l)  Universal  suflFrage:  the  abolition  of
privileged  classes 5 Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk vi, 520b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk vih, 406a-407a /
Laws,  bk  VI,  705b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk hi, ch 9-12 477c-481b
passim; bk iv, ch 6 492b-493a; bk vi, ch 4
[1319^2-32] 523a-b
38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a-5c; BKxi, 71d-72b 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  427d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 14b 41
GiBEOi<:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b-c;  81d-82b 42 Kant: Science ofRight,
436d-437c; 445a-c

[374a]
316  THE  GREAT IDEAS (4a. Liberty and equality for all under law. 4a{l)
Universal  su^rage: the abolition of privileged classes.) 43 Articles of
Confederation: vi
[87-93]
6b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 9
[289-295]
14a; article vi
[597-599] 16d;
AMENDMENTS,  XIV,  SECT  I-3 18c-19a; XV 19b; XVII 19b-c; xix 19d; xxiii
20d  43  Federalist: number 39, 125c-126b; number 57, 177a-b; number 84,
252a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 344d-346c; 350a; 369b-370a;
380c-389b;  394a-396d; 403 d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 416cd;
425b-c;  428d-429c  4a{2)  The  problem  of economic justice: the choice
between  capitalism  and  socialism  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-462]
261d-262b  5  Aristophanes: Ecdesiazusae 615a-628d 7 Plato: Republic, bk
hi,  341c-d; bk v, 363b365d / Laws, bk v, 691b-697a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 2
[ii3o^3o]-ch
4 [1132^20] 378b-380b / Politics, bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a; ch 6
[1265*27-37] 460c-d; ch 7
461d-463c;  bk  v,  ch  i  502a-503b;  bk  vi,  ch  3  521c-522a;  ch  5
[1320*17-^11]  523d-524b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 36a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 105, A 2, ANS and rep 1-6 309d-316a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  156b-157a 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-226]   351a-353d  35  Locke:  Civil  Goveriiment,  ch  v  30b-36a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  iv,  16a-17b;  BK v, 19d-21d; bk vii,
44d-45b;  bk  xiii,  96a-102a,c  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 375b-d;
377bd / Social Contract, bk i, 393d-394d; bk ii, 405a-d 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d; 61c-d; 109d-110d; bk iv, 201b-d; 239c-240a;
287c-d  43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: amendments, v[645-648] 17b; xiii
18c;  xvi  19b  43 Federalist: number 10, 50b-53a; number 35, 113a-114b;
number  60,  184d-186b;  number  79,  233c  43  Mill:  Liberty, 309a-c /
Representative   Government,   345b-346a;  369b-370a  /  Utilitarianism,
467a-b;  472d-473c  44  Bosw^l.l:  Johnson, 304c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  iv, 356d 50 Marx: Capital, 33b-37a; 104b-105a; 113c115c;
377c-378d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 419a434d esp 428d-429c,
432b-c,  433b,  434c-d  54  Freud:  Civilizatio?t  and  Its Discontents,
787d788b

[374b]
4rt(2)  to 4c 4b. The democratic realization of popular sovereignty: the
safeguarding of natural rights 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[334-^58]
261b-c;
[399-462] 261d-262b
6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-d;  bk  vir,  245b  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 396b-397c 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 681d-682c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk hi, ch i 471b,d-472c; CH 6 [1278*^7-14] 475d /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^22-31] 608a
14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus, 678b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
101a-104d;  part  III,  228b-c; part iv, 273a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  prop  37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect
21  29d; CH VII, SECT 87-CH VIII, sect 99 44a-47c; CH IX, SECT 127-CH X,
SECT 132 54a-55b; CH XI 55b-58b; ch xiii, sect 149 59b-d; ch XIX 73d-81d
passim,  esp  sect  212  74a-b, SECT 243 81d 38 Moj<iTESQiJiE\j : Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d;  356b-359a  /
Political  Economy,  369b-c / Social Contract^ bk I, 387b,d-392a; bk ii,
395a-396a;  bk  in, 420a-424d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14b; 91a d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 94d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 429a-c; 434a,
^35a458a,c   esp   436c,   437c-d,  450a'b,  451c-d  43  Declaration  of
Lndepexdence:
[r-28]
b;  [41-47]  2a;  [109-121]  3a-b  43 Constitution of the U.S.: preamble
lla,c;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d;  xin-xv 18c-19b; XIX 19d 43 Federalist:
number  10  49c-53a;  number  14,  60c-d;  number 22, 84d-85a; number 39
125a-128b;  number  40,  131b;  number 44, 144d-145a; 146c-d; number 46,
150b-c;  number  51, 164a-165a; number 78, 231a-232c; NUMBER 83, 246a-b;
number  84,  251b-254b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267a-274a  / Representative
Govermnent,  344d;  350a; 382b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  279,  93d-94d;  par  308  102c-103a  / Philosophy ofHistory, intro,
175b-c; part ii, 272a-d 4c. The infirmities of democracy in practice and
the  reforms  or  remedies  for  these  defects  5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462]  261d-262b  5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians 455a-469a,c / Knights
470a-487a,c esp
[1111-1150]
483d484b  /  Wasps 507a-525d / Peace 526a-541d esp [601-692] 532d-534a /
Birds   542a-563d  /  Frogs  [686-705]  572a-b  /  Lysistrata  [486-586]
589a-590d  /  Ecdesiazusae  [169-188]  617a 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
108a-c; bk v, 180c-d

[375a]
Uto5b Chapter 16: DEMOCRACY 317 6 Th ucY Di D ES : Pehponne<ian War, b k
hi,  425a-d;  bk v, 504c 505a; bk vi, 533a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii,
411d-413d  /  Laws,  BK  in,  674c  676b;  bk vi, 699d-700c 9 Aristotle:
Politics, hk iv, ch 4
[i2Q2"-4-^7]
491b-d; ch 6 \\2q2^^o~i2()7^\] 492c; bk v, ch 9 [i;{io''25 -36] 512c; BK
VI,  c\\  4  [1318^6-1319''  32]  522a-523b Athenian Constitution^ cm 28
565c-566b  14  Plitarcii: Lycurgus, 34d-35c / LycurgusNunia, 62b-64a,c /
Agis,  648b,d'649b  23 HoBH{:s: Leviathan, part ii, 148d-149b; 150c-d 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch xiii, sect 157i58 61c-62b 38 MoNTESQiTEu:
spirit  of  Latvs,  bk  11,  5a; bk III, lOa-c; HK VI, 35c-36a; bk viii,
51a-52c;  BK  IX, 58b,d-59b; bk xi, 69a-c; bk xix, 142c143a 38 RoussEvr:
Social  Contract,  bk hi, 418a-420a; BK IV, 433a-434b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  14b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94d-95c; 562c565a esp
563d-564a  43  Federalist:  number  10 49c-53a passim; NUMBER 22, 83b-d;
number  44,  146c-d; number 48, 157c; number 49-50 159b-162c; number 55,
172b-173b; number 58, ISlb-c; NUMBER 62, 189d-191c; number 63, 192b195b;
NUMBER  75,  223c-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  268d-271a; 298b-299b; 309a-b /
Representative  Government,  354b-355b;  362c389b passim, esp 380c-381a,
387b-d: 392b399d; 403b-d; 406a-409c passim 44 Bos well: Johnson, 178a-c;
374b  c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 303 10Ic-102a /
Philosophy   of   History,  intro,  172d-173a  4d.  The  suitability  of
democratic  constitutions to all men under all circumstances: conditions
favorable  to democracy; progress toward democracy 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  vi,  193b-c;  bk  ix,  314a,c  7 Plato: Republic, bk ix, 425c-427b 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch 15 [1286^8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 2
[1289^13-20]  488c-d;  CH  11-12  495b-497b;  bk  vi,  ch 4 522a-523b 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs, bk i, 3b-d; bk viii, 56b-c; 57b-c; bk xiv,
107b-d;  bk  XVI, 118b-c; BK xvii-xviii, 122a-126c; bk xix, 139c-140a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  II, 402b-405a;
405c-406a:  bk  hi, 410c; 411a-c: 415d; 421c-423a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  562c-565a esp 562c-d, 563d-564a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-115a /
Science  of  Right,  436dA37c;^51a-h  43 Federalist: number 14, 60a-61b;
number 39, 125b; number 55, 174c-d

[375b]
43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c;  272a  / Representative Government, 328d
332d;  338b  340d:  344d  345a;  350b  355b;  387c  d; 395b c; 413d414d;
424c-428a  passim,  esp 427a b; 433b442d passim 46 He(;el: Philosophy of
History,  intko, 161a-c; 172d-175c; part 11, 271c-274a; i'\rt hi. 300c d
5.  Democracy  and representative government 5a. The distinction between
direct  democracy  and  representative,  or  republican, government: the
territorial  limits  of  democracy  9  Aristotle:  Politics, bk vi, ch 4
[1318^21   522b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x,  sect  55a-b  38
Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk viii, 56c-d; 27I 132 bk ix, 58b,d-60a; bk
xi,  71a-c;  bk xix, 142c143a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 410c;
420a423a  42  Kant: Science ofRight, 451c-452a 43 Federalist: number 10,
51c-53a;  number  14,  60a-61b; number 48, 157c; number 63, 192c-194a 43
Mill:  Represe7itative  Government, 330a-b; 350a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,   intro,   175b-c;   part  II,  273d-274a  5b.  The  theory  of
representation 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 697a-705c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
iv,  ch  passim; ch 15 499c-501c; bk 521c-523b 4 498b-499c VI, ch 3-4 14
Plutarch:   Lycurgus,   34d-35d   /  Solon,  70d71c  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 3, ANs and rep 2 207a-c; q 97, a 3, rep 3
237b-238b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 96c-98a,c; part II, lOla-b;
104d-105c; 117b-121a; 153a-159c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect
87-89  44a-d; ch xi, sect 140 58a; ch xii, sect 143 58c-d; ch xiii, sect
154-158 60c-62b; ch xix, sect 240 81b 38 MoxNTESQuiEu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
xi,  71a-d  38  RoussEAu:  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 421c-423a 39 Smith:
Wealth  ofNations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
522c-523a   42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436c;  450a-b;  451c452a  43
Declaration of Independence:
[35-47]
lb-2a;  [109-121]  3a-b  passim  43  Constitution of the U.S.: article i
11a14b  passim  43  Federalist:  number  10 49c-53a; number 14, 60a-61b;
number 22, 82a-83a; number 28, 97b-d; number 35, 113a-114b;

[376a]
(5.   Democracy   and  representative  government.  5b.  The  theory  of
representation.)   NUMBER   52-66   165a-203a  passim,  esp  number  57,
176d-178b,  NUMBER  63, 192b-194a; NUMBER 76, 227a; number 78, 231a-232c
43  Mill:  Liberty, 268b-c / Representative Government 327a'442d passim,
esp  329d-330b, 338a-b, 350a, 355b-356b, 370a-372b, 389c392 b, 401a-406a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 301303 100b-102a; par
308-311 102c-104a; additions, 182 148c-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO,
175b-c 5^(1) Majority rule and minority or proportional representation 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 10 478d-479a; CH 13 [1283^21-^34] 481b-d;
ch 15 [1286^22- *'22] 484c-485a; bk iv, ch 8
[1294*12-15]
493d-494a; bk v, ch 9
[1310*25-35]
512c;  BK  VI, CH 2 [1317^2-16] 520d; ch 3 [1318*19- ^5] 521c-522a; ch 4
[1318^21-26] 522b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 301-303 227b; 878 345a-b 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch viii, sect 95-99 46c-47c; ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch
xi,  sect  140  58a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 4b-6d 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 391b; bk IV, 425d-427a esp 426d-427a 39
Smith:  Wealth  ofNations, bk iv, 269d-271d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
91b 43 Articles of Confederation: v
[49-73]
5d-6a  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  XIV, sect 2 18d 43
Federalist: number 10 49c-53a; number 22, 82a-83a; number 35, 113a-114b;
number  37,  120b-c;  NUMBER 43, 141d-142d; number 51, 164a-165a passim;
number  54  170a-172b;  number 58, 181d-182a; number 62, 189b-d 43 Mill:
Liberty,  268d-271c;  298b-302c;  307b312a  / Representative Government,
366a-380b;  386a-387d;  406d-407d; 410b-c 44 BoswEL,!.: Joh?Json, 261c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 3 1 1-3 13 103d-104b /
Philosophy  of  History,  INTRO, 172d-173a; part iv, 365a 5^(2) Ultimate
limitations  on  the franchise 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 697d-700b; bk viii,
740d-741a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv, ch 6 492b-493a; BK VI, CH 3
521c-522a; ch 4
[1319^2-32]
523a-b;  bk vii, ch 9 533a-d / Athenian Constitution, CH 4 554b-d; ch 42
572b-d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  ii,  4a-5c  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 427c-432b 42 Kant:
Science  ofRight, 436d-437c 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect
2 [5-10] lib

[376b]
318  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5^(1) to 5^(4) 43 Federalist: number 52, 165a-c;
number 54 170a-172b; number 57, 177a 43 Mill: Representative Government,
375a-b;  380c-389b  passim, esp 382c-383c; 394b396d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par  311  103d-104a 5^(3) Methods of election and
voting  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  697a-705c;  bk 786b-787b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk iv, ch 9 [1294^6-13] 494c; CH 14
[1298^13-1299*1] 499a-c; ch
15
[1300*9-^4] 500d-501b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 45d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 6a-b / Histories,
bk  XII,  IV, 267d-268c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect 154158
60d-62b;  ch  xix,  sect  216  74d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk ii,
5b-6a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c-325b  /  Social Contract, bk iv,
426c-428a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 2
[5-10]
lib; sect llb-12a; sect 4
[96-102
12b;  ARTICLE  II, sect amendments, XII 18a-c; 20d 43 Federalist: number
52-61 165a-188d pas2
[i7]-sECT
3
[66]
, SECT 5
[107-109]
[321-374]
14b-d;  XVII  19b-c; XXIII sim; number 62, 189a-b; number 68 205b207a 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  370a-406a;  412a-414d  44 B0SWEI.1.:
Johnson,  176a-b;  251a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par
309-311  103b-104a  /  Philosophy  of History^ PART II, 277c-d 5b{4) The
role of political parties: factions 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata [577-580]
590c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 434c-438b; bk iv, 458d-459c;
463a-465c; bk V, 502d-504a; bk viii 564a-593a,c esp 568d569a, 575c-576c,
577b-d,  579c-583c,  584b585a, 585d-586b, 587a-590c 7 Plato: Laws, bk v,
695a-c;  bk  ix,  744c-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk ix, ch 6 420c-421a /
Politics, BK V, CH 9
[1309*^14-1310*12]
511d512b  /  Athenian  Constitution, ch 5 554d-555a; CH 8, par 5 556c 14
Plutarch:  Solon,  68d;  75c-d  /  Pericles,  126c-d  /  Pompey, 521d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b-c  /  Histories^  BK  II,  224d-225a  23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch ix, 14c-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 121c-d;
148d149b;  150b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk hi, 9d; bk XIX,
142b-143a  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 396b-d; BK III, 424b 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271a; BK V, 420c-421a

[377a]
5c to 7 Chapter 16: DEMOCRACY 319 40 ChBBON: Decline and Fall, 652b-655c
43  Federalist:  number  io  49c  53a;  number 43, 141d-142d; number 50,
161d-162c  passim;  NUMBER  51,  164a-165a; number 60, 185b187a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  289c-d  /  Representative  G(jvernment,  366a-370a; 371c-372a;
376a-377a;  412b413a  44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  261c-d; 374b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  ii,  275b-d; 279b; part hi, 285d; part iv,
336a-c;  366d-367a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 423d425b 5c. The
distribution   of   functions   and   powers:  checks  and  balances  in
representative  democracy  7  Plato: Laws, bk vi, 697a-705c 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  iv, ch 14-16 498b502a,c; bk vi, ch 8 525b-526d / Athenian
Constitution, ch 42-69 572b-584a,c passim 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d
/  Solon,  70d71c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103d-104b;  150b;
151c-152a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect 107 49b-d; ch xii-
xiii  58c-62b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 69d75a 38 Rousseau:
Social Contract, bk iv, 428a435a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 26d-27b 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436b-c;  438a-439a; 451d-452a 43 Articles of
Confederation:  ix  7a-9a 43 Constitution OF the U.S.: article i, sect I
lla-b; SECT 2 [41-47] lid; sect 3
[73-87]
12a; sect 4
[96-102]
12b; sect 5 12b-c; article I, sect 7
[l52]-ARTICLE
II, SECT I
[326]
12d-14b; article ii, sect 2
[409]-
ARTICLE  III,  SECT  2 [492] 15a-d 43 Federalist: number 47-48 153c-159a
esp  NUMBER  48,  157c; number 51 162d-165a number 52, 167a-b; number 57
176d-179b  NUMBER  58,  180d; number 60, 184d-185b number 62, 189d-191c;
number  63, 192c 193c; number 66, 200c-201d; number 69 207a-210c passim;
number  73, 219b-221c; number 76, 226a-227b; number 78, 230a233a; number
81,  237d-239c 43 Mill: Representative Govermnent, 355b-356b; 365b-366a;
369b-370a;  401d-402b;  406a409c;  412b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  272  89d-90c;  additions,  178  147d-148a  /  Philosophy
ofHistory,  intro,  192d-193a  6.The  educational task of democracy: the
training  of  all  citizens  5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b
6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d-399a

[377b]
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  hi,  675c-676b  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 9
[i294''i9  24]  494c;  bk  v,  ch  9 |iy()'»i2 ^5] 512b-c; hk vii, CH 14
537b-538d; bk vhi, ch i 542a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114d 115a;
153a 155c 32 Milton: Areopagitica 381a-412b csp 384b389a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk iv, 15c18d 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 375d-377b
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 340c343d 43 Federalist: number 27,
95c-d;   number   84,   253d-254b   43   Mill:  Liberty,  317d-323a,c  /
Representative   Government,   330a-b;   339a-341c;  349a-350a;  351a-c;
381b-382b; 386b-387d; 401a-406a passim; 418b-d; 420b-d; 424b-c 50 Marx :
Capital, 237d-240d esp 238b-c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 427c;
429b  7.  The  growth  and  vicissitudes  of  democracy  5 Aristophanes:
Ecclesiazusae
[169-188] 617a
6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 120b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
hi,  434c-438b; bk viii, 579d-580a 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 408b-414b
/ Laws, BK III, 674d-676b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[1273^271274^22] 470b-d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  1-41  553a-572a  esp  ch  41 571c-572a /
Rhetoric,  bk  I,  ch  4  [1360*17-29] 600c 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 9a-d /
Themistocles^  96b-c  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  / Alcibiades, 166a174d /
Phocion 604b,d-619d / Tiberius Gracchus, 675b-d; 678b-d / Caius Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c esp 683b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  v  8a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114b-115a; 150c151a;
part   iv,   273a-b   26   Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c  27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
hi,  9b10c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 418a419b 41 Gibbon:
Decline   and   Fall,  71d-73d  passim;  217a-b;  218c-219a;  427b-428b;
562b-565a  esp  562c-d; 574b-582b esp 574b-577d; 587b588b 43 Federalist:
number  i  29a-31a  passim; number 6 38d-41c passim; number 9-10 47a53a;
number  22,  82d-83d; number 43, 141a142d; NUMBER 44, 146c-d; number 51,
164a165a;  number  58  179c-182a  passim;  number 63, 192c-194a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative  Govermncfit,  376b-c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part ii, 271c274a; 275b-276a

[378a]
320  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (7. The growth and vicissitudes of democracy^ la.
Demagoguery and the danger of revolution 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462]
261d-262b 5 Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c esp
[1111-1150]
483d-484b / Wasps
[655-724]
515c-516d  /  Peace  [601-692]  532d-534a  6 Herodotus: H/V/or)', bk hi,
108a-c   6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  434c-438b;  bk  iv,
463a-465c;  466a'469b;  BK VI, 519c-d; 520a-d; 533a-c; bk viii, 575c582c
esp  575c-576c,  577b-d,  579c-581c,  582a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii,
411d-414b / Laws, bk IX, 744c-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[1273^361274^14] 470c-d; bk v, ch
i [i302'*8-i6] 503b; CH 5 506b-507a; ch 8
[1308*11-24] 510a-b;
CH 9 [13(59^14-13 io'*i2] 511d-512b; bk vi, ch 4 [i3i9^2]-CH 5 [1320^17]
523a-524b   /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  14-15  558d-559c;  ch  28-29
565c-566d; ch 34 568c-569a 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 13a-14c / Solon, 75c76d
/  CamiUus,  117c-121a,c  / Coriolanus, 180b-d / Pompev, 521c-d / Caesar
577a-604d esp 577d-583a / Phocion 604b,d-619d / Cato the Younger, 628b-d
/  Caius  Gracchus  681b,d889a,c  esp  684c-685c  / Dion, 792d-802a,c 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i, la-2a / Histories, bk II, 224d-225a 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii, 105c-106d; 127d129d; 152a-d 30 Bacon: Advanceinent
of  Learning,  23a-26a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch xix, sect 224228
76d-78a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  52b-c;  BK XIX,
142d-143a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 419b 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  439c-441d  43 Federalist: number i, 30b; number 9, 47a-b; number
21,  78d-79a; number 48, 157c; number 58, 181b-c 43 Mill: Representative
Government, 329b-330c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 300a301c
lb.  The  dangers  of  imperialism:  the  treatment  of  dependencies  5
Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  [572-586]  590c-d  6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War, bk ii, 403b-c; bk hi, 425a-429a 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 698c-d

[378b]
la  to  Ic 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 21a-27c esp 22c / Pericles, 129a-141a,c
passim  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk ii, 224d-225a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  107a;  107c  35  Locke:  Civil Goverriment, ch xvi 65d-70c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 182b-183a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
x,  64a-d  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 252d-253a; 267c-271d 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 79b-d; 630b,d631b 42 Kant: Scie7ice of Right.
413d;   454a-455a   43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  427a-b;  433b-442d 7c. The challenge of war
and peace: the citizen army 5 Euripides : Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b
5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c  / Knights 470a-487a,c / Peace
526a-541d esp
[601-692] 532d-534a /
Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  esp [486-586] 589a-590d ' 6 Herodotus: History,
bk   v,  175b;  177d-178a;  180c-d;  bk  VII,  232d-233d  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  402b404d; BK HI, 425a-d; 434c-438b; bk vi,
513d-514d; 515d-516a; bk viii, 564a-c 7 Plato: Laws, bk i, 640b-642b; bk
hi, 674d675c; bk viii, 732b-735a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vi, ch 7
[1^21*5-26]
524d-525a; bk vii, ch 9 [1329^3-17] 533b-c; CH 14
[1333^1-1334^10]
538b-d  /  Athenian Constitution, ch 8, par 5 556c; ch 15 559b-c; CH 27,
par  1-2 565a-b 23 Machiavelli: Priiue, ch v 8a-c; ch xhXIII 17d-21a; ch
xxvi  36b-37d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xix, sect 224230 76d-78c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 80a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi,
lOa-c;  BK  IX,  58b,d-60a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c / Political
Economy,  380b-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4b-5c 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  452dA5Sa,c  esp  454d455a, A^57aA58a,c / Judgement, 586a-587a 43
Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a;  nuxMber  8 44c-47a; number 22, 83a-b;
number  29 98c-101a passim; number 46, 152b-153a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part ii, 274b- ;d 275b: 278c-279b

[379a]
1  CROSS-REFERENCES  For: The general theory of government and the forms
of  government,  see  Government;  and 8d; State yd. ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ{S ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. I. XII
Plutarch.  "Of  the  Three  Sorts  of Government Cartvvright, Tal^e Your
Choice!  Monarchy,  Democracy  and Oligarchy," in MoBurke. An Appealfrom
the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs  ralia  . Letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe
Spinoza. Tractatus Politicus (Political Treatise), Paine. Rights of Man,
part  ii,  ch  i  CH  1  J.  S. Mill. "M. De Tocqueviile on Democracy in
Jefferson.  Democracy,  ch  1-2 America," "Enfranchisement of Women," in
vol  Tocqueville. Democracy in America II, Dissertations and Discussions
T.  Carlyle.  Chartism  . Socialism Michelet. The People Marx. The Civil
War  in  France Calhoun. A Disquisition on Government Clarl^ Papers, The
Putney  Debates  Thoreau.  A  Plea  for  Captain  ]ohn  Brown  Voltaire.
"Democracy," in A Philosophical DieWhitman. Democratic Vistas tionary J.
F. Stephen. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity

[379b]
Chapter  16: DEMOCRACY 321 J. Wilson. Worlds, part i, ch vi-ix; part ii,
ch . Dissertation on First Principles of Governnieni

[380a]
322  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Acton.  Essays  on  Freedom and Power, ch 5, 7-8
Arnold.   "Democracy,"  "Equality,"  in  Mixed  Essays.  Maine.  Popular
Government  Lecky.  Democracy and Liberty GiDDiNGs. Democracy and Empire
M.  HiRscH.  Democracy Versus Socialism H. Adams. The Degradation of the
Democratic   Dogma   OsTROGORSKi.  Dcmocracy  and  the  Organization  of
Political  Parties Dicey. The Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in
England During the Nineteenth Century Santayana. Reason in Society, ch 5
Sorel.  Reflexions  on Violence MicHELs. Political Parties Morley. Notes
on Politics and History Beard. Economic Origins ofjeffersonian Democracy
Croly.  Progressive  Democracy  Pareto.  The Mind and Society, vol iv T.
Veblen. The Vested Interests and the State of the Industrial Arts Lenin.
The  State  and Revolution, ch 5 . ''Left-Wing'" Communism, an Infantile
Disorder   Trotsky.   The  Defense  of  Terrorism  Bryce.  The  American
Commonwealth . Modern Democracies

[380b]
Tawney.  Equality  Nock.  The  Theory  of Education in the United States
Kelsen.   Vom   Wesen   und   Wert   der  Demokratie  .  Staatsform  und
Weltanschauung  Laski. Democracy in Crisis J. A. HoBsoN. Democracy and a
Changing Civilisation Friedrich. Constitutional Government and Democracy
Benes.  Democracy  Today  and Tomorrow Dewey. Characters and Events, vol
ii, bk v (17) . The Public and Its Problems, ch 3 . Freedom and Culture,
ch  4-7 MacIver. Leviathan and the People Hook. Reason, Social Myths and
Democracy  Becker.  Modern Democracy Merriam. The New De?nocracy and the
New  Despotism  .  What Is Democracy? Agard. What Democracy Meant to the
Greeks  Barker. Reflections on Government Lindsay. The Modern Democratic
State  Maritain.  Scholasticistn and Politics, ch iii-iv . Ransoming the
Time,  ch  2  .  Christianity and Democracy . Principes d' une politique
humaniste  Perry. Puritanism and Democracy Simon. Community of the Free,
ch 4

[381a]
Chapter  17:  DESIRE  INTRODUCTION IN Darwin, Mill, James, and Freud, at
tlic  modern  end  of  the  great tradition, the word "desire" primarily
signifies  a  cause of animal and human behavior. It is one of the basic
terms  in psychological analysis, covering that whole range of phenomena
which  are  also referred to by such terms as wanting, needing, craving,
wishing, willing, all of which are discussed in connection with theories
of  instinct and emotion, libido and love, motivation and purpose. If we
turn  to  traditional  beginnings,  to the writings of Plato, Aristotle,
Galen,  and  Plotinus,  we  find that the psychological consideration of
desire  is  part  of a much larger context. The ancients are, of course,
concerned  with  the role of desire in causing animal or human behavior,
and  with  the  causes  of  such desire, but they are also interested in
cravings  which  seem to be present in plants as well as animals. Plato,
for example, attributes to plants "feelings of pleasure and pain and the
desires  which  accompany them." The vegetative activities of nutrition,
growth,  and  reproduction  seem  to  spring from basic appetites—or, in
modern  phraseology,  "biological  needs"—inherent in all living matter.
Because hunger and thirst so readily symbolize the essence of desire (or
certainly  represent  its  most general manifestation in living things),
the words "appetite" and "desire" are frequently used as synonyms in the
earlier  phase of the tradition. As Hobbes observes, when he proposes to
use  "appetite"  and "desire" as synonyms, desire is "the general name,"
and  appetite  is "oftentimes restrained to signify the desire for food,
namely  hunger  and  thirst."  So,  too,  Spinoza says that "there is no
difference  between  appetite  and desire," yet he adds, "unless in this
particular,  that  desire  is generally related to men in so far as they
are conscious of their appetites, and it may therefore 323

[381b]
be  defined  as  appetite  of  which  we are conSpinoza here seems to be
reflecting  the  distinction  made  by  earlier  writers between natural
appetite and conscious desire, which we today would, perhaps, express in
terms  of  "need"  and  "wish."  The  ancient  conception  of tendencies
inherent in all things— inanimate as well as living—which seek a natural
fulfillment  broadens  the meaning of appetite or desire. When Aristotle
says  that  "each  thing seeks its own perfection" and that "nature does
nothing in vain," he is thinking of non-living as well as living bodies.
Wherever in the physical world things seem to have a natural tendency to
move  in  a  certain  direction  or  to  change  in a certain way, there
appetite,  belonging to the very nature of the moving thing, operates as
a  cause.  Adopting  this view, Dante declares that "neither Creator nor
creature  was  ever without love, either natural or of the mind"; and in
his  Comivio  he shows how each thing has its "specific love." The love,
or  desire,  of  the  elements is their "innate affinity to their proper
place";  minerals  desire "the place where their generation is ordained"
with  the result that "the magnet ever receives power from the direction
of  its  generation."  According to this view it is possible to speak of
the  natural  desire  of  raindrops  to fall or of smoke to rise. Such a
manner  of  speaking  may  at  first  seem metaphorical—an expression of
primitive  animism  or  anthropomorphism—  but  the  ancients, observing
different  natural  tendencies  in heavy and light bodies, mean this The
sense  of  such statements is no different from what is meant when it is
said  that the sunflower, without consciousness, naturally tends to turn
toward the sun, or that all men by nature desire to know.

[382a]
324  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  From its narrowest meaning with reference to the
behavior of animals and men, desire gains a wider connotation when it is
conceived as covering the appetites found in Uving organisms. But in its
broadest  significance,  it  refers  to  the innate tendency inherent in
matter  itself. As we shall presently see, appetite, desire, or tendency
is  seated  in  matter  according  to  that  conception  of matter which
identifies it with potentiality or potential being. These considerations
are more fully treated in the chapters on Being, Change, and Matter, but
their  significance  for  the  notion of desire can be briefly indicated
here.  Plotinus  suggests  the basic insight when he describes matter as
"in  beggardom,  striving  as it were by violence to acquire, and always
disappointed."  Matter is that in natural things which is the reason for
their  motion  and  change.  Considering natural change, Aristotle names
what  he  thinks  are  its  three  principles. In addition to "something
divine,  good,  and  desirable,"  he writes, "we hold that there are two
other  principles,  the one contrary to it, the other such as of its own
nature  to  desire  and  yearn  for  it."  These  are respectively form,
privation, and matter. The relation between matter and form is expressed
by  Aristotle  in  terms  of desire. "The form cannot desire itself," he
says,  "for  it  is  not  defective; nor can the contrary desire it, for
contraries  are mutually destructive. The truth is that what desires the
form  is  matter,  as  the  female  desires  the  male."  Conceived most
generally  as natural appetite or tendency, desire becomes a physical or
metaphysical   term.   ''Natural  appetite,''  says  Aquinas,  "is  that
inclination which each thing has of its own nature." The significance of
desire in this sense extends, far beyond psychological phenomena, to all
things  in motion under the impetus or inclination of their own natures,
rather than moved violently by forces impressed on them from without. In
ancient  physics  every  natural  tendency  has an end or fulfillment in
which  the  motion  governed  by  that  tendency comes to rest. Eros and
telos—desire and end—are complementary concepts, each implying the other
as principles of physics, i.e., as factors operating together throughout
nature in the order of change. The tclos of each thing is the perfection
which satis-

[382b]
fies  the tendency of its nature. That nature does nothing in vain means
simply  that  no  natural  desire—need  or  appetite—exists  without the
possibility  of  fulfillment. Considering the design of the universe and
the relation of creatures to God, theologians like Augustine and Aquinas
use the concept of desire in both its psychological and its metaphysical
sense.  Considered  metaphysically, desire can be present only in finite
beings,  for  to  be  finite  is to be in want of some perfection. Hence
desire  can  in  no  way enter into the immutable, infinite, and perfect
being  of God. In desire, Aquinas points out, "a certain imperfection is
implied," namely, the lack "of the good which we have not." Since God is
perfect,  desire  cannot  be attributed to Him, "except metaphorically."
Love,  however,  implies  perfection  rather than imperfection, since it
flows  from  the  act  of  the  will  "to diffuse its own goodness among
others."  For  that  reason,  although  the  infinite  perfection of God
precludes  desire, it does not preclude love. The theologian goes beyond
the metaphysician or physicist when he carries the analysis of desire to
the  supernatural  plane.  As God is the supernatural eflicient cause of
all created things, so God is also the supernatural final cause— the end
or ultimate good toward which all creatures tend. The metaphysical maxim
that  each  thing  seeks  its  own  perfection is then transformed. "All
things,"  Aquinas  writes, "by desiring their own perfection, desire God
Himself,  inasmuch  as  the  perfections  of  all  things  are  so  many
similitudes  of  the divine being. ... Of those things which desire God,
some  know  Him  as  He  is  Himself, and this is proper to the rational
creature;  others  know  some  participation  of  His goodness, and this
belongs also to sensible knowledge; others have a natural desire without
knowledge,  as  being  directed to their ends by a higher intelligence."
The  existence  in  the  creature  of  a desire ior God raises difficult
questions  concerning  the  manner  in which this desire is fulfilled. A
supernatural  end  cannot  be  attained  by  purely natural means, i,e.y
without  God's help. The vision of God in which the souls of the blessed
come to rest is, according to the theologian, the ulti-

[383a]
mate  gift of grace. Hence, in man's case at Icasi, it becomes necessary
to  ask  whether  he  can have a purely natural desire to see God if the
goal  of  such  desire  cannot  be achieved by purely natural means. The
question  is  not  whether  men  to whom God has revealed the promise of
ultimate glory can consciously desire the beatific vision. C'learly that
is  possible,  though  to  sustain such desire the theological virtue of
hope,  inseparable  from  faith and charity, may be required. Rather the
question  is whether the beatific vision which is man's supernatural end
can  be  the object of natural desire. On this the theologians appear to
be  less  clearly  decided.  Aquinas  holds  that  "neither man, nor any
creature, can attain final happiness by his natural powers." Yet he also
seems  to  maintain  that  man  has  a  natural  desire  for the perfect
happiness  of  eternal  life.  "The  object  of the will, i.e., of man's
appetite,"  he writes, "is the universal good, just as the object of the
intellect  is  the  universal  truth."  Man's natural desire to know the
truth—not just some truths but the whole truth, the infinite truth—would
seem  to  require  the vision of God for its fulfillment. Aquinas argues
similarly  from the will's natural desire for the infinite good. "Naught
can  lull  man's  will,"  he  writes, "save the universal good ... to be
found  not  in  any  creature, but in God alone." Some writers find this
confirmed  in  the  fact that whatever good a man sets his heart upon he
pursues  to  infinity.  No  finite amount of pleasure or power or wealth
seems  to  satisfy  him.  He  always  wants more. But there is no end to
wanting more of such things. The infinity of such desires must result in
frustration.  Only God, says the theologian, only an infinite being, can
satisfy  man's  infinite craving for all the good there is. Seeing man's
restlessness, no matter where he turns to find rest, Augustine declares:
"Thou  madest us for Thyself, and our heart is restless, until it repose
in Thee." Pascal reaches the same conclusion when he considers the ennui
of  men  which  results  from  the desperation of their unending search.
"Their  error,"  he writes, "does not lie in seeking excitement, if they
seek  it  only  as  a diversion; the evil is that they seek it as if the
possession of the objects of their quest vrould make them really happ)."

[383b]
CiiAPiiR   17:  DESIRE  325  With  regard  lo  the  frantic  pursuit  of
diversions,  he claims that "lK)th the censurcrs and the censured do not
understand  man's  true nature" and the "misery of man without CkxI." In
such  restlessness  and  vain  seeking,  the theologian sees evidence of
man's  natural  desire  to  be  wr/h  God. Admitting the same facts, the
skeptics  interpret the infinity of man's desire as a craving to be God.
If  this  is not every man's desire, it is certainly Satan's in Paradise
Lost.  Skeptic  or  believer,  every  man understands the question which
Goethe and Dante among the great poets make their central theme. At what
moment,  amid man's striving and restlessness, will the soul gladly cry,
"Ah,  linger  on, thou art so fair?" Confident that there can be no such
moment, Faust makes that the basis of his wager with Mephistopheles. The
two  poets  appear to give opposite answers to the question. Faust finds
surcease  in  an  earthly  vision of progressive endeavor. Heavenly rest
comes to the soul of Dante at the very moment it relinquishes its quest,
winning peace through surrender. In the broadest or theological sense of
the  word,  God alone does not desire. In the narrowest or psychological
sense,  only  animals  and  men  do. The contrast of meanings is useful.
Natural  appetite  or  tendency  throws light on the nature of conscious
desire.  In order to "determine the nature and seat of desire," Socrates
in  the Philebus considers such things as "hunger, thirst, and the like"
as  "in  the  class  of desires." He points out that "when we say 'a man
thirsts,'  we  mean  to  say  that  he  'is empty.' " It is not drink he
desires,  but  replenishment  by drink, which is a change of state. This
insight Socrates generalizes by saying that "he who is empty desires . .
. the opposite of what he experiences; for he is empty and desires to be
full."  In the Symposium, using the words "love" and "desire" as if they
were  interchangeable,  Socrates declares that "he who desires something
is  in  want  of something" and "love is of something which a man w ants
and  has  not."  In  the psychological sphere, desire and love are often
identified—at least verbally. The one word is frequently substituted for
the other. Here the fact already noted, that God loves but

[384a]
326  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  does  not  desire,  suggests  the  root  of  the
distinction between desire and love. Desire ahvays involves some lack or
privation  to  be remedied by a change; whereas love, certainly requited
love,  implies  the  kind  of satisfaction which abhors change. Love and
desire  are, of course, frequently mixed, but this does not affect their
essential  difference as tendencies. They are as different as giving and
getting.  Love aims at the well-being of the beloved, while desire seeks
to  enjoy  a  pleasure  or  possess  a  good.  Not all writers, however,
contrast  the  generosity  of  love  with the acquisitiveness of desire.
Locke,  for  example,  finds  self-interest and selfseeking in both. The
meaning  of love, he observes, is known to anyone who reflects "upon the
thought  he  has of the delight which any present or absent thing is apt
to  produce  in  him. . . . For when a man declares in autumn when he is
eating  them, or in spring when there are none, that he loves grapes, it
is  no  more  but that the taste of grapes delights him." The meaning of
desire  is,  in  Locke's  opinion,  closely related. It consists in "the
uneasiness  a  man  finds  in himself upon the absence of anything whose
present  enjoyment  carries  the idea of delight with it." We desire, in
short,  the  things  we love but do not possess. The distinction between
love  and  desire,  the question whether they are distinct in animals as
well  as  in  men,  and  their  relation  to  one  another when they are
distinct, are matters more fully discussed in the chapter on Love. It is
enough   to   observe   here   that  when  writers  use  the  two  words
interchangeably,  they use both words to signify wanting and seeking. In
the  case of animals and men, the thing wanted is an object of conscious
desire  only  if it is something known. In addition to being known as an
object  of science is known, it must also be deemed good or pleasant— in
other  words,  worth  having.  For Locke, desire, as we have seen, is no
more  than  "an  uneasiness  of  the mind for want of some absent good,"
which is measured in terms of pleasure and pain. "What has an aptness to
produce  pleasure in us is that we call good, and what is apt to produce
pain  in us we call evil.'' That which we consciously desire, that which
we  judge to be desirable, would thus be something we regard as good for
us, while the "bad" or "evil" would be that

[384b]
which  we  seek  to avoid as somehow injurious rather than beneficial to
us.  There  is  no question that desire and aversion are psychologically
connected  with  estimations of good and evil or pleasure and pain. This
is  the  case  no  matter  how  we answer the moralist's question, Do we
desire  something  because  it  is  good, or do we call it "good" simply
because  we  desire it? The ethical significance of the question, and of
the  opposite  answers  to  it,  is discussed in the chapter on Good and
Evil.  The  metaphysical conception of natural desire provides terms for
the psychological analysis of conscious desire and its object. Viewed as
belonging  to  the  very  nature  of  a  thing,  appetite,  according to
Aristotle,  consists  in  the tendency toward "something we do not have"
and  "which  we need." Both factors are essential— the privation and the
capacity,  or  potentiality, for having what is lacked. Privation in the
strict  sense is always correlative to potentiality. The writers who use
these  terms  would not speak of the sunflower being deprived of wisdom,
even  as they would not call a stone blind. Blindness is the deprivation
of sight in things which have by nature a capacity to see. So when it is
said  that  man  by  nature  desires  to  know, or that certain animals,
instinctively  gregarious,  naturally tend to associate with one another
in  herds  or societies, the potentiality of knowledge or social life is
indicated;  and precisely because of these potentialities, ignorance and
solitariness  are  considered  privations. We observe here two different
conditions  of  appetite  or  desire.  As  the  opposite of privation is
possession—or  of lacking, having—so the opposite states of appetite are
the  drive  toward the unpossessed and satisfaction in possession. We do
not strive for that which we have, unless it be to retain our possession
of it against loss; and we do not feel satisfied until we get that which
we have been seeking. "If a man being strong desired to be strong," says
Socrates in the Symposium, "or being swift desired to be swift, or being
healthy  desired  to be healthy, he might be thought to desire something
which he already has or is." This would be a misconception which we must
avoid. To anyone who says "I desire to have simply what I

[385a]
have,"  Socrates  thinks we should reply: "You, my friend, having wealth
and  health  and  strength,  want to have the continuance of them. . . .
When  you  say,  'I  desire that wliich I have and nothing else,' is not
your  meaning  that  you want to have in the future what you now have ?"
This  "is equivalent to saying that a man desires something which is for
him  nonexistent,  and which he has not got" ; from which Socrates draws
the  conclusion  that  everyone  "desires that which he has not already,
which  is  future and not present . . . and of which he is in want." The
object  of  desire—natural  or  conscious  thus  seems  to be an altered
condition  in  the desirer, the result of union with the object desired.
Man's  natural desire to know impels him to learn. Every act of learning
which  satisfies  this natural desire consists in a changed condition of
his  mind,  a change which both Plato and Aristotle describe as a motion
from  ignorance to knowledge. When we consciously desire food, it is not
the  edible thing as such we seek, but rather the eating of it. Only the
eating of it will quiet our desire, with that change in our condition we
call  "nourishment."  That  the  edible  thing  is only incidentally the
object of our desire may be seen in the fact that no way in which we can
possess  food,  other  than eating ity satisfies hunger. The distinction
between  natural  and  conscious  desire is complicated by other closely
related  distinctions which psychologists have made. Freud, for example,
distinguishes between conscious and unconscious desire; Darwin separates
instinctive  from  learned  desires;  and James observes how a conscious
desire may become habitual and operate almost automatically, without our
awareness  of  either its object or its action. Part of the complication
is  verbal  and  can  be  removed  by  referring  to  natural desires as
nonconscious  rather  than  w«-conscious.  The word "conscious" Hterally
means with knowledge. Creatures which lack the faculty of knowing cannot
desire  consciously.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that sentient or
conscious  beings cannot have natural appetites. Man's natural desire to
know  is a case in point. That natural human tendency is not excluded by
the fact

[385b]
CiiAPTKR  17:  DESIRE 327 that many men also consciously seek knowledge,
knowing  what  knowledge  is and considering it sometliing worth having.
The  instinctive desires of animals are not generally thought to operate
apart  from  the  perception  of  the  object toward which the animal is
emotionally  impelled. The instinctive desire works consciously, both on
the  side of perception and on the side of the emotionally felt impulse.
If,  because  it  is  innate  rather  than  learned, or acquired through
experience,  we  call  the  instinctive  desire "natural," it is well to
remember  that  we  are  not  here  using  the  word  to signify lack of
consciousness.  Yet  both  instinctive  and acquired desires may operate
unconsciously.  What  Freud means by a repressed desire illustrates this
point. The repressed desire, whether instinctual in origin or the result
of  some  acquired  fixation  of the libido on object or ego, would be a
conscious  tendency if it were not repressed. Freud compares the process
of  repression  to  the efforts of a man to get from one room to another
past  the guard of a doorkeeper. "The excitations in the unconscious ...
to begin with, remain unconscious. When they have pressed forward to the
threshold  and  been turned back by the door-keeper, they are 'incapable
of  becoming  conscious';  we  call  them  then  repressed.  . . . Being
repressed,  when  applied  to  any single impulse, means being unable to
pass  out of the unconscious system because of the door-keeper's refusal
of  admittance  into  the preconscious." The repressed desire is made to
operate unconsciously by being repressed, which does not prevent it from
influencing  our conduct or thought, but only from intruding its driving
force  and  its  goal  upon our attention. In contrast, the desire which
works  habitually  and  therefore  to  some extent unconsciously, is not
repressed,  but  merely  one which no longer demands our full attention.
Desire  and  emotion  are  often  identified  in  our description of the
behavior  of  animals  and  men.  Sometimes,  however, desire along with
aversion  is  treated as just one of the emotions, and sometimes all the
emotions  are  treated  as  manifestations of just one type of conscious
appetite, namely, animal as opposed to rational desire.

[386a]
328  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  The  appetitive or driving aspect of emotions is
indicated  by William James in his analysis of instinctive behavior. The
functioning of an instinct may be viewed, according to James, as a train
of  psychological  events  of "general reflex type . . . called forth by
determinate  sensory  stimuli in contact with the animal's body, or at a
distance  in  his environment," arousing "emotional excitements which go
with them." The emotional part of the instinctive behavior is at once an
impulse  to  perform  certain acts and the feeling which accompanies the
acts  performed.  The  sheep,  instinctively  recognizing  the  wolf  as
dangerous,  fears and flees. It runs away because it is afraid and feels
fear  in  the  act of flight. When, in his theory of the emotions, James
goes  so  far  as  to  say that the feeling of fear results from running
away,  he  does  not  mean to deny that the emotion of fear involves the
impulse to flee. In its aspect as impulse—or tendency to act —an emotion
is a desire, consciously aroused by sense-perceptions and accompanied by
conscious  feelings.  This  conception  of  emotion  has  been variously
expressed  in  the  tradition  of the great books. Aquinas, for example,
calls   all  the  emotions  or  passions  "movements  of  the  sensitive
appetite." But he also uses the words "desire" and "aversion" along with
"love"  and "hate," "anger" and "fear" to name specific emotions. Hobbes
recognizes  the  appetitive tendency which is common to all the emotions
when  he  finds  at  their  root  what  he calls "endeavor" "those small
beginnings  of  motion,  within  the  body of man, before they appear in
walking,  speaking,  striking,  and  other  visible  actions. . . . This
endeavor,"  he goes on to say, "when it is toward something which causes
it,  is  called  appetite  or  desire."  Spinoza makes the same point in
somewhat different terms. "Desire," he writes, "is the essence itself or
nature  of a person in so far as this nature is conceived from its given
constitution  as  determined  towards  any  action. ... As his nature is
constituted  in this or that way, so must his desire vary and the nature
of  one  desire differ from another, just as the affects from which each
desire  arises  differ. There are as many kinds of desire, therefore, as
there  are  kinds  of joy, sorrow, love, etc., and in consequence ... as
there are kinds of objects by which we are affected."

[386b]
Those psychologists who find in man two distinct faculties of knowledge—
the  senses  and  the  reason or intellect—also find in him two distinct
faculties of appetite or desire. The distinction is perhaps most sharply
made  by  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  who  claim  that  "there must be one
appetite  tending  towards  the universal good, which belongs to reason,
and  another with a tendency towards the particular good, which appetite
belongs  to  sense." The traditional name for the intellectual appetite,
or  the  faculty of rational desire, is "will." In Spinoza's vocabulary,
the  effort  of desire, "when it is related to the mind alone, is called
will^  but  when it is related at the same time both to the mind and the
body,  is  called  appetite.'' Psychologists who attribute these diverse
modes  of  desire,  as they attribute sensation and thought, to a single
faculty  called  "mind"  or  "understanding," nevertheless deal with the
whole  range of appetitive phenomena, including both the animal passions
and  acts  of  will.  James,  for  example,  treats the instinctive acts
associated  with  the  emotions as "automatic and reflex" movements, and
separates  them  from  "voluntary  movements  which,  being  desired and
intended  beforehand,  arc  done with full prevision of what they are to
be." In so doing, he draws a line between emotional impulses and acts of
will, even though he does not distinguish two appetitive faculties. With
or  without  the distinction in faculties, almost all observers of human
experience  and  conduct  seem  to  agree upon a distinction in types of
conscious  desire,  at  least insofar as they recognize the ever-present
conflict between the passions and the will. These matters are more fully
considered  in  the  chapters on Emotion and Will. The role of desire in
human life— especially emotional desire— is so intimately connected with
problems of good and evil, virtue, duty, and happiness, that until quite
recently  the subject was discussed mainly in books on ethics, politics,
or  rhetoric  rather  than psychology. Even Freud, who tries to separate
psychological  description  and  explanation  from  moral  principles or
conclusions,  cannot  avoid  treating  the  effects of morality upon the
dynamics of desire and the life of the passions. Many of the funda-

[387a]
mental  terms  of psychoanalysis— conflict, repression, rationalization,
sublimation,  to  name only some— carry the connotation of moral issues,
even  though  they  imply  a  purely  psychological  resolution of them.
Contrary  to  a popular misconception, Freud expressly declares that "it
is  out  of  the  cjucstion  that  part of the analytic treatment should
consist  of  advice  to  'live freely.' "The conflict "between libidinal
desires and sexual repression," he explains, is "not resolved by helping
one  side  to  win a victory over the other." Although Freud thinks that
"what the world calls its code of morals demands more sacrifices than it
is  worth,"  he also declares that "we must beware of overestimating the
importance  of  abstinence  in  effecting  neurosis."  What  Freud calls
emotional  infantilism  resembles  to  some  degree what a moralist like
Aristotle calls self-indulgence or incontinence. To give vent to all the
promptings  of  desire,  without  regard  to  the  demands of society or
reality  is  to  revert  to  infancy—a state characterized, according to
Freud,  by  "the  irreconcilability of its wishes with reality." Because
children  "live at the beck and call of appetite, and it is in them that
the  desire  for  what  is  pleasant  is strongest," Aristotle thinks it
fitting  that  we  should  speak of self-indulgence when it occurs in an
adult  as  a "childish fault." Aristotle and Freud seem to be looking at
the  same  facts of human nature and seeing them in the same light. What
Freud describes as the conflict between the "pleasure-principle" and the
"reality-principle,"   Aristotle—and  with  him  Spinoza—  treats  as  a
conflict  between  the  passions  and  the reason, and Kant conceives in
terms  of the opposition between desire and duty. What Freud says of the
reality-principle  —that  it  "demands  and enforces the postponement of
satisfaction,  the  renunciation  of  manifold  possibilities,  and  the
temporary endurance of pain"—parallels traditional statements concerning
the  role  of  reason  or of duty in the moral life. Where the moralists
speak  of  the necessity for regulating or moderating emotional desires,
Freud refers to the need of "do-

[387b]
Chapter  17: DRSIRE 329 mesticating" them, as one would train a beast to
serve  the ends of human life. The implication, in Aristotle and Spinoza
as well as in Freud, docs not seem to be that man's animal appetites are
in  themselves bad, but that, if they are undisciplined or uncontrolled,
they  cause  disorder  in  the  individual  life  and  in  society. Some
moralists,   however,   take  an  opposite  view.  For  them  desire  is
intrinsically evil, a factor of discontent, and fraught with "While what
we  crave  is wanting," Lucretius writes, "it seems to transcend all the
rest;  then,  when  it has been gotten, we crave something else"; yet as
often  as a man gains something new, he discovers afresh that "he is not
better  off." Either our desires are unsatisfied, and then we suffer the
agony  of frustration; or they are satiated and so are we—desperate with
ennui. Hence, freedom from all desires, not just their moderation, seems
to  be  recommended  for  peace of mind; as centuries later Schopenhauer
recommended  the  negation  of  the  will  to  live  in  order  to avoid
frustration  or boredom. Marcus Aurelius and the Stoics, and later Kant,
similarly urge us "not to yield to the persuasions of the body . . . and
never  to  be  over-powered either by the motion of the senses or of the
appetites."  But whereas the Stoics would restrain desire "because it is
animal" and in order to avoid pain, Kant argues that the renunciation of
desire  should  be  undertaken "not merely in accordance with duty . . .
but from duty, which must be the true end of all moral cultivation." The
opposition  between  these  two  views  of  desire  in  the  moral  life
represents  one of the major issues in ethical theory, further discussed
in  the chapters on Duty and Virtue. The doctrine of natural appetite is
crucially  relevant  to the issue. If the naturalist in ethics is right,
he  is  so by virtue of the truth that natural tendencies are everywhere
the  measure  of  good  and  evil. If, however, there is no truth in the
doctrine  of  natural  desire, then the impulses which spring from man's
animal passions can claim no authority in the court of reason.

[388a]
330  THE GREAT IDEAS libido 2I?. The objects of desire: the good and the
pleasant  3.  The  modes  of  desire  or  appetite 3^. Natural appetite:
desires determined by nature or instinct and acts of the will ^c. Desire
and  love:  their distinction and connection 4. The economy of desire in
human  life  4^.  The  conflict  of  desires  with  one  another 4^. The
discharge  of desires : catharsis and sublimation 5. Desire as ruler 5^.
Desire  ruling  imagination:  daydreaming  and  fantasy 5^. Desire ruhng
thought: rationalization and wishful thinking 7. Desire and infinity ya.
The  infinite  tendency  of  desires  (2)  The  lust  for  power (3) The
accumulation of wealth

[388b]
OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. Desire and the order of change: eros and telos
ooi 2. The analysis of desire or appetite ^^2 2a. The roots of desire in
need,  privation,  or potency: the instinctual sources of the 2C. Desire
as  a  cause of action: motivation or purpose; voluntariness 333 2^. The
satisfaction  of  desire:  possession  and  enjoyment  334  3^.  Desires
determined  by  knowledge  or  judgment  335 (i) The distinction between
sensitive  and  rational  desire: emotional tendencies (2) Conscious and
unconscious  desires:  habitual  desire  336  3^. Desire and aversion as
emotional  opposites  337  4^.  The  attachment  of  desires: fixations,
projections, identifications, transferences 4^. The focusing of desires:
emotional   complexes  338  5^.  Desire  ruling  action:  the  unchecked
expression of desires; incontinence 339 6. Desire as subject to rule 340
6b.  The  restraint  or  renunciation of desire: abstention, inhibition,
repression  341  (i) The pursuit of pleasure 342 yb. The restless search
for the infinite : the desire for the vision of God 343

[389a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the vohimc and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4 Homhr: Iliad, bk ii [265-28:5] 12d, tlie number 4 is the
number  ot  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  ot page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page.  For  example, in 53 James : Psyc/iology, 1 16a-l
19b,the  passage  begins  in  the upper half of page 116 and ends in the
lower  half  of  page  119. When the text is printed in two columns, the
letters  a  and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand
sideof  the  page,  the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of
the  right-hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium,
163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of
page  163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164.
Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as
part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included  in the reference; line
numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  Bible  References: The references are to book, chapter,
and  verse.  When  the  King James and Douay versions differ in title of
books  or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James version
is  cited  first  and  the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.. Old
Testament:   Nehemiah,   7:45—   (D)   //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols:  The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed  mtermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in  the  use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. , Desire
and  the  order  of  change:  eros and telos 7 Plato: Cratylus, 103c-d /
Symposium, 165c166b / Phaedo, 241b-242b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192*16-24]
268b-c; bk ii, ch 8-9 275d-278a,c; bk viii, CH 4
[255*30-^31]
340a-c  / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6 [333*35-334^9] 434b435a
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[984^8]-ch 4
[985*28] 502d-503c; ch 7
[988^6-16] 506c-d;
BK IX, CH 8
[1050*3-^6] 575d-576b; bk
xii, CH 5
[1070^36-1071*4]
600b-c; CH 7
[1072*
20-^13]  602b-d;  ch 10 [1075^1-10] 606b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
hi, ch 6 202d203a 12 Lucretius: A^fl/«r<? of Things, bk i [1-61] la-d;
[1022-1037]
13c-d;
[1052-1082]
14a-c; bk ii
[167-183]
17a-b;
[1048-1066]
28b-c; bk iv
[823-857]
55a-b; bk v
[156-194]
63a-c;
[416-431] 66c-d; [509-533] 67d-68a
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr v 100c-106b / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
18-21  166d-168c  18 Ausustine: Confessions, bk i, par i, la; bk IV, par
15-17  23a-c  /  City of God, bk xii, ch 4-5 344b-345b; bk xix, ch 12-14
517b-520d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 5-6 23b-30d passim;
qq 19-20 108d-124a passim; q 26, a 2, ans 150c-151a; q 48, a i,

[389b]
Chapter  17:  DESIRE  331  ans  and  rep  4 259b-260c; qq 59-60 306b314c
passim;  q 62, a i, ans 317d-318c; q 104, a 3, rep i 537b-d; q 105, a 4.
ans 541c542a; part i-ii, q i, a 2 610b-611b; a 8 615a-c; q 2, a 5, rep 3
618d-619c:  q  26, a i, ans and rep 3 734a-d; q 27, a 3, ans and REP 3-4
738c- 739c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[9i]-xviii
[75] 79b-80c; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107b-d  23  HoBBEs: Leiiathan, part i, 50a; 61a-c; part IV,
271d   28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  38a-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  426d-427a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  73a-c 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, pref 422b, d424a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72, 184b;
75  185b-186a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 29-41
184d-188c  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  293d  [fn 3]; 304b-d; 315b-c /
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a386d / Judgement, 465c-466c esp 466b. d
[fn
ij;  483d-484b;  577c-578a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy'  of  History, intro,
161d168b  esp  162a-163d,  164c,  165b-c  49  Darwin:  Origin ofSpecies,
40c-42a; 96b-98a,c 53 James: Psychology, 4a-7a esp 4b-5a

[390a]
(1.  Desire  and  the order of change: eros and telos.) 54 Freud: Beyond
the  Pleasure Principle 639a663d esp 651d-654c, 662c-663d / Ego a?id Id,
708d-712a  esp 711c-712a / Civilization a?id Its Discontents, 790a-791d;
799a-800a  /  Netv  Introductory  Lectures, 849c-851d 2. The analysis of
desire  or  appetite  2a.  The  roots  of  desire in need, privation, or
potency:  the  instinctual sources of the libido 7 Plato: Lysis, 24a-c /
Symposium,  162a-166b  / Republic, bk iv, 352b-d / Philehus, 621c-622b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192^16-24]
268b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[581*21-^22]
107a-b  /  Parts of Animals, bk III, CH 14 [675^25-30] 205b / Ethics, bk
hi, CH II [1118^8-18] 365a-b / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 13 [1389V-35] 637b 10
Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk hi, ch 6 202d203a; ch 8 205a-207b; ch 13,
211d-212d  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk iv [858-876] 55b-c; bk v
[156-173]  63a-b  17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr v, ch i 100c101c; CH 10
105d-106b  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  IV,  CH 18-21 166d-168c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 1-6 la-2c; bk III, par I 13b-c; par lo 15b-d; bk
iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; bk v, par 1-2 27a-c; bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, A 3, REP 3 25a-d; q 19, a i, rep
2  108d-109c; Q 59, A 2, ANs 307c-308b; q 81, a 2 429c430c; part i-ii, q
27,  a  3, ans and rep 3-4 738C-739C 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvii
[9i]-xviii
[75]
79b-80c; xx
[i24]-xxi
[75]
84c-85d  passim; paradise, i [103-120] 107b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 61a-d 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act ii, sc iv
[263-274] 261c
28  Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 347c; 349a350a; 402a-d 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  vi, 97d-98a; 99d102d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 2-7
425a-426b   33   Pascal:   Pensees,  100  191a-192b  35  hocKE  :  Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xx, SECT 6 177a-b; ch xxi, sect 30-35 185a-186d
esp  SECT  31  185c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 346b 43 Mill: Liberty,
295b-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 190-195 66a-67a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b  esp 577d-578a; bk xiv,
605b-d; bk xv, 630c631c; epilogue i, 665a-d 53 James: Psychology, 51a-b;
767a

[390b]
332  THE  GREAT IDEAS Itolb 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 363c-d /
Narcissism,   400c-402c   /   histincts,  412c-413a;  414a-d  /  General
Introduction, 574a; 580a-d; 591d-592b; 615b-616b; 618d-619a / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  654a-c; 657d-659a / Group Psychology, 673b-c / Ego
and Id, 7lOc711b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 789c791c esp 791a /
New  Introductory  Lectures, 846a-851d esp 846a-847b, 849b-85'lc 2h. The
objects  of  desire: the good and the pleasant 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 69a-
71a  /  Phaedrus,  120a-122a / Sym.posium, 161d-166b / Meno, 177d-178b /
Gorgias,  262a-264b;  275b-280d  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  310c-d;  bk  iv,
351b-352d; bk IX, 422c-425b esp 423b-424d / Philebus, 614a / Laws, bk v,
689c-690c;  bk  vi, 712b; BK VIII, 735c-736c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii,
ch 3 [iio''38-iii*6] 155d; BK III, CH 1-4 162a-166b; bk vi, ch 8
[i46'*37-bi9]
200b-c;
[146^36-1 47*^11]
200d201a  /  Physics, bk i, ch 9 [192^16-24] 268b-c / Metaphysics, bk i,
ch 2
[982^12-27]
500d501a;  [983^14-21] 501b-c; bk xii, ch 7 [1072* 23-^13] 602b-d/ Soul,
BK II, CH 3 [4i4*28-'^5] 644c; BK iH, CH 7
[43i''i-^i2] 663c-D64b; ch
10 [433*13-^19] 665d-666c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch I
[589^3-10] 115b
/ Parts of Anifnals, bk ii, CH 17
[661^6-8] 188a
/ Motion of Animals, ch 6
[700^23-30] 236a /
Ethics, bk i, ch i
[1094*1-3] 339a; ch 2 [1094^17-22] 339b; bk
VI,  ch 2 387d-388b; bk vii, ch 11-14 403c406a, c; bk x, ch 2 426c-427b;
ch 3
[1174*
4-11] 428b; CH 4
[1175*10-22] 429c;
ch 5
[1175^24-33] 430b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6-7 602d-607d; ch 10
[1369*1-4]
612b; ch ii
[1370*17-28] 613c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Thifjgs, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4 lC8d110a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  vi  21a-26a passim / Third Efinead, tr v 100c-106b / Fourth
Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  35,  177d-178a / Ffth Ennead, TR V, CH 12 234a-d /
Sixth Ennead, tr VII, CH 30 336b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
9-18  lOd13a;  BK  X,  par  29-33  78d-80b  /  City of God, BK XII, CH 6
345b-346c;  bk  xix,  ch  i  507a509a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 3-4
625b-c;  ch 22-30 629b-633b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 5-6
23b-30d  passim;  q  16, a i, ans 94b-95c; a 4 97a-c; qq 19-20 108d-124a
passim; q 26, a 2, ANS 150c-151a; q 48, a i, ans and rep 4 259b-260c; qq
59-60  306b-314c  passim,  esp  q  60,  aa 3-5 311d-314c; q 62, a i, ans
317d318c; Q 63, A 4 328b-329a; qq 80-83 427a440b passim; q 104, a 3, rep
i 537b-d; q 105, A 4, ANS 541c-542a; q 106, a 2, ans 546d-547c;

[391a]
Ic  Chapter  17:  DESIRE  333  PART  i-ii,  QQ 1-5 609a-643d passim; q 8
655a657c;  o  22,  A  2,  ANS  721c-722c;  a  ^,  rep  2 722d'723b; q 23
723c-727a;  q  26,  a  i,  ans  and  REP  3 734a-d; q 27 737a-740a; q 30
749a-752b passim; q 33, a 2 766a-767a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  94,  A  2,  ANS 221d-223a; part hi suppl, q 98, A 3 1074a-c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy^ purgatory, xvii
[9i]-xviii
[75]
79b-80c; paradise, v
[1-12]
112a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part i, 61a-62c; 76c-77b; 96a; part iv,
272c  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 381d382a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  73a-74a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 50b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  4-13  398d400d; prop 39, schol 408b-d; prop 56
414a-d; the affects, def 1-3 416b-417a; part IV, def 1-2 424a; prop 9-13
426d-428a; prop 19-28 429d-431c; prop 63 443d-444a; prop 65-66 444b-d 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  81  186b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii,
sect  3  104b-d; bk ii, ch vh, sect 3 131d132a; ch xx, sect 6 177a-b; ch
xxi, sect 29-48 184d-190d passim, esp sect 31 185c-d, sect 42 188c; sect
55-56  192c-193b; sect 61-62 194b-d; sect 70 197a-b; sect 73 198c199c 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 264d-265b / Practical Reason,
298a-300d; 315c-317b; 330c-331a; 341c-342a / Judgement, 605d-606b [fn 2]
43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448a-450b; 461c-464d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  ii,  par  123124  44a-d  / Philosophy of History, part iv,
319b-320a  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1194-1216]  29b-30a;  part  ii
[11,559-586] 281b-282a 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 308a-b; 316a-317a; 592d
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 524c-527a; BK XII, 560a-561c; bk xiii,
577a-578b  esp  577d-578a;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk xv, 630c631c 53 James:
Psychology,  198b-211a;  808b-814b  esp  812b-813a  54 Freud: Instincts,
414a-b;  418d-420b esp 420a-b / General Introduction, 592c-593a / Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle,  639a-640c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
772a-b  2c.  Desire  as  a  cause  of  action:  motivation  or  purpose;
voluntariness 7 Plato: Cratylus, 95a-b / Symposium, 163a166b / Republic,
bk  iv, 352d-353b / Ttmueus, 474b-d / Laws, bk vi, 712b; bk ix, 751b-d 8
Aristotle:  M^/^/j/zj'i/r^v.BK 11, ch 2 [994^^9-16] 512d-513a; bk vi, ch
i
[1025^23-25] 547d;
bk IX, CH 5 [1047^35-1048*24] 573b-c; en 7

[391b]
[io49"5-i2]
574c-d / Soul, bk hi, cii 7
[43i'*8-''i2l 663c-664b; ch 9-1 i 664d-667a
QAristoti-k: Motion of An mals, ch 6-11 235d 239d csp ch 6 235d 236b, ch
10 238c239a / Ethics, bk in, ch i 355b,d-357b esp
[iiii''2i-'\:j) 357a-b; ch
12 365d-366a,c; bk VI, CH 2 387d 388b / Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[i267''^-8]
462c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 611c 613a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  ii  [251-293]  18b-d;  BK  IV  [877-906]  55d-56a 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead, tr v, ch 10 105d106b / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 18-21 166d168c /
Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch 4 344b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
25 25c; bk viii, par 19-27 58b-60c / City of God, bk XII, CH 6 345b-346c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 8, ans and rep i 82c-83b;
q 18, a 3, ans 106b107c; q 19, A 4 lllc-112c; q 41, a 2 218c-219d; q 57,
A  4,  rep  3  298a-299a;  q  59. a i, rep 3 306c-307b; q 75, a 3, rep 3
380c-381b;  q 78, A I, ANS and REP 4 407b-409a; q 80, a 2, rep 3 428a-d;
q 81, a 3, ans and rt.p 2 430c-431d; part i-ii, q i, aa 1-6 609b-614c; q
6  644a-651c;  qq 16-17 684a-693d; q 22, a 2, rep 2 721c-722c; q 28, a 6
744b-d 21 Dante: Divifie Comedy, purgatory, xxiii
[19-75] 80a-c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53a; 61a-c; 64a-c; 76c; part ii, 112d-113c
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part v, 60b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, partiii, the
affects,  def  i  416b-d;  part  iv,  def 7 424b; proi' 19 429d; prop 59
442b-d   33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  24b-  26b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk i, ch ii, SECT 3 104b-d; sect 13 107d-108c; bk ii, ch
XX, SECT 6 177a-b; ch xxi, sect 29-48 184d190d passim, esp sect 33 186a;
sect  73  198c-199c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 338c-339b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 262a-c; 271c-d; 279b; 282d-'283d / Practical
Reason, 293d
[fn
3];  298d-300a;  303b-304b;  341c-342a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals,
385a-386d    43    Mill:    Representative   Government,   346c-348c   /
Utilitarianism,  461c-464d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 11
15a-b;  par  17  16c;  part  ii,  par 123 44a-b / Philosophy of History,
intro,  162a-c;  164b166b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a-314c passim;
316a-317a 53 James: Psychology, 4a-7a; 8a-9a; I3a 15a; 51a-b; 767a-768a;
788a-799b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams, 363b-364d; 377c-378b /
Instincts,  4l2c-413a;  418d-419a  /  General  Introduction, 453b-476a,c
passim, esp 469a-470c, 473b-d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 768b-c

[392a]
334  (2.  The  analysis  of desire or appetite.) 2d. The satisfaction of
desire:  possession  and enjoyment 7 Plato: Symposium, 162b-c / Gorgias,
275b276b  /  Republic,  bk ix, 421a-425b / Philebus, 620a-b 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk vi, ch 8
[146^13-19]
200c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  io-ii  364b365d; BK X, ch 4-5
428b-430d esp ch 4
[1175*10-22] 429c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[1003loio] 43a; bk iv [1073-1120] 58a-d
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 2-4 9b-d; BK IV, par 15 23a-b; bk
vi,  par  9-10  37c-38b;  par  26  42d-43a;  bk  viii, par 6-8 54c-55a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 3-4 625b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  5,  a  6,  ANs  and  rep  2 27c-28b; part i-ii, q i, aa 7-8
614c-615c;  q  2,  a  6  619d-620d;  q  3,  a  4  625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-2
629d-631a;  q  5, a 8, REP 3 642d-643d; q ii 666b,d-669b; q 27, a 3, ANS
738c-739c;  q  30,  a 4, rep 3 751c-752b; QQ 31-34 752b-772b 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 28-29 527b-533a; part hi suppl, q 69, a
4, ans 889c-890c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-39]
80a-b; paradise, hi
[34-90]
109d110b; XXXII
[52-72]
155b-c; xxxiii
[46-48]
156c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 76c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
prop  32  406b-c;  PROP 35-36 406d-407c; prop 39, scHOL408b-d 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  109 193b-194a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 346b 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,   298a-300a;   341c342a   /   Judgement,   470a-471b   43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  347b-348b  /  Utilitarianism,  448d-449c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 45 23c-d; par 59 27a-b; part ii,
par  124  44b-d;  PART  HI,  par  154  57c;  par 182 64a / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  165b-166a  47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part i [2605-3216]
63b79a,  PART  II  [9192-9573]  223b-232a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man,
308a-309d  passim;  312b  53  ]mabs: Psychology, 725b-726a; 812a-813b 54
Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 363c-d; 377c-d / Instincts, 412d-413a /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  663a  /  Ego  and  Id,  71  Id712a  /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  773b-d  3.  The modes of desire or
appetite  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c  8  Aristotle:  Soul, bk hi, ch 9
[432^5-7]  665a  9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1370*17-27] 613c 17
Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 4-5 108c109d

[392b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Id  to  la 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 29-33
78d-80b  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, A I, rep 2 28b-d; q
19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  Q  59, A I, ANS 306c-307b; q 78, a i, rep 3
407b-409a;  q 80 427a-428d; part i-ii, q 5, A 8, REP 3 642d-643d; q 8, a
i,  ans  655b656a;  Q 26, a i 734a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvii
[9i]-xviii
[75] 79b-80c esp xvii
[91-96] 79b
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-62a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
9 399b-c; prop 56-57 414a-415b; the affects, def i 416b-d; part iv, prop
59  442b-d;  appendix,  i-iii  447a-b;  part  v, prop 4, schol 453b-d 49
Darwin:  Origin of Species, 119a-b / Descent of Man, 287d-289a 53 James:
Psychology,  8a-17b  esp 8a-9a, 13a-15a; 47b-52b esp 49b-50a, 51a-52a 54
Freud:  General  Introduction,  591d-593b / War and Death, 757d-759d esp
758d-759a ^a. Natural appetite: desires determined by nature or instinct
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c  /  Symposium,  165b-c  /  Republic, bk ii,
311b-312b  / Timaeus, 474b-d / Philebus, 621c-622b / Laws, bk vi, 712b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192*16-24]
268b-c; bk viii, ch 4
[255*30-^31] 340a-c /
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*22-28]  499a  9  Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk v, ch 8
[542*17-^4]
68d-69a;  bk  vi,  ch  i8-bk  vh, CH 2 97b-108c passim, esp bk vi, ch 18
97b99c, bk VII, CH I 106b,d-108a; bk viii, ch I [589*4-9] 115b / Ethics,
bk hi, ch ii [1118^ 8-18] 365a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1370*
18-25] 613c; BK II, ch 7
[1385*21-25] 631d
10  Galen:  Natural  Vacuities, bk hi, ch 6 202d203a; ch 8 205a-207b; ch
13, 211d-212d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk iv
[858-876]
55b-c;
[1037-1057]
57d  15  Tacitus: Histories, bk ii, 224d-225a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr  v  100c-106b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 28, 157a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 6, a I, rep 2 28b-d; q 12, a i, ans 50c-51c; a 8,
rep  4  57b-58b; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; a 4 lllc-112c; Q 26, A 2, ANS
150c-151a;  q  59,  a  i,  ANS 306c-307b; q 60 310a-314c; q 62, a i, ANS
317d-318c; q 63, a 3 327b-328b; q 75, a 6, ANS 383c-384c; q 78, a i, rep
3  407b-409a; Q 80, A I, ANS and REP 1,3 427b-428a; q 82, A I 431d-432c;
part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  8  642d-643d;  q 8, A I, ANS 655b-656a; q 10, a 2
663d-664d; Q 12, A 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q 26, A I, ANS and REP
3  734a-d;  a  2, ans 734d735c; Q 27, A 2, REP 3 737d-738c; q 30, AA 3-4
750d-752b; q 34, a i, rep 2 768c769d; q 36, aa 1-2 780c- 782b; q 40, a 3
794c795a

[393a]
lbtolb{\)  Chapter  17:  DESIRE  335  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 94, A 2, ANS and REP 2 221d-223a; q 109, a 3 340c-341b; part hi
suppl,  q  9^,  a i, ans 1037d-1039a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvii
[9i]-xviii
[75]
79b-80c; xx
[i24]-xxi
[75]
84c-85d passim; paradise, i [103-120] 107b-c 22 Chaucer: Manciple's Tale
[ij,  10^-i^4f\^90a.-h  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, parti, 50a; 61a-d; 76c-d;
PART  IV,  271d  25 Montaigne: fijflj^i, 224d-225a; 489b-d 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  347c;  349a350a;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c-477a 31
Descartes: Discourse, part v, 60b / Meditations, VI, 97d-98a; 99d-103d /
Objections  and  Replies,  124b;  156a-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part hi,
395a-d; prop 7 399a; part iv, prop 19 429d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 81 186b /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 440b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
ii, sect 3 104b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knotvledge, intro, sect 3 405b-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-339b;  346b  44  BoswELL.: Johnson, 130b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 11 15a-b; additions, 121 136c-d
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  119a  /  Descent  of  Man, 287d-289a;
304a-313a passim, esp304b,d
[fn 5], 307d-309d, 310c-311b; 371c-372c
53  ]AMES  -.Psychology,  49b-50a;  198b-199a;  204b211a  esp 205b-206a,
209a-b;  700a-737a  esp 700a-701a, 712b-737a; 799a-b; 890b-892a esp 891b
[fn  i]  54  Freud: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 15d-18a /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  363c-d / Narcissism, 400c-402c esp 401b-c /
Instincts,  414b-421c  passim,  esp  414c-415d  /  General Introduction,
569c-576d  esp  574a-d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  651d-654c;
658b-659d  /  War and Death, 758a-759a; 764d-765a / Civilization and Its
Discontents,   787a-788d   esp  787a-c;  789b-791d  /  New  Introductory
Lectures, 837b-d; 846a-851d esp 846a-847b; 883b-c 3^. Desires determined
by knowledge or judgment 7 Plato: Protagoras, 59a-62d / Phaedrus, 120b-c
/ Philebus, 621c-622b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 8
[146^36147*11]
200d-201a / Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 7
[1072*26-30] 602b / Soul, BK
II, ch 2
[413^19-24] 643d; CH 3
[414*28-^16] 644c-d;
BK  HI,  CH  3 [427^21-24] 660a; ch 7 [431*8-^12] 663c-664b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[1113*3-13]
359a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii [1370*17-28] 613c 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 28, 157a-b; tr iv, ch 20, 168a-b / Sixth Ennead^ tr
viii, ch 2-4 343c-344d

[393b]
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 29-:j3 78d 80b / City of God, bk
xiv,  ch 6 380b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, A I, REP 3
407b-409a; qq 80-83 427a-440b; PART i-ii, Q 27, A 2 737d-738c; q 40, a 2
793d-794c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[9i]-xviii [75]79b-80c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 61c-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi,
50b  /  Meditations,  hi,  82d-83a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 3
373d;  part  iv,  prop  59 442b-d; prop 61-62 443a-d; APPENDIX, HI 447b;
part v, prop 4, schol 453b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338c-339b 42 Kant:
Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d-265b esp 265b,d [fn i] 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  310c-313a  passim,  esp  312a-c 53 James: Psychology,
13a-15a;  51a-52a;  729b730a  54 Freud: General Introduction, 501d-504b;
593a  / War and Death, 758a-759a 3^(1) The distinction between sensitive
and  rational desire: emotional tendencies and acts of the will 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk ix, 421a-425b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5 573ac;
bk xii, ch 7
[1072*27-29]
602b / Soul, bk III, CH 7
[431*8-^12]
663c-664b; ch 9
[432^5-7] 665a; ch
id
[433^5-13]
666b; ch 10
[433^27]-CH
II
[434*22]
666c-667a / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453"! 5-31]
695b-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[i368''281369*4] 612a-b; ch ii [1370*17-28] 613c
17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi 21a-26a passim / Third Ennead, tr v, ch
i  lOOc-lOlc;  TR  VI,  CH  4-5  108c-109d / Fourth Ennead, tr IV, CH 28
172a-173b  /  Sixth  Ennead, tr VIII, CH 2-4 343c-344d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 19, A I, ans 108d-109c; q 59, a i, ans and rep i
306c-307b;  q  79, a i, rep 2 414a-d; q 80, A 2 428a-d; q 82, a 2, rep 3
432d-433c; a 5 435c-436c; q 106, a 2, rep 3 546d-547c; part I-II, Q I, a
2, rep 3 610b-611b; q 6, a 2 646a-c; q II, A 2 667b-d; q 12, a 5 672a-c;
q  13,  a  2  673c-674c; q 15, a 2 682a-c; q 16, a 2 684d685b; Q 17, A 2
687d-688b;  q 22, a 3 722d723b; Q 24, A 2, ans 727d-728c; q 26, a i, ans
734a-d;  q  30,  a  i  749a-d;  a 3 750d-751c; Q 31, AA 3-4 754a-755c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 18, A 2 811d-812b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvhi
[19-75] 80a-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 63a; 64a-c; part ii, 162c 31 Descartes:
Z)^TO«ri(f, part hi, 50b

[394a]
(3^.  Desires determined by knowledge or judgment. 3^(1) The distinction
between  sensitive and rational desire: emotional tendencies and acts of
the will.) 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 48, schol 391b-c; PART III,
PROP  9,  SCHOL  399c;  prop  58-50  415c-416b; the affects, def i, expl
416c-d;  part  v,  prop 32 460b 35 Locke: Human Understandings bk 11, ch
XXI, sect 30 185a-c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d'265b
esp 265b,d
[fn
if;  271c-d;  279b;  282d-283b;  284d-285a  /  Practical Reason, 301a-c;
303b-304b; 314d-317c; 330c-331a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386b
/  judgement,  483d-484b;  605d-606b  [fn  2]  43  Mill: Utilitarianism,
463c-464d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, intro, par 19 16d-r7a; par
25-26  18a-c;  part  ii,  par  139  48d-49b;  part  hi,  par  194 66c-d;
additions,  121  135c-d;  131  137d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  INTRO.
163a-164a;  part  iv,  362b-c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 310c-314c;
592d593a  53  ]AMES  -.Psychology,  8a-9a; 13a-15a: 767b-768a; 790a-799b
passim,  esp  794a-798b  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  110c / Interpretation of
Dreams,  377c-380d  esp  377c-378b,  379d380b  /  General  Introduction,
501d-504b;  590a593b;  607d-608c;  615b-616c  /  Ego  and Id, 702c / New
Introductory   Lectures,   837b-838d;   843d-844b  3^(2)  Conscious  and
unconscious  desires: habitual desire 7 Plato: Republic, bk ix, 416a-c 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii, ch i 348b,d-349b; CH 5 351b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessiofis,  bk  viii, par lo-ii 55c-56b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  87,  a  2  466c-467b;  part i-ii, q i, a 6, rep 3 614a-c 20
Aquimas: Su7nma Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 3 8b-9a; a 5 lOb-d; q 56,
a  4  32b-33c;  a  6  34b'35a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 9, schol
399c; THE affects, def I, EXPL 416c-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  262a-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c386b  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  463d-464d  49  Dar>vin:  Origin  of  Species, 119a'b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  407c-d  53 James: Psychology, 8b-9a;
90b-93a passim; 788a-792a 54 Freld: Hysteria, llOb-c / Interpretation of
Dreams,  357b-358c;  363b-365c esp 364c; 369a-b; 377b-387a.c passim, esp
386d-387a  /  Unconscious,  428a-443d  esp  428a,  429d-430b, 432c-433d,
436b-437c / General Introduction,

[394b]
336  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3>b(2)  to Ic 452a-c; 453b-476a,c esp 488a-469c,
473c-d;  501d-503d  esp  503b-c;  531d-532b;  599d / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,  643  d-646a  /  Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720a 3c.
Desire  and  love:  their  distinction  and  connection  5  Euripides  :
Iphige?iia  at Aulis [543-589] 429d430a 7 Plato: Lysis, 20c-d; 23d-24d /
Phaedrus, 115a-129d'esp 120b-c, 123b-124a / Symposium, 164c-165b / Laws,
bk viii, 735c-736c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk h, ch 22
[68=^25-^7]
89d-90a / Topics, bk vi, ch 7
[146^9-12] 199d; BK
vii, ch i
[152^6-9] 207c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch ii
[1118^8-18]
365a-b;  bk  viii, ch 1-8 406b,d-411d passim; CH 13-14 414d-416d; bk ix,
ch  i  416b,d-417c  passim;  ch  5 420a-c; ch 8 421 d 423a 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371062] 57d-58a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  24 203c210a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead, tr v, ch 7-TR vi, CH 9 20a-26a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par  i-bk  hi,  par  I  9a-13c  /  City of God, bk xiv, ch 7 380c-381c /
Christian   Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  10,  661d-662a  19  Aquinas:  Sumjna
Theologica,  part  i,  q 19, A I, REP 2 108d-109c; a 2, ans 109c-110b; Q
20,  A  I, ans and rep 2 120a-121b; a 2, rep 3 121b-122a; q 60, a 3, ans
311d-312b;  PART i-ii, Q 2, A I, REP 3 615d-616c; q 23, a 2 724c-725c; a
4  726a-727a;  q 25, a 2 731b732a; a 3, ans 732a-733a; q 26 733d-737a; Q
27,  aa  3-4  738c-740a;  q 28, a i, ans and REP 1-2 740b-741a; a 2, ans
741a-742a;  a  3,  ANS  and  REP  2-3  742a-d;  a 4 742d-743c; q 30, A 2
749d-750d;  q  32,  a 3, rep 3 760d-761c; A 8, ans 764c-765b 20 Aquinas:
Sumjna  Theologica, parti-ii, q 62, A 3, ans and rep 3 61c-62b 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [4081]  75d-76a;  xvii  [9i]-xviii [75]
79b-80c  23  Hobbes:  Let'iathan, part i, 61c; 63a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
83d-84a;   398c-399d;   424d-425a;473a-b  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and
Cressida,  act  i,  sc H [308-321] 107d-108a 29 Cervantes : Don Quixote,
part i, 79d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, the affects, def 6 417b-c; part
iv, appendix, i-ii 447a-b; xix-xx 449a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b  35  Locke:  hluman  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, SECT 4-6
176d-177b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345c-346b  53 James : Psychology,
204b-209b   passim   54  Freud:  Narcissism,  404d-406b;  409b-411a,c  /
Instincts, 420a-421a / General bitroduction,

[395a]
3ii  to  U  Cfiaptik  17: desire ;37 581b; 617c 618a / Group Psychology,
673b674a;   679a-b;   681c-683a;  693a  694b  /  Cii'ilization  and  Its
Discontents,  783b-c  / New Introductory Lectures, 847d-848a 3#/. Desire
and  aversion as emotional opposites 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 352d-353a
8 Aristotle: Souly bk hi, ch 7
[431 "8
^'9] 663c-664a 9 Aristotlr: Ethics, rk vt, ch 2
[ir^Q'*2i^i]
387d-388a;  bk x, ch 2 [ii73'*5-i3] 427a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xiv,  ch  6  380b-c  19 Aquinas: Sutnma Theologica, part i-ii, q 23, A 2
724c-725c;  a 4 726a-727a; q 25, aa 1-2 730b-732a; a 3, rep 3 732a-733a;
q  ^50  749a-752b;  q  35,  a 6 777b-778c 23 Hobbes: Lei'iathan, part i,
61a-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part hi 395a-422a,c csp PROP 12-13 400b-d,
PROP 15-48 401a 411a, prop 51 411c-412a, the affects, def 2-3 416d-417a,
def  6-7  417b-d;  part iv, def 5 424b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch xx, sect 4-5 176d-177a 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a
-c  53 James: Psychology, 7b8a-709a 54 Freud: Instincts, 418c-421a,c esp
418c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  659b-d  /  Group Psychology,
677c-678c / Ego and Id, 708d710c esp 709d-710c / War and Death, 766a-b /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 790a- 791b 4. The economy of desire in
human  life  4a.  The  conflict  of  desires with one another Apocrypha:
Susanna, 22-24— (D) OT, Daniel, 13:22-24 New Testament: M^///2<?«^ 6:24;
8:21-22; 26:364^ / Romans, 7:14-25 / Philippians, 1:21-26 /James, 4:1-10
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch 5
[i048''2i24] 573c / Soul, BK III, CH 10 [433^5-13] 666b; ch II
[434^10-15] 666d-667a
/  Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2 [453^15-31] 695b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk vii 395a-406a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10731085] 5Sa-b
13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv [332-360] 176a-177a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  iv,  par  11-12  21d22b;  bk  X,  par 39 81b-c; par 41-64 81c-87d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 6, AA 6-7 649a-650d; q 9, a 2,
rep  3  658d659c; Q 10, A 3 664d-665c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 77, A I 145a-d; part ii-ii, q 29, a i 530b-531a; part III, Q 18,
A  6  814d-815d;  part  hi  suppl,  Q 96, AA II-I2 1063d-1065b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[1-27]
llOd-llla  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 297b-d; 350d-354b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part iii-iv395a-450d passim,

[395b]
esp  part  III,  prop 31 405d-406a, !>\ri iv, OFF 5 424b, prop 7, coRoi,
426b,  i»kop  15-18  428a-429d,  prop  60  61  442d-443b  46  IIi-(;i:l:
Philosophy  of  Right,  imuo. par 17 16c; additions, 1:5 118c 47 Goethe:
Faust csp part i
[^554
513] 11a 14b,
[614-685] 17a-18a, [1110-1117J 27b-28a
48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 394a-397a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 309c-313a;
318d319a 50 Marx: Capital, 293c-294a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karaniazov,
v.k  hi,  53d-54b 53 James: Psychology, 199b-204b; 705a-706b; 717a-718a;
720b;'734b-735a;  791a-798b  passim,  csp 794a'795a 54 Freud: Origin and
Developmait  of PsychoAnalysis, 7a-8a / Hysteria, 65c-66a; 82c-83a; 117a
/  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  370b / Narcissism, 407a-c / Unconscious,
433d-436c  esp  436b-c/ General Introduction, 467b-47Ga,c csp 469c-470c,
474d-475a; 501d-504b; 589c-593b esp589c-591d;599d-600d;615b'616c:624b-d;
633d-635d  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 640c-d / Ego and Id, 699a-c;
704d;   712a-717a,c   passim  /  hihibitions,  Symptofns,  and  Anxiety,
720a-733c  passim, esp 722b-d, 724a-725a, 731C'd / Civilization atid Its
Discont^its,  783d784a;  789b-791d  passim  / New Introductory Lectures,
843d-845a   4b.  The  attachment  of  desires:  fixations,  projections,
identifications, transferences 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10581072] 57d-58a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 15 155c-156b 14 Plutarch: Solon,
66c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, lOb-llb 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act
hi, sc ii
[123-195] 87C'88a
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 1^-17 400c402a; prop 46 410c; part iv,
prop  6  426a; prop 44, scHOL 437d-438a 33 J-*ascal: Pensees, 81 186b 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, iniro, 196d197c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1583-1606] 38b-39a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{ esp 135a-136b, 156b158b 53 James: Psychology,
648b-650b;  707a-712b  esp  707b-  708a;  734b-735b 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  16b-18a; 19a-c / Narcissism 399a411a,c
esp  404d-406c,  409d-410d  /  Instincts,  414b  / General Introduction,
557b-558d  esp  558a-b;  569c-589c  esp  574c-d,  5S0a-581c,  585b-586d,
589a-c; 593d-597c; 599d-600d; 616d-622b; 623c-631b esp 628d-630d; 634b-d
/  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 644d-645d; 648c / Group Psychology,
678d-684a esp 678d681a, 681b,d
[fn
4] / Ego and Id, 703c- 706c esp 704d-705c; 711b-c; 712b-c / New Intro-

[396a]
(4.  The  economy  of  desire  in  human  life.  4b.  The  attachment of
desires:fixations, projections, identifications, transferences.^ duciorv
Lectures,  832b-834b  esp 832d-833b; 847b-849b; 855d-856d; 852d-863c 4c.
The  focusing  of  desires:  emotional  complexes  54  Freud: Origin and
Development   of   PsychoAnalysis,  10c;  16b-17d  /  Interpretation  of
Drear)2S,  246a-248c  /  Instincts,  415d-418c  /  General Introduction,
529d-531d;  557b-558d;  569c-585a  esp  574a-576d,  580a-584c; 593d600d;
607b-623c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 644d-646a / Group Psychology,
680c-d  /  Ego  and  Id, 704d-706d / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
724a-742a  esp  724a-727c, 733c- 734d, 739a- 740b / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 774c-d; 792b-796c esp 794c796c / New Introductory Lectures,
833c-834a;  847b-849b;  855d-863c  esp  856b-860a  4d.  The discharge of
desires:  catharsis and sublimation 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 6 [1449^28]
684a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 190a-c 32 Milton:
Samson  Agonistes,  337a  42  KAyiT-.  Judgement,  509b-d  44 Bosw^L.1.:
Johnson,  308b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 718a-719a 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 2b-6c esp 4c-5a; 8d-9a; llc-17b; 20a-d /
Hysteria,  26c-31a  esp  27a-c;  62c-64a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
189b-193b;  356d373a  esp  363c-d,  364d-365c,  369a-370a  / Narcissism,
407c-408a  /  General  Introduction,  452cd;  495a-499b  esp  496a-497b;
527c-539c  esp  532d-535d;  587d-588b;  592c-593a  / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle, 641d-643c / Group Psychology, 693b-694b / Ego and Id, 704b-c;
710c712a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and Anxiety, 739a-c; 745a; 751b-d/
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 773d-774c; 781a-c / New Introductory
Lectures,  847a-b  5.  Desire  as  ruler  5a. Desire ruling imagination:
daydreaming  and  fantasy  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk v, 361a 8 Aristotle:
Dreams, ch 2 [460^33-^27] 704b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 42
82a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 77, A I, ans 145a-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  52d-53a; part ii, 138d-139a 25 Montaigse:
Essays, 37a-b; 405d-406a 26 Shakespeare: Srd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[123-195] 87c-88a
/ Richard II, act v, sc v
[1-4 1 ] 349d-350a

[396b]
338  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4r  to  5b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part i,
lb-2b, 18d-19b, 50b-52d, T34b-135d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[95-128] 177b178a / Samson Agonistes [599-605] 352b
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 220c221a 47 Goethe: Faust, part
ii
[7271-7312]
178b179a;  [10,039-066]  245a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 82a-d;
bk  HI,  125b-c; 146d-148c; bk vi, 254b-c; bk x, 394d; 443c-444a; bk xi,
497c-499c;  bk  xii,  542d-543a;  544a-b;  bk  xiv,  601c-602d;  bk  XV,
615a-617a   53   James:  Psychology,  374a-375a  54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development   of   PsychoAnalysis,   18c-d   /   Hysteria,  115a-116a  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  333c-336a  esp 333c- d; 347d-349c / General
Introduction,  483 b-c; 486b-489c esp 486d-487a, 487d-488a; 597b601b esp
599b-600b,  600d-601b  /  Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 774a-c 5b.
Desire ruling thought: rationalization and wishful thinking 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  llb-d;  21d-22a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
427d-428a;  bk  iv, 474a-c; bk v, 506b; 507a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
hi, ch 16 [1287^20-^5] 485c-486a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11411 191] 59a-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a162b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 9, A 2, ans and rep 2 658d-659c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 74, AA 5-10 131d-137c; q 77, a i, ans
145a-d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52d-53a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel^.  bk  hi,  148d-150d;  154a-156c;  159d-163c;  166a-168a  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  210b-212a; 273b-276a; 490d-491d 26 Shakespeare: Srd
Henry VI, act hi, sc 11
[123-195] 87c-88a
27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida, act v, sc II [106-114] 136a 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone, bk hi, 60d-61a 28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood,
306a-c;  309d  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 49 Ilia 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  iv 89a-93a / Objections and Replies, 215d-216a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  39,  schol  408b-d  33  Pascal: Pensees, 82-87
186b-189a;  99-100  191a-192b  /  Geometrical Demonstration, 439b442a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXI, sect 12 180d-181a; sect 65-67
195b196c;  bk  IV, ch xx, sect 12 392c 43 Federalist: number i, 29b-30a;
number 31, 103c-104a; number 50, 162a-b

[397a]
3  43  Mill:  Liberty,  269d-270a  44 hoswEi^L: Johnson, 103b-c; 106d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15b 16a; bk II, 82d-83a; bk hi, 134a-c; bk
iv,  170d-171c;  BK  M,  238a-c;  bk  ix,  366d 367b; bk x, 426b; BK XI,
505a-511b  csp 509d 510a; bk xiii, 585b 53 James: Psyclwlogy, 314b; 381b
385b:  643a646a;  652a-657b;'668a  671a  54  Frki'd:  Interpretation  of
Dreams,  363d-364b;  379a-380d  /  Narcissism,  400a / Group Psychology,
682b-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  716a  /  War and Death, 760d-761a; 765a-766b /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 774c-d / New Introductory Lectures,
873d-879c passim, esp 874a-d, 876d877b, 878b-c 5c. Desire ruling action:
the   unchecked  expression  of  desires;  incontinence  Old  Testament:
Genesis,  4:1-16;  25:29-34;  34;  39:7-20  /  Exodus, 16:1-3 / Numbers,
11:4-35;  16:1-35—  (D)  Numbers,  11:4-34; 16:1-35 / / Samuel, 18:5-12;
19:8-10—  (D)  /  Kings,  18:5-12;  19:8-10  / // Samuel, 11; 13— (D) //
Kings,  II  ;  1  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 2:6-9— (D) OT, Bool{ of
Wisdom,  2:6-9 New Testament: Romans, 1:18-32 / Philippians, 3:18-19 / /
Timothy,  6:9-10  /James,  4:1-4  /  I  John, 2:15-17 5 Aeschylus: Seven
Against Thebes
[653-719]
34b-35a  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [1047-1090]  152a-b / Trachiniae [431-492]
174a-c   5  Euripides:  Medea  [623-641]  217c  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds
[882-1104]  499b-502a  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 95d-98b; bk VII,
222c-d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  436d-438b  7  Plato:
Phaedrus,  120a-122a;  128a-129c  /  Republic,  BK II, 311b-312b; bk hi,
326c-327b;  BK  IV,  352b-354d;  bk  ix,  416a-418c; 425c427b / Timaeus,
474b-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  SOlb-c  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  hi,  ch 9
[433*i]-ch ii
[435=^21] 665c-667a
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[58i*2i-''22]
107a-b / Motion of Animals, CH 7 [7oi*6]-ch 8
[702^22] 236b-237c
/ Ethics, bk I, ch 13
[1102*^13-26] 348a-b; bk hi,
CH II
[1118^8-19]
365a-b; ch 12
[1119*34-
^19] 366a,c; bk vii, ch i-io 395a-403c; ch 14
[1154^2-15] 405d-406a
/ Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[1267*3-8]
462c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[1369*5-22] 612b-c; bk
ii, ch 12
[1389*3-^11]
636b-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 18 161a162b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk ii, sect 10 257d258a 14 Plutarch: Antony 748a- 7 79d

[397b]
b  Chapter  17:  DESIRE  339  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57b 58d 18
Aiglstine:  Confessions, bk iv, par 25 25c; bk VI, par ri-13 38b-39c; bk
viii,  par 25 27 60a c; bk x, par 40-70 81c-89a / Christian Doctrine, bk
hi,  ch 18-21 664d-666b 19 AguiNAs: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, A 3,
rep  1-2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  i,  rep i 436d438a; part i-ii, q 6, a 7
650a-d;  o  9,  a  2  658d-659c;  q  10, a 3 664d 665c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-h, q 75, AA 2-3 138c-139d; q 77 144d-152a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, v [i]-vhi
[64]
7a-llc; XI [67-90] 15d-16a; purgatory, xvii
[91-139] 79b-d; xix-xxvi 81c-94c
22 Chaucer: Manciple's Tj/<? [17,104-144] 490a24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  65c-66b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 107a-112d; 159a-167a;
232b-238d;  350d-354b;  413a-416c;  486b495a;  527b-528a; 538a-543a,c 26
Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[123-195] 87c-88a; act v, sc vi [61-93] 103d104a
/  Richard III 105a-148a,c / Romeo and Juliet, ACT II, sc VI [1-15] 300c
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [61-79] 49c-d; sc iv [65-81] 55b-c
/ Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc hi
[101-124] 109b; act
ii,  sc  II  113c-115d / Othello 205a-243a,c esp act IV, sc I 229d-233a,
act v, sc h
[291-356]
242b-243a  /  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc vi [109-134] 274c-d / Antony and
Cleopatra  311a-350d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 1-18 424c429d;
PROP 44 437c-438a; prop 60-61 442d443b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[521-594]
243b-245a; bk ix
[990-1066] 269a-270b; bk
XII  [79-90]  321a  /  Samson Agonistes [521-540] 351a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understa?idi?ig,  bk  i, ch 11, sect 3 104b-d; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 29-48
184d-190d  passim;  sect  65-67  195b-196c  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
239b-243a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, l69c; 122d-123a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  34d-39d  passim,  esp  35a-b, 38a-b; 60a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  174c-175a;  559a-c  42 K\^t: Judgement, 586a-587a 44 Bosw' Ei.1.:
Johison,  135c-136a;  301c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro,
162b-c;  171c-172b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [2605-2677] 63b-65a; PART II
[9695-9944]  235a-241b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk V,
201a-c;  bk  vi,  248b-250a;  251d-252d;  bk viii, 321d-322d; 329c-333a;
334d-335a;  336b337d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karajnazov, bk i, 4a-d; bk
ii, 39b-40a; bk vi, 164b-d 53 James: Psychology, 718a-720a; 799a-807a 54
Freud:  Group Psychology, 690b-c ' Ego and Id, 702c-d / New Introductory
Lectures, 837b839b

[398a]
340 6. Desire as subject to rule 6a. The regulation of desire by reason:
the discipline of moral virtue or duty Old Testament: Exodus, 20:14,17 /
Numbers,  15:38-41  / Deuteronomy, 5:18,21 / Psalms, 37:1-13 esp 37:7-8—
(D)  Psalms,  36:1-13  esp  36:7-8  / Proverbs, 7; 23:1-8; 25:16; 30:7-9
Apocrypha:   Ecclesiasticus,   18:30-31;   23:5-6;   31:1-17—   (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  1  8  :30-3  1  23:5-6;  31:1-17 New Testament: Romans,
8:1-13  /  ^  Cormthians,  13  :4-8 / Galatians, 5 : 16-24 / Colossians,
3:5-15  /  /  Thessalofiians, 4:3-8 / / Timothy, 6:3-12/ Titus, 2:11-14;
3'3~7  I  J^^fi^cs,  4:1-7  /  /  Peter,  2:11  5  Aeschylus: Eu?nenides
[490-565]  86b-87a  5 Euripides: Iphigenia at Aulis [543-589] 429d430a 5
Aristophanes:  Clouds  [882-1104]  499b-502a  / Lysistrata 583a-599a,c 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d  /  Phaedo,  225d226c  /  Gorgias, 275b-280d /
Republic, bk hi, 326c-327b; bk iv, 346a-356a; bk ix, 416a'C; 425c-427b /
Laws, bk vi, 712b; bk vhi, 735c-738c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[129^10-16]
179a / Soul, bk III, cH 9 [433*5-8] 665c; ch 11
[434^10-15] 666d-667a
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i, ch 13 [1102^13-1103^ 3] 348a-c; bk hi, ch
10-12  364b-366a,c;  bk  VI,  CH  2  387d-388b; bk vii, ch i-io 395a403c
passim  /  Politics, bk ii, ch 7 [1266^261267*^17] 462b-d 11 NicoMACHus:
Arithmetic,  bk  i,  826d-827a 12 Aurelius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk
ii,  SECT  16  259a,  BK  IV,  sect 24 265c-d, bk vii, SECT 55 283b-c 13
Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk iv 167a-186b 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 174b,d-175a /
Caius  Marius,  353d-354a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57b-58d  17
Plotixus:   Fifth   Ennead,   tr  ix,  ch  1-2  246c247b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii, par 2-4 9b-d; BK hi, par I 13b-c; bk vi, par 18-26
40d-43a;  bk  viii, par 1-2 52c-53b; par lo-ii 55c-56b; par 25-27 60a-c;
bk  x, par 40-70 81c-89a / City of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a-289a; BK XIV,
CH 8-9 381c-385b; bk xix, ch 4, 511d-512a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch
24  630c-631a;  ch  27  631d; bk hi, ch 18-21 664d666b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 81, A 3 430c-431d; q 95, a 2 507c-508a; q 98, a 2
517d-519a:  part  i-ii,  q  10, a 3 654d-665c; q 17, a 7 690d-692a; q 24
727a-730a;  q  45, a 4, ans 812b-813a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  50, a 3 8b-9a; q 56, a 4 32b-33c; a 5, rep i 33c-34b; qq 59-60
45d-54d; part hi, q 15, A 4 790d-791c

[398b]
;  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 6 to 6a 21 Dante: Difine Comedy, purgatory 53a-105d
esp  XV [4o]-xviii [75] 75d-80c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv,
stanza  82  99a  / Parson s Tale, par 80 541b-542a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  95d-96b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  89b-90c;  159a-167a; 184a-d:
200d-205b;  232b-238d;  431c-432d; 486b-495a; 538a-543ax 26 Shakespeare:
Henrx V, act i, sc i
[24-69]
533b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc hi
[5-51]
34b-d; act hi, sc ii
[61-79] 49c-d
/  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i,  sc hi [101-124] 109b; act II, sc II
113c-115d / Othello, act i, sc hi
[322-337] 212b-c
30 Bacon: Advancefnent ofLearning, 26a-c; 78a-d 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part hi, 49b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop i 396a-c; PROP 9, scHOL
399c;  part  iv,  pref  422b,d424a;  prop  14-18  428a-429d;  prop 44-73
437c-447a; appendix, i-iii 447a-b; xxxii 450c-d; PART V, pref 451a-452c;
prop  1-16  452d-456c; prop 42 463b-d 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 390b-391a
33   Pascal:   Pensees,   104   193a;  502  250b-261a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk i, ch ii, SECT 13 107d-108c; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 46-54
189d-192c;  sect  71  197b-198a;  sect  73 198c199c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   ofMorals,   256b;   258b-c;   259a-c;   264d-265"b  /  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 378b-c / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  295a-d  /  Representative Government, 348a-b / Utilitarianism,
463d-464d 44 BoswEi^i.: Johnson, 135c-136a; 176d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  intro,  par  19  16d-17a;  part  hi,  par 149 56b; par 187 65ac;
additions,  13-14 118c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 162a-172b; part
hi,  312d313a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-305a;  310c319a  esp
310c-312c, 313d-314b, 318d-319a; 592b-593b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  245  b-c;  248b-250a:  epilogue  i. 655c-656b 53 James: Psychology,
80a-83b  passim;  202a204b;  797b-798a;"807a-808a;  816a-819a  54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development of PsychoAnalysis, 9a; 16c / Hysteria, llOb-c /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  386d-387a  /  Narcissism,  407b-c / General
Introduction, 452c-d; 501d504b esp 504b; 590a-593b; 624a-625b esp 625a-b
/ Ego and Id, 701d-702d; 704a-707d esp 706d-707c; 715a-716c esp 715c-d /
//zhibitions,  Symptojns,  and Anxiety, 721d-722c; 744a / War and Death,
757c-759d  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 773b-774a esp 773c; 780b-
781d;  783c-785a;  785d-789a  esp 787b-c; 192a.-196c esp 792a-b, 793a-b,
793d-794b; 800c-801b / New Introductory Lectures, 83 7 d840a

[399a]
6b  to  la  Chaptir  17: desire 341 dh. The restraint or renunciation of
desire:  abstention,  inhibition,  repression 5 Aristophanls: Lysistraia
583a-599a,c  12  RpicTETUs:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  csp  bk  i,  CH  I
105a-106c,  CH 3-4 108b 110a, hk ii, ch 2 140c 141c, CH 17-18 158d-162b,
bk  hi, ch 24 203c-210a, bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  h,  sect  5 257b-c; BK VII, SECT 2 279b,d; sect 55-57 283b-c; bk IX,
sect  7  292b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv [393-449] 178a-179b 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a289a;  bk xiv, ch 8-9 381c-385b 19
Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  10,  A  3 664d-665c; q 24
727a-730a  esp a 2 727d-728c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, Q
186  650b-663b;  part hi suppl, q 96 1049d1066a 22 Chaucer: WifeofBath's
Prologue [^^Sy-^y^^] 256a-258b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
hi,  188d-191c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 89b-91b; 99b-c; 107a112d; 166a-d;
200d-205b; 232b-238d; 297d300c; 353c-354b; 432b-d; 538a-543a,c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  ofLearning, 71d-72b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 49b-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  9-18  426d429d;  part  v, prop 2
452d-453a;  prop  6 453d-454a; prop 42 463b-d 32 Milton: Comus [420-475]
42b-44a;   [716-765]  49a-50a  /  Areopagitica,  390b-391a  33  Vascai.:
Provincial  Letters,  64b-65b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 192a-193c;
596c-d  42  Kant:  Practical Reason, 346a-d / Pref Metaphysical Elements
ofEthics,  378d-379a 44 BoswEi.!.: Johnson, 283a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part i, 224a225a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1544-1571] 37b-38a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  hi,  122b-c;  bk  v,  201a-c; bk vi,
248b-250a;  bk  ix, 373b-374a; BK xiii, 577a-578b esp 577d-578a; bk xiv,
605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
164d-165a 53 James: Psychology, 80b-83b esp 81a; 199b202a esp 200b-201a;
720a;  725a;  734b-735b;  799a-800a  54 Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,   6d-8b  esp  7a-c;  16c  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
377d-378d  esp 378b-d / Repression 422a-427a,c esp 422c-d / Unconscious,
432d436b  / General Introduction, 566a-568a; 573cd; 585b-586d esp 586d /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  640c  /  Ego  and  Id, 699a; 706b-c /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  718a-722b  esp  719b-c,  720a-d;
726a-728b; 741d
[fn
i];  747b-c;  750a-d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 773b-d; 781a-d;
782a-b,d
[fn
i]; 793a-

[399b]
795c  csp  793d- 794b / AV/r Introductory Lectures, 834d-835b; 842a 845b
csp 842b- d, 843d 844c 6c. The results of repression: dreaming, symbolic
over-reactions,  neuroses  18  Augistine:  City  of God, bk xiv, <jii 89
381c-385b esp ch 9, 384b, 385b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[28-128I
176a178a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 598a b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  v, 220b-c; 233b234a; bk vi, 238a-c; 248b 250a; bk \ii, 292b-296a; bk
vhi, 338b 339c csp 338d 53 James: Psychology, 753b-754b 54 Freud: Origin
and  Development  of  Psycho Analysis la-20d csp 4c- 5a, 6d-9a, He 12 b,
13a-b,  14b-15a,  20c-d / Hysteria 25a-118a,c esp 27a-28c, 35b-c, 38a-b,
52c   53c,  65c  66a,  75a-d,  82c-87a,  90d-96a,  97b  102a,  111a115a,
116d-118a,c / Interpretation of Dreams, 164d-168d esp 167d-168a; 176a-b;
189b-205c   passim;   216b-219a;  234d-235d;  240d-249b  csp  240d-241a,
248c-249a;   294d-295b;   323b-c;   328a-d;   331d-332a;  352d-382a  esp
356d-365c, 375c-376a, 380d-382a; 386b-387a / Repression, 423b-427a,c esp
423b-424b,  425c-426a  /  Unconscious, 434c-436b / General Introduction,
469c-470b;  476a-544d esp 489c-491b, 495a-504d, 532d-539b; 557b 631b csp
563a569c, 586b-590a, 593b-600d, 614b 615a; 633d-635d / Group Psychology,
690a-c  /  Ego  and  Id, 712c-715c esp' 713c-714b, 715a-b / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and Anxiety 718a754a,c esp 720a, 721c-d, 722c-723d, 728b733c,
741d  [fn  i],  745d-747b/  War and Death, 759c-d / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  781cd;  793a-794a;  796a-c;  798c-799a;  800d-801c  / Netv
Introductory  Lectures, 810d-813c esp 811b-812b; 817a-818b; 840a-846a 7.
Desire  and infinity 7a. The infinite tendency of desires Old Testament:
Proverbs,  27:20 / Ecclesiastes, 6:7 / Habal{ku}{, 2:5— (D) Habacuc, 2:5
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  14:9—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  14:9  New
Testament:  /o/jw. 4:13-14 7 Plato: Gorgias, 275b-277c / Republic, bk v,
370a-c; bk ix, 416a-418c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[1003ioio]43a; [io76-io94]44a,c; bk vi [i-42]80a-c
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 9, 185d; BK IV, CH 9, 237d-238a 14
Plutarch: Caius Marius, 353d-354a.c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
19 5d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q r a 4 612a-613a; q 2, a
i,  rep  3  615d-616c; q 30, a 4 751c-752b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 149b-d;
297d-299c; 429a-b;489b-d;503b-d

[400a]
342  THE  GREAT IDEAS (7. Desire and infinity, la. The infinite tendency
of desires.) 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc II
[82-90] 121a / Macbeth, act
iv, sc hi
[57-99] 304a-c
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 6-9 398d-399c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 109
193b'194a;  125-183  195b-204b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 236b-238a 42
Kant:  Judgement,  584d-585c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
185  64b-d;  additions, 118 136a-b 47 Goethe: Faust esp part i [354-481]
lla-14a,
[602-784]
16b-20b,
[1671-1706]
40a-41a, part II
[11,433-466] 278a-279a, [11,559-586]
281b-282a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 164b-d 7^(1) The
pursuit   of  pleasure  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  23:16-17—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 23:21-24 New Testament: /oA;7, 4:13-14 7 Plato: Gorgias,
275b-277c  /  Philebus,  628a-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  12
[1119^6-12]  366c  /  Politics,  bk  i, ch 9 [1257^38-1258^14] 452a-b 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [1003loio] 43a;
[1076-1094]
44a,c; bk iv
[10731120] 58a-d; bk v [1405-1435] 79b-d
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  9,  237d238a  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk h, par 2-4 9b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  30,  A  4  751c-752b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v [25-45] 7b-c 22
Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 58-66 8b-9b / Wife of Bath's
Prologue  [59535960]  262a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 429a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  act  i,  sc  I [1-55] 311b-312a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  XXI,  SECT 42-45 188c-189d 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  283a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364a-b  42  Kant: Judgement,
584d-585b; 586d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 185 64b-d 47
Goethe:   Faust,  part  i  [3217-3250]  79a-b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  hi,  53b-54b  7a{2)  The  lust  for power Old Testament:
Isaiah, 14:12-14 (D) Isaias^ 14:12-14 / Habakjiu^, 2:5— (D) Habacuc, 2:5
6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 215c-216b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk v, 506b-c 7 Plato: Gorgias, 275b-277c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi [59-86] 30d-31b; [995-1002] 42d-43a

[400b]
7a{\)  to  7a{3>)  IV,  ch  9,  237d12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 238a 14
Plutarch: Pyrrhus, 319b-321a / Pompey, 525a-b; 533a-c / Caesar, 599b-d /
Cicero,  706b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk xiv, ch 13 387c388c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63,  a 3 327b-328b 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, part i, 76c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 350d-354b 26 Shakespeare:
Richard  III  105a-148a,c /Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i [10-34] 574c-d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[242-270] 98b99a
35   Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect  229  78a  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  364a-b  la{i)  The  accumulation  of  wealth Old Testament:
Ecclesiastes,  5:10;  6:7—  (D)  Ecclesiastes, 5 :9 ; 6 :7 / Haba%u}^, 2
:5-i i— (£)) Habacuc, 2:5-11 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 11:10; 14:9— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  11:10;  14:9  /  Baruch,  3:16-19— (D) OT, Baruch,
3:16-19  New  Testament: LuJ^, 12:16-21 5 Aristophanes: Plutus [143-197]
630d-631b  7  Plato:  Gorgias, 275b-277c / Republic, bk VIII, 405c-408a;
412a  / Laws, bk vih, 733b-d; BK IX, 751b-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i,
ch 9
[1257^381258^14] 452a-b; bk
ii,  ch 7 [1266*^27-1267^5] 462b-463b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
hi  [59-93] 30d-31b; bk vi [1-42] 80a-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv,
ch  9,  237d238a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 19 5d 19 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 2, a i, rep 3 615d-616c; q 30, a 4, ans
751c752b  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 84, A 1 174b-175a
21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii [52-66] lOa-b 22 Chaucer: Tale
ofMelibeus,  par  18,  408a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 122a-124c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, appendix, xxviiiXXIX 450a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
237a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 364a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
71b-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  510b  43  Mill: Utilitarianism,
462c-463a  44  BoswEL,!.: Johnson, 125a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 185 64b-d; par 195 66d-67a 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[5505-6172]
136a151a;  [11,151-287]  271b-274b  esp  [11,151-162] 271b, [11,239-258]
273b-274a  50  Marx:  Capital,  60d-62d  esp  62a-b;  71d-72c esp 72a-c;
292c-295a esp 293c-294a

[401a]
; n Chapter 17: DESIRE 343 Ih. The restless search for the infiaite: the
desire  for  the vision of God Old Testament: Exodus, 33:11-23 / Psalms,
27  esp 27:4, 27:8; 42-43; 63; 73:25-28; 84-(D) Psalms, 26 esp 26 :4, 26
:8  ; 41-42 ; 62 ; 72 :25-28 83 / Isaiah, 26:8-9— (D) Isaias, 26:8-9 New
Testament:  John,  4:13-14; 6:35 / Philippians, 3:7-21 / I John, 3:1-3 7
Plato:  Symposiwn,  163a-167d  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi 21a-26a
passim  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix  353d-360d  18  Augustine: Confessions
la-125a,c  esp  bk  i,  par 1-6 la-2c, bk ii, par 15 12b-c, bk hi, par I
13b-c,  par  8 14d-15a, bk iv, par 1519 23a-24b, bk v, par 1-2 27a-c, bk
vii,  par  16-23 48c-50c, bk viii, par 17-18 57d58a, bk IX, par 3 62a-b,
bk x, par 1-40 71c-81c, bk XI, par 1-4 89b-90b, bk xii, par 10 101c, par
23  104b-c,  bk xiii llOd125a,c / Christian Doctrine^ bk i, ch 38 635c-d
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, a I, rep 2 28b-d; q 12, a i,
ans  50c-51c;  a  8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 26, a 2, ans 150c-151a; q 54, A 2,
ANS 285d-286c; q 60, a 5 313b-314c; Q 62, A I, ans 317d-318c; part i-ii,
q  2, a i, rep 3 615d-616c; q 5, a i, ans 636d-637c; q 8 655a-657c CWSS-
KEFEKENCES  For:  Matters  relevant  to  the  metaphysical conception of
desire,  see  Being  7c-7c(3);  Change  i; Matter la, 3b. 7c-7c(i); Love
5a(2); Will 7d.

[401b]
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 109, A 7^ 340c-341b; part ii-
ii,  q 27, a 6 524c-525c; q 28, a ^5 528d-529c; part hi suppl, q 69, a 4
889c-890c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv
[40-81] 75d-76a; xvii [9i]-xviii [75] 79b-80c;
paradise, IV
[ii5]-v
[12]
llld-112b; xxii
[52-72] 140b; XXVI
[1-78] 145d-146c; xxxiii
156b-157d esp [46-48] 156c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 31
Descartes: Meditations, in, 88c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix,
iv 447b-c; part v, prop 36 461a-c 32 Milton: Sonnets, xiv 66a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  72,  183a-b;  125-183 195b204b; 463 255a; 468-492 255b-259b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  en  XXI, sect 45-47 189b-190b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 224a225a; part hi, 304c-306a 47
Goethe:   Faust   esp   part  i  [354-481]  11a14a,  [602-784]  16b-20b,
[1671-1706]! 40a-41a, PART II
[11,433-466] 278a-279a,
[11,559-586]
281b-282a  48  Melville:  MobyDicJ{, 78a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xh,  560a-561d;  BK  XIV,  608a-b; bk xv, 631a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk hi, 53b-54b

[402a]
344  THE  GREAT  IDEAS I. Epictetus. The Manual Goethe. Sorrows of Young
Werther   Hegel.  The  Plienomenology  of  Mind,  iv  (3)  Freud.  Three
Contributions  to  the  Theory of Sex^ II. Epicurus. Letter to Menoeceus
Boccaccio. Decameron \'iLLON. The Debate of the Heart and Body of Villon
Ebreo. The Philosophy ofLove, dialogue i P. Sidney. Astrophel and Stella
Marlowe.  Tamburlaine  the  Great  Suarez, Disputationes Metaphysicae, x
(i),  xxiiiXXIV,  XXX  (16),  xLvii  (14)  loHN  OF Saint Thomas. Cursus
Philosophicus Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, part iv, q 12 Moliere.
Uavare  {The  Miser)  Malebranche.  De  la recherche de la verite, bk IV
Racine.  Phedre . Athalie Bos suet. Traite de la concupiscence Leibnitz.
New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  BK  II, CH 21 J. Butler.
Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature, i-ii HuTCHESON. A System of Moral
Philosophy,  bk  i,  CH  2-3;  BK II, CH 2 . An Essay on the Nature a?id
Conduct  of  the  Passions  and Affections Helvetius. Traite de Vesprit,
iii,  ch  9-1  i T. Reid. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind,
III, part ii, ch 1-2 J. G. Fichte. The Vocation of Man Schopenhauer. The
World  as  Will  and Idea Brown. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human
Mind, vol ii, pp 153-179

[402b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below arc works not included in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas, D. Stewart. Outlines ofMoral Philosophy,
part  ii, CH I (1-4) . Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man,
BK I, CH 1-3 J. iMiLL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, CH I
Stendhal.  The  Red  and  the  Blac\  Bentiiam.  An  Introduction to the
Principles  ofMorals  and  Legislation,  ch 10 . Deontology Pushkin. The
Queen  of  Spades  Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk i, ch 2 Balzac.
Cousin  Bette  Spencer. The Principles ofPsychology, vol i, part i, ch 6
(50)  ;  part  iv,  ch  8  Bain.  The Emotions and the Will E. Hartmann.
Philosophy  ofthe  Unconscious H. SiDGwicK. The Methods of Ethics, bk i,
ch  4  Zola.  Nana  France.  The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard T. H. Green.
Prolegomena  to Ethics, bk h, ch 2 L. Stephen. The Science of Ethics, ch
2  Ibsen. The Master Builder Chekhov. The Sea-Gull RiBOT. The Psychology
of  the  Emotions Bradley. Collected Essays, vol i (14) Moore. Principia
Ethica,  ch  2  (39-47)  ScHELER.  Der Formalismus in der Ethil{ und die
materiale  Wertethi/{  B.  Russell.  The Analysis of Mind, lect 3 Dewey.
Hu?nan  Nature  and  Conduct,  part  hi (8) Fitzgerald. The Great Gatsby
O'Neill.  Desire  Under  the  Elms  F. Alexander. Psychoatialysis of the
Total  Personality  Beebe-Center.  The  Psychology  of  Pleasantness and
Unpleasantness  Nygren.  Agape  and  Eros RouGEMONT. Love in the Western
World  Maritain.  Scholasticism and Politics, ch vi D'Arcy. The Mind and
Heart of Love

[403a]
Chapter   i8:   DIALECTIC   INTRODUCTION  THE  words  "dialecticar'  and
"dialectician"  are  currently used more often in a derogatory than in a
descriptive  sense.  The  person  who  criticizes an argument by saying,
"It's just a matter of definition" is also apt to say, "That may be true
dialectically, but . . ." or "You're just being dialectical." Implied in
such  remarks  is  dispraise  of  reasoning  which, however excellent or
skillful it may be as reasoning, stands condemned for being out of touch
with  fact  or  experience. Still other complaints against dialectic are
that   it   plays   with  words,  begs  the  question,  makes  sport  of
contradictions.   When  the  theologian  Hippothadeus  almost  convinces
Panurge  that he "should rather choose to marry once, than to burn still
in  fires  of  concupiscence," Rabelais has Panurge raise one last doubt
against  the  proposal. "Shall I be a cuckold, father," he asks, "yea or
no?"  Hippothadeus answers: "By no means . . . will you be a cuckold, if
it  please  God." On receiving this reply Panurge cries out, "O the Lord
help  us now; whither are we driven to, good folks? To the conditionals,
which,  according  to  the  rules and precepts of the dialectic faculty,
admit  of all contradictions and impossibilities. If my Transalpine mule
had  wings, my Transalpine mule would fly. If it please God, I shall not
be  a  cuckold, but I shall be a cuckold if it please him." As a term of
disapproval,   "dialectical"   has   been  used  by  scientists  against
philosophers,  by  philosophers  against  theologians  and,  with  equal
invective,  by  religious  men  against  those  who  resort  to argument
concerning  matters of faith. The early Middle Ages witnessed a conflict
between  the  mystical  and  the  rational  approaches  to the truths of
religion. Those for whom religious experience and revelation were 345

[403b]
the  only  avenue to God condemned the dialecticians—the philosophers or
theologians  who tried to use reason discursively rather than proceed by
intuition and vision. With the Reformation and with the Renaissance, men
like  Martin  Luther and Francis Bacon regarded dialectic as the bane of
mediaeval   learning.  Because  of  its  dialectical  character,  Luther
dismissed  all theological speculation as sophistry. Bacon, for the same
reason,  stigmatized  scholastic  philosophy  as consisting in "no great
quantity of matter and infinite agitation of wit." On grounds which were
common  as  well as opposite, both mystics and experimentalists attacked
dialectic  as  a  futile,  if  not  vicious,  use  of the mind—as "hair-
splitting"  and  "logicchopping."  Even when they admitted that it might
have  some virtue, they approved of it as a method of argument or proof,
proper  enough  perhaps  in  forensic  oratory  or political debate, but
entirely out of place in the pursuit of truth or in approaching reality.
A  CERTAIN  CONCEPTION  of dialectic is implicit in all such criticisms.
The  dialectician  is a man who argues rather than observes, who appeals
to  reason  rather than experience, who draws implications from whatever
is  said  or can be said, pushing a premise to its logical conclusion or
reducing  it  to  absurdity.  This aspect of dialectic appears to be the
object  of  Rabelais'  satire  in the famous dispute between Panurge and
Thaumast,  which is carried on "by signs only, without speaking, for the
matters  are  so abstruse, hard, and arduous, that words proceeding from
the mouth of man will never be sufficient for the unfolding of them." In
view  of  those who think that truth can be learned only by observation,
by  induction  from  particulars, or generalization from experience, the
technique of dialectic, far from being a

[404a]
346 THE GREAT IDEAS method of inquiry, seems to have virtue only for the
purpose  of  disputation  or  criticism.  "The  human faculties," writes
Gibbon,  "are  fortified  by  the art and practice of dialectics." It is
"the  keenest  weapon  of dispute," he adds, but "more effectual for the
detection  of error than for the investigation of truth." Mill describes
"the  Socratic dialectics, so magnificently exemplified in the dialogues
of Plato," as a "contrivance for making the difficulties of the question
. . . present to the learner's consciousness . . . They were essentially
a negative discussion of the great questions of philosophy and life," he
continues,  "directed with consummate skill to the purpose of convincing
anyone  who has merely adopted the commonplaces of received opinion that
he  did  not understand the subject . . . The school disputations of the
Middle  Ages  had  a  somewhat similar object." In Mill's opinion, "as a
discipline  to  the  mind,  they  were  in every respect inferior to the
powerful  dialectics which formed the intellects of the 'Socratic viri';
but  the  modern  mind,"  he  says,  "owes  far  more to both than it is
generally  willing  to admit, and the present modes of education contain
nothing  which  in  the smallest degree supplies the place either of the
one  or  of  the other." Disparaging comment on dialectic comes not only
from those who contrast it unfavorably with the methods of experiment or
empirical  research. It is made also by writers who trust reason's power
to   grasp   truths   intuitively  and  to  develop  their  consequences
deductively.  Sensitive to what may seem to be a paradox here, Descartes
writes  in  his  Rules  for  the  Direction of the Mind: "It may perhaps
strike  some  with  surprise  that  here, where we are discussing how to
improve  our  power  of deducing one truth from another, we have omitted
all  the  precepts  of  the dialecticians." The dialectician can proceed
only after he has been given premises to work from. Since, in Descartes'
view,  dialectic  provides  no  method  for establishing premises or for
discovering  first  principles, it can "contribute nothing at all to the
discovery  of the truth ... Its only possible use is to serve to explain
at  times  more easily to others the truths we have already ascertained;
hence it should be transferred from Philosophy to Rhetoric."

[404b]
The  connection  of  dialectic  with  disputation  and rhetoric has some
foundation  in  the  historical  fact  that  many  of  the techniques of
dialectic  originated  with  the  Greek  sophists  who  had  primarily a
rhetorical  or forensic aim. Comparable to the Roman rhetoricians and to
the  law  teachers  of a later age, the sophists taught young men how to
plead  a  case, how to defend themselves against attack, how to persuade
an  audience.  Skill  in  argument  had  for  them  a  practical,  not a
theoretical,  purpose; not truth or knowledge, but success in litigation
or  in  political  controversy. The familiar charge that the method they
taught  enabled  men  "to  make  the  worse  appear  the better reason,"
probably exaggerates, but none the less reflects, the difference between
the  standards  of probability in disputation and the standards of truth
in  scientific  inquiry.  This  has  some  bearing  on  the disrepute of
sophistry  and  the  derogatory light cast on the dialectical when it is
identified  with  the  sophistical. But there is another historical fact
which  places  dialectic  in  a different light. In the tradition of the
liberal  arts,  especially  in  their  Roman  and mediaeval development,
"dialectic"  and  "logic"  are  interchangeable names for the discipline
which,  together  with grammar and rhetoric, comprises the three liberal
arts  known  as  the  "trivium."  In  his treatise On Christian Doctrine
Augustine uses the word "dialectic" in this way. Whatever else it means,
the  identification of dialectic with logic impfies its distinction from
rhetoric,  and  certainly from sophistry. Yet Augustine does not fail to
observe  the  misuse  of  dialectic  which  debases  it  to the level of
sophistry.  "In  the use of it," he declares, "we must guard against the
love  of  wrangling, and the childish vanity of entrapping an adversary.
For   there   are  many  ofwhat  are  called  sophisms^'  he  continues,
"inferences  in  reasoning that are false, and yet so close an imitation
of  the  true,  as  to deceive not only dull people, but clever men too,
when  they  are  not on their guard." He gives as an example the case of
one  man  saying to another, "What I am, you are not." The other man may
assent to this, thinking, as Augustine points out, that "the proposition
is  in part true, the one man being cunning, the other simple." But when
"the first speaker

[405a]
adds:  'I am a man' " and **the other has given his assent to this also,
the first draws his conclusion: 'Then you are not a man.' " According to
Augustine,  "this  sort  of  ensnaring  argument"  should  not be called
dialectical,  but  sophistical.  He  makes  the same sort of observation
about  the  abuse  of  rhetoric  in  speech  which  "only aims at verbal
ornamentation  more  than  is  consistent  with seriousness of purpose."
That,  too,  he thinks, should be "called sophistical" in order to avoid
attaching the name of rhetoric to misapph cat ions of the art. Dialectic
for  Augustine is the art which "deals with inferences, and definitions,
and  divisions"  and  "is of the greatest assistance in the discovery of
meaning."  Rhetoric,  on  the other hand, "is not to be used so much for
ascertaining  the  meaning  as  for setting forth the meaning when it is
ascertained."  Dialectic, in other words, is divorced from the practical
purpose of stating and winning an argument, and given theoretical status
as  a  method of inquiry. This conception of dialectic originates in the
dialogues  of  Plato.  Not himself a sophist, either by profession or in
aim,  Socrates  found  other  uses  for the analytical and argumentative
devices  invented  by  the  sophists.  The same skills ofmind which were
practically useful in the public assembly and in the law courts could be
used   or   adapted  for  clarification  and  precision  in  speculative
discussions.  They  could also be used to find the truth implicit in the
commonly  expressed  convictions of men and to lay bare errors caused by
lack  of  definition  in discourse or lack of rigor in reasoning. In the
Sophist  Plato  separates  the  philosopher from the sophist, not by any
distinction  in  method,  but by the difference in the use each makes of
the  same  technique.  And  in the Republic, one of the reasons Socrates
gives  for  postponing the study of dialectic until the age of thirty is
that  youngsters,  "when they first get the taste in their mouths, argue
for amusement" and "like puppy-dogs, they rejoice in pulling and tearing
at  all  who  come near them." As a result of being vainly disputatious,
they  "get  into  the  way of not believing anything which they believed
before, and hence, not only they, but philosophy and all that relates

[405b]
Chapter  18: DIALECTIC 347 to it is apt to have a bad name with the rest
of the world . . . But when a man begins to get older, he will no longer
be  guilty  of  such  insanity;  he will imitate the dialectician who is
seeking  for  truth,  and  not the sophist, who is contradicting for the
sake  of  amusement."  In  the  hands of the philosopher dialectic is an
instrument  of  science.  "There  is,"  according to Socrates, "no other
method  of comprehending by any regular process all true existence or of
ascertaining what each thing is in its own nature." It passes beyond the
arts  at  the  lowest  level,  "which  are concerned with the desires or
opinions  of  men,  or  are  cultivated  with  a  view to production and
constructions." It likewise transcends the mathematical sciences, which,
while  they  "have  some  apprehension  of  true  being  . . . leave the
hypotheses  which they use unexamined, and are unable to give an account
of  them."  Using  these  as  "handmaids  and  helpers," dialectic "goes
directly  to the first principle and is the only science which does away
with  hypotheses  in  order to make her ground secure." The dialectic of
Plato  has  an  upward  and  a downward path which somewhat resemble the
inductive  process  of  the  mind  from  facts  to  principles,  and the
deductive  process  from  principles  to  the conclusions they validate.
Dialectic,  says  Socrates,  ascends  by  using hypotheses "as steps and
points  of  departure  into  a world which is above hypotheses, in order
that she may soar beyond them to the first principle of the whole ... By
successive  steps  she  descends  again  without the aid of any sensible
object,  from  ideas,  through  ideas,  and  in  ideas she ends." As the
disciplined  search  for  truth,  dialectic includes all of logic. It is
concerned  with  every  phase  of  thought:  with  the  establishment of
definitions;  the  examination  of  hypotheses  in  the  light  of their
presuppositions  or  consequences;  the  formulation  of  inferences and
proofs;  the  resolution of dilemmas arising from opposition in thought.
Whereas  for  Plato  dialectic  is  more  than  the  whole of logic, for
Aristotle  it  is  less. Dialectic is more than the process by which the
mind  goes from myth and fantasy, perception and opinion, to the highest
truth. For Plato it is the

[406a]
348  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ultimate  fruit  of intellectual labor—knowledge
itself,  and in its supreme form as a vision of being and unity. That is
why  Socrates makes it the ultimate study in the curriculum proposed for
training  the  guardians  to  become  philosopher kings. "Dialectic," he
says,  "is  the  copingstone  of  the sciences, and is set over them; no
other  science  can  be placed higher— the nature of knowledge can go no
further."  For  Aristotle,  dialectic,  far  from being at the summit of
science  and  philosophy,  lies  at  their  base,  and must be carefully
distinguished   from   sophistr\',   which   it   resembles  in  method.
"Dialecticians  and  sophists assume the same guise as the philosopher,"
Aristotle  writes,  "for  sophistic  is  wisdom  which  exists  only  in
semblance,  and dialecticians embrace all things in their dialectic, and
being  is  common  to all things; but evidently their dialectic embraces
these  subjects  because  these  are proper to philosophy. Sophistic and
dialectic,"  he  continues,  "turn  on  the  same  class  of  things  as
philosophy,  but  philosophy differs from dialectic in the nature of the
faculty  required  and  from  sophistic in respect of the purpose of the
philosophic  life.  Dialectic is merely critical where philosophy claims
to  know,  and  sophistic  is what appears to be philosophy but is not."
According  to  Aristotle,  dialectic is neither itself a science nor the
method of science. It is that part of logic or method which he treats in
the  Topics,  and it differs from the scientific method expounded in the
Posterior   Analytics   as   argument  in  the  sphere  of  opinion  and
probabilities   differs   from   scientific  demonstration.  Unlike  the
conclusions  of  science,  the  conclusions of dialectical reasoning are
only  probable,  because they are based on assumptions rather than self-
evident truths. Since other and opposite assumptions cannot be excluded,
one  dialectical conclusion is usually opposed by another in an issue of
competing  probabilities.  Intermediate  between  science  and rhetoric,
dialectic  can  serve  both.  In addition to its practical employment in
forensics,  it  is  useful  in  the  philosophical  sciences  because it
develops  skill  in making and criticizing definitions, and in asking or
answering  questions.  "The  ability  to raise searching difficulties on
both sides of a subject," Aristotle says, "will make us detect

[406b]
more  easily  the  truth and error about the se\eral points that arise."
Though  it  is  primarily  a  method  of arguing from assumptions and of
dealing  with  disputes  arising from contrary assumptions, dialectic is
also  concerned  with  the  starting  points  of  argument.  The  Topics
considers  how  assumptions are chosen, what makes them acceptable, what
determines  their  probability.  Here  again  Aristotle  shows  how  the
philosopher  can  make  use  of dialectic— as that "process of criticism
wherein  lies  the  path  to the principles of all inquiries." There are
four major expositions of dialectic in the tradition of the great books.
It  is as pivotal a conception in the thought of Kant and Hegel as it is
in  the  philosophies of Plato and Aristotle. With differences which may
be more important than the similarities, the Kantian treatment resembles
the  Aristotelian,  the Hegelian the Platonic. Like the division between
the  Posterior  Analytics  and  the  Topics  in Aristotle's Organon, the
transcendental  logic  of  Kant's Critique oj Pure Reason falls into two
parts—  the  analytic  and  the  dialectic.  The distinction between his
transcendental logic and what Kant calls "general logic" is discussed in
the  chapter  on  Logic,  but  here  it  must  be observed that for Kant
"general  logic,  considered  as  an  organon, must always be a logic of
illusion, that is, be dialectical." He thinks that the ancients used the
word "dialectic" in this sense, to signify "a sophistical art for giving
ignorance,  nay, even intentional sophistries, the coloring of truth, in
which  the thoroughness of procedure which logic requires was imitated."
For  his  own  purposes, however, he wishes "dialectic" to be understood
"in  the  sense of a critique of dialectical illusion." When he comes to
his  own  transcendental logic, therefore, he divides it into two parts.
The  first  part  deals  with  "the  elements  of  pure cognition of the
understanding,  and the principles without which no object at all can be
thought."  This  is the "Transcendental Analytic, and at the same time a
logic of truth" a logic of science. Since in his view "it ought properly
to   be   only  a  canon  for  judging  of  the  empirical  use  of  the
understanding,  this  kind of logic is misused when we seek to employ it
as

[407a]
Chapii:f{  18: an organon of the universal and unlimited exercise of the
understanding."  When  it  is  thus  misused,  "the exercise oi the pure
understanding becomes dialectical. The second part of our transcendental
logic,'  Kant  writes,  "must  therefore  be  a  critique of dialectical
illusion, ajid this critique we shall term Transcendental Dialectic— not
meaning  it  as  an  art of producing dogmatically such illusion ^an art
which   is   unfortunately   too  current  among  the  practitioners  ot
metaphysical juggling), but as a critique of understanding and reason in
regard  to their hyperphysical use." Kant goes further than Aristotle in
separating  dialectic  from  science.  With  regard  to  the sensible or
phenomenal  world of experience, science is possible; with regard to the
mind's  own structure, the supreme sort of science is possible. But when
reason  tries  to use its ideas for other objects, and then regards them
"as   conceptions  of  actual  things,  their  mode  of  application  is
transcendent  and  delusive."  Kant  explains  that "an idea is employed
transcendentally,  when  it is applied to an object falsely believed ...
to  correspond  to  it;  immanently,  when  it  is applied solely to the
employment  of  the  understanding  in the sphere of experience"; and he
maintains  that  when  ideas are used transcendentally, they do not give
rise  to science, but "assume a fallacious and dialectical character." A
conclusion  of  dialectical  reasoning,  according  to  Kant,  is either
opposed  by  a  conclusion  equally  acceptable  to reason— "a perfectly
natural  antithetic"— as in the antinomies of pure reason; or, as in the
paralogisms,  the  reasoning  has specious cogency which can be shown to
"conclude  falsely,  while  the form is correct and unexceptionable." In
this  balance  of  reason against itself lies the illusor}^ character of
the transcendental dialectic. Where Aristotle recognizes that reason can
be  employed  on  both sides of a question because it involves competing
probabilities,  Kant  in  calling  dialectic  "a  logic  of  appearance"
explicitly   remarks   that   "this  does  not  signifv  a  doctrine  of
probability."  He  further  distinguishes  what he calls "transcendental
illusory  appearance"  from "empirical illusory appearance" and ordinary
"logical  illu-sion."  The  latter  two  can  be  corrected  and totally
removed.

[407b]
DIALECIIC 349 But "transcendental illusion, on the contrary," he writes,
"does  not  cease  to  exi>l  even  after  it  has  been exposed and its
nothingness  has  been  clearly  perceived  by  means  of transcendental
criticism." The reason for this, Kant explains, is that "here we have to
do  with a natunii'dnd unavoidable illusion, which rests upon subjective
principles,  and  imposes  these  upon  us as objective. . . . There is,
therefore,"  he  continues, "a natural and unavoidable dialectic of pure
reason"  which  arises  because the mind seeks to answer questions "well
nigh  impossible  to  answer,"  such  as "how objects exist as things in
themselves"  or  "how  the  nature  of  things  is to be subordinated to
principles." In its effort to transcend experience— "in disregard of all
the  warnings of criticism"— the mind cannot escape the frustration, the
dialectical illusion, "which is an inseparable adjunct of human reason."
It  is not, Kant repeatedly insists, that "the ideas of pure reason" are
"in  their  own nature dialectical; it is from their misemployment alone
that  fallacies  and  illusions arise." For Hegel as for Plato dialectic
moves  in the realm of truth and ideas, not probabilities and illusions.
But  for  Hegel dialectic is always the process of mind, or of the Idea,
in  interminable  motion  toward  absolute  truth—never  resting  in the
intuition  of  that  truth. The Idea, he writes, "is self-determined, it
assumes  successive  forms which it successively transcends; and by this
very  process  of transcending its earlier stages, gains an affirmative,
and, in fact, a richer and more concrete shape." The dialectical process
is a motion in \\ hich contrary and defective truths are harmonized. The
synthesis  of thesis and antithesis results in a more complete truth. To
illustrate  his meaning, Hegel uses the example of building a house. For
such  a  purpose,  we must have "in the first instance, a subjective aim
and design" and as means, "the several substances required for the work—
iron,  wood,  stones."  In  rendering  these  materials suitable for our
purpose,  we  make  use of the elements: "fire to melt the iron, wind to
blow  the  fire,  water to set the wheels in motion, in order to cut the
wood, Yet the house that we build is, according to

[408a]
350  IHE GREAT IDEAS Hegel, an opposite or antithesis of these elements.
"The  wind,  which  has  helped  to  build the house, is shut out by the
house; so also are the violence of rains and floods, and the destructive
powers  of  fire, so far as the house is made fire-proof. The stones and
beams  obey  the  law  of  gravity—press  downward—and so high walls are
carried  up."  The  result  is  that  "the  elements  are made use of in
accordance  with  their  nature,  and yet to cooperate for a product, by
which  their  operation  is limited." The initial opposition between the
idea  of a house and the elements is reconciled in the higher synthesis,
which  is  the  house itself. While it shows the opposing theses and the
resulting  synthesis,  this  example  does not fully exhibit the dynamic
character  of  the Hegelian dialectic. If the resulting synthesis is not
the whole truth, it too must be defective and require supplementation by
a  contrary  which  is  defective in an opposite way. These two together
then  become  the  material for a higher synthesis, another step in that
continuing  dialectical  process  which  is  the  life of mind— both the
subjective  dialectic  of  the human mind and the objective dialectic of
the  Absolute  Mind or the Idea. The thread of common meaning which runs
through  these  four  conceptions  of  dialectic  is  to be found in the
principle of opposition. In each of them dialectic either begins or ends
with  some  sort of intellectual conflict, or develops and then resolves
such oppositions. For Kant dialectical opposition takes the extreme form
of  irreducible contradictions from which the mind cannot escape. "It is
a  melancholy  reflection,"  he  declares,  "that  reason in its highest
exercise,  falls  into  an  antithetic."  This  comes about because "all
statements  enunciated  by  pure  reason  transcend  the  conditions  of
possible  experience,  beyond  the  sphere  of  which we can discover no
criterion of truth, while they are at the same time framed in accordance
with  the  laws  of  the  understanding,  which  are  applicable only to
experience; and thus it is the fate of all such speculative discussions,
that  while  the  one  party attacks the weaker side of his opponent, he
infallibly lays open his own weaknesses."

[408b]
For  Hegel  the  opposition takes the milder form of contrary theses and
antitheses.  They  can  be  dialectically  overcome by a synthesis which
remedies  the  incompleteness of each half truth. "It is one of the most
important  discoveries  of  logic,"  Hegel says, "that a specific moment
which,  by  standing  in  an opposition, has the position of an extreme,
ceases  to  be  such and is a moment in an organic whole by being at the
same  time  a  mean."  The Hegelian opposition is thus also "mediation."
Dialectical  opposition  for  Aristotle  originates in the disagreements
which  occur  in  ordinary  human discourse. But just as disagreement is
reasonable  only  if  there are two sides to the question in dispute, so
reason  can operate dialectically only with regard to genuinely arguable
matters. The familiar topics concerning which men disagree represent the
commonplace issues of dialectic, since for the most part they are formed
from  debatable  propositions  or  questions.  "Nobody  in  his senses,"
Aristotle  believes, "would make a proposition of what no one holds; nor
would  he  make  a  problem  of  what is obvious to everybody or to most
people." Each of the conflicting opinions will therefore have some claim
to probability. Here the dialectical process ends neither in a synthesis
of  incomplete  opposites  nor  in a rejection of both as illusory; but,
having  "an  eye  to  general  opinion,"  it seeks to ascertain the more
reasonable  view—  the  more  tenable  or  probable  of  the two. In the
Platonic  theory  of dialectic, the element of opposition appears in the
tension   between   being  and  becoming,  the  one  and  many,  or  the
intelligible  and the sensible, which is found present in every stage of
the  mind's  dialectical  ascent  to  the  contemplation  of  ideas.  So
fundamental  is  this  tension  that  Socrates  uses  it  to  define the
dialectician  as one who is "able to see 'a One and Many' in Nature"— by
comprehending  "scattered particulars in one idea" and dividing it "into
species  according  to  their natural formation." Here as in the Hegehan
theory  the  oppositions  apparent  contradictions  in  discourse—can be
resolved  by dialectic, and through their resolution the mind then rises
to a higher level.

[409a]
It is only in the writings of Hegel or his followers that the meaning of
dialectic  is  not  limited  to  the  activity  ot  human thought. Hegel
expressly  warns  that  "the loftier dialectic ... is not an activity of
subjective thinking applied to some matter externally, but is rather the
matter's very soul putting forth its branches and fruit organically." It
is  the  "development of the Idea," which is "the proper activity of its
rationality." If the whole world in its existence and development is the
thought  and  thinking of an Absolute Mind, or the Idea, then the events
of  nature and of history are moments in a dialectical process of cosmic
proportions.  The  principles  of  dialectic  become  the  principles of
change,  and  change itself is conceived as a progress or evolution from
lower  to  higher,  from  part  to  whole, from the indeterminate to the
determinate.  The  dialectical pattern of history, conceived by Hegel as
the progressive objectification of spirit, is reconstructed by Karl Marx
in  terms  of  the  conflict  of material forces. Marx himself exphcitly
contrasts  his  dialectic  with that of Hegel. "My dialectic method," he
writes,  "is  not  only  different  from the Hegelian, but is its direct
opposite."  Hegel,  he  claims,  thinks that "the real world is only the
external,  phenomenal form of 'the Idea,' " whereas his own view is that
"the  ideal  is  nothing  else  than the material world reflected by the
human  mind,  and  translated into forms of thought." Nevertheless, with
respect to dialectic, Marx praises Hegel for being "the first to present
its  general  form  of working in a comprehensive and conscious manner."
The  only  trouble  is  that  with  Hegel, dialectic "is standing on its
head."  It  must therefore "be turned right side up again," a revolution
which Marx thinks he accomplishes in his dialectical materialism. Having
put  dialectic on its proper basis, Marx constructs the whole of history
in  terms  of  a  conflict  of  material forces, or of social classes in
economic  strife,  according  to  a  dialectical  pattern which provides
"recognition  of the existing state of things, at the same time also the
recognition  of  the  negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking
up." History is thus viewed dialectically "as in fluid move-

[409b]
Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC  351  ment," yet it is also conceived as working
towards a definite end— the revolution which has as its result the peace
of  the  classless  society.  Bourgeois  industry, by bringing about the
concentration  and  association  of  the  proletariat, produces "its own
grave diggers; its fall and the victory of the proletariat" are "equally
ineviIn  Marx's  vocabulary  the  phrases  "historical  materialism" and
"dialectical materialism" are strictly synonymous. But Marx's protest to
the  contrary  notwithstanding,  a comparison of Marx and Hegel seems to
show  that  a dialectic of history is equally capable of being conceived
in  terms  of  spirit  or  of  matter.  The  question whether there is a
dialectic of nature as well as a dialectic of history remains a point of
controversy  in  Marxist  thought,  despite  the  bearing  which Hegel's
Science  ofLogic and Phenomenology of Mind might have upon the question.
Engels  tries  in his Dialectics of Nature to give a fuller rendering of
the  Hegelian  dialectic  in strictly materialistic terms. Its universal
scope,  including  all  of  nature  as  well  as all of history, is also
reflected  in  certain  postDarwinian  doctrines  of  cosmic  evolution.
Considerations  relevant  to  the  Hegelian or Marxist dialectic will be
found  in  the  chapters  on  History  and Progress. Without judging the
issues  which  Hegel  and  Marx  have  raised in the thought of the last
century, it may be permissible to report the almost violent intellectual
aversion  they have produced in certain quarters. Freud, for example, is
as  unsympathetic  in his criticism of Marx and as uncompromising in his
rejection  of dialectical materialism, as James before him is extreme in
the  expression  of his distaste for Hegel. Mocking "the Hegelizers" who
think  that  "the glory and beauty of the psychic life is that in it all
contradictions  find  their  reconciliation," James declares: "With this
intellectual  temper I confess I cannot contend." The Hegelian dialectic
and  what James calls "the pantomime-state of mind" are, in his opinion,
"emotionally  considered,  one  and the same thing. In the pantomime all
common  things are represented to happen in impossible ways, people jump
down  each  other's  throats,  houses  turn inside out, old women become
young men,

[410a]
352  THE  GREAT  IDEAS distinctions (such as that between knower and ing
the spectacle they show." 2. Diverse theories of dialectic 2a. Dialectic
as  the  pursuit of truth and the contemplation of being upward and do\\
nward  paths  of dialectic (i) Divisions of dialectic: the theory of the
predicables  (2)  The  technique of question and answer of reason beyond
experience   general   and  transcendental  dialectic  (2)  The  natural
dialectic  of  human  reason 2d. Dialectic as the evolution of spirit or
matter  3. Types of dialectical opposition and the other the conflict of
probabilities  of a transcendental dialectic 4. Dialectic in relation to
philosophy  and science 6. The evaluation of dialectic: the line between
dialectic and sophistry

[410b]
everything  'p^^-^^^  ^'''^^^  i^^  opposite' with inconobject, many and
one)  must first be translated ceivable celerity and skill \nd so in the
into  impossibilities  and  contradictions,  then Hegelian logic," James
continues,  "relations  'transcended' and identified by miracle, ere the
elseu here recognized under the insipid name of proper temper is induced
for  thoroughly  enjoyOUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. Definitions of dialectic
^53  (i)  The  ascent  from  appearance  to  reality, or from opinion to
knowledge:  the  (2)  Definition,  division, hypothesis, and myth in the
service  of  dialectic  354  (i) The division of logic into analytic and
dialectic:   the   distinction   between  (i)  The  distinction  between
subjective  and  objective  dialectic: the realization of the moral will
355 5. The spheres of dialectic and rhetoric: proof and persuasion 356

[411a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the vohimc and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in 4 Ho.viiiR: Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in the set; the number 12d indicates tliat llic
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
halt  of page 119. When the text is printed in tw'o columns, the letters
a  and b reter to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and ends in the upper half of the right-hand sicle of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 1. Definitions of dialectic 7
Plato: Cratyhis, 88d-89a / Phaedrus, 139d140a / Republic, bk vi, 387c-d;
bk  vii,  396d398c  /  Parmenides,  491a-c  /  Sophist, 557a-b; 571a-c /
Philebus, ^nd-^l2h\^Z^h-c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810c 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24*
21-^15] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch ii
[77^25-35] 106b / Topics, bk
i, ch i [100^18- ^31] 143a-c; ch 2
[ioi''3-4] 144a / Sophistical
Refutations, ch 2
[i65*'3-4] 228a; en
11
[171^
3-8] 236a-b;
[i72''i5-''4] 237a-c / Generation
and  Corruption, bk i, ch 2 [316^5-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[1004^15-27]  523d;  BK XI, CH 3 [1061^29-^10] 589c-d / Soul, bk i, ch I
[403'>29-b8] 632c-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk t, ch 593a;
[1355^7-10]
594b;  ch 2 595d-596a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, 12b 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Thcologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, A 6, REP 3 40a-41a 31 Descartes:
Rules,  x,  16d-17a  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 36d-37d; 59c-d; 108a111c esp
108a-d;  227a-235a  esp  229b-c,  231c232a  / Practical Reason, 337a-c /
Judgement, 562a-564c esp 562d
[1356^31-33]
ch 4-6 11a-

[411b]
Chaptur  18:  DIALECTIC  353  43  Mill:  Liberty,  287d-288a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  31  19c-20a / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro,  179b-c;  182d  2. Diverse theories of dialectic 2a. Dialectic as
the pursuit of truth and the contemplation of being 7 Plato: Protagoras,
57a-c  /  Phaedrus,  139b140b  /  Phacdo,  242b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,
383d-388a;  bk vii, 396d-398c / Parmenides, 491a-d / Sophist, 556c-557b;
571a-c  /  Statesman,  585c  / Philebus, 611d-612b; 634b-635a / Severith
Letter,  809c-810d  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b esp ch 4-6
lla-12b  42  Kant: Practical Reason, 337a-338c / Judgement, 551a-552c 43
Mill: Liberty, 287c-288c 2^(1) The ascent from appearance to reality, or
from  opinion to knowledge: the upward and downward paths of dialectic 7
Plato: Republic, bk vi, 385b-388a; bk vii, 391b-401d / Sophist 551a-579d
esp  552b-c,  561d-579d  /  Statesman  580a-608d esp 585d, 586c, 589c-d,
591a-c, 594d 596a. 599a-c, 608d / Seventh Letter, 810a-d

[412a]
d  354  THE  GREAT  IDEAS {2a. Dialectic as the pursuit of truth and the
contemplation  of  being.  2^(1)  The ascent from appearance to reality,
orfrom   opinion   to  knowledge:  the  upward  and  downward  paths  of
dialectic.^  17  Plotinus: F/Vi-/ Ennead, tr hi, ch 4-6 lla-12b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  113b-115c;  173b-174a  /  Judgement,  551a-552c  43 Mill:
Liberty,  288a  2^(2)  Definition, division, hypothesis, and myth in the
service  of  dialectic  7 Plato: Charmides, 4a-13d esp 4b, 5a-b, 6d, 7c,
10a  /  Laches, 31c-37d / Protagoras, 43d45a; 49a / Phaedrus, 124b-129d;
134a-c;  139  d140b  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp 175d, 179d-180b, 183b-c /
Euthyphro,  192c-199a,c  esp  193a,  193d,  195b  /  Phaedo, 242b-243c /
Republic,  BK  i-ii,  297b-316b;  bk iv, 346a-356a; bk vi-vii,386d-398c/
Timaeus,  462b'C  /  Parmenides 486a-511d esp 491a-d / Sophist 551a-579d
esp  552b-c,  553d-554a, 561b, 570c-571d / Statesman 580a-608d esp 580d,
582d-583c,  586c-589c,  591a-d,  594d-596a  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c esp
610d-613a, 615c-617d / Seventh Letter, 809C'810d 8 Aristotle: Generation
and Corruption, bk i, CH 2 [316^5-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987^29-^7]
505b-c;
[987^30-33]
506a;  bk  xiii, CH 4 [1078^18-32] 610b-c 7 Soul, bk i, CH I [403*29-^8]
632c-d  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-3 165d-167d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 7 112b-113d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  hi, ch 4 lla-c 2b. Dialectic as the method of inquiry, argument, and
criticism  in  the sphere of opinion 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch i
[24*
21-^15]  39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch II [77^25-35] 106b; ch 19
[81^17-22]   lllc-d  /  Topics  143a-223a,c  /  Sophistical  Refutations
227a-253d  esp  ch  1-2  227a-228a, ch 9-11 234b-237c, ch 34 252c-253d /
Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14]
411c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [1004^15-27]  523d 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 1-2 593a-598b; CH 4 [1359^30-^19] 599c-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 57, A 6, rep 3 40a-41a; part hi, q 9, a
3,  rep  2  765b-766b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60a-c; 65a-c 31
Descartes:  Rules, 11, 2c-3a; iv, 5b-c; x, 16d-17a; xiii, 25b 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 299b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36d-37d; 109b-c /Judgement,
600d-603d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  287c-288c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro,  par 31 19c-20a; part ii, par 140, 53a-b / Philosophy of History,
part iv, 360c-

[412b]
2a{2)  to 2d 2b{l) Divisions of dialectic: the theory of the predicables
8  Aristotle:  Topics, bk i-vii 143a-211a,c esp bk I, CH 2 143d-144a, ch
4-6 144b-146a, ch 12 148d / Sophistical Refutations, ch ii
[171^
3-8] 236a-b; [i72''22-b4] 237b-c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356^361358^33] 596a-598b
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, parti-ii, q 57, A 6, rep 3 40a-41a 2^(2)
The  technique  of  question  and  answer 7 Plato: Protagoras, 50d-51b /
Euthydemus^  78a-d  /  Cratylus,  88d-89a  /  Republic,  bk vi, 375b-c /
Sophist, 551d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24*
21-^15] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 1 1
[77^25-35]
106b; bk II, ch 5
[9i''ii-i7]
125b  /  Topics,  bk  viii  211a-223a,c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 10
[i7i*27]-ch ii
[171^6]
235d-236a; ch ii [172*15-21] 237a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 2,
178a-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 65a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
36a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par 140, 53a-b 2c.
Dialectic  as the logic of semblance and as the critique of the illusory
employment of reason beyond experience 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp
la-b;  7a-8b;  15c-16c; 20a; 36d-37b; 53b-54b; 59c-d; 93c99a; 101b-107b;
108a-209d  esp  108a-112d,  120c-121c, 129c-130b, 133d, 157d, 173b-174a,
175c-d,  185b-c,  190a-209d;  217d-218a; 219a223d; 227a-235a esp 229b-c,
231c-232a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 260d-261c; 283d-284d /
Practical   Reason,   291a-292a;  296a-d;  309b;  310d-311d;  313b-314d;
320c321b;   335c-337a,c   /   Judgement,  461a-c;  540a542a;  543c-544c;
551a-552c;  562a-564c;  570b572b;  606d-607c 2c(l) The division of logic
into  analytic  and  dialectic:  the  distinction  between  general  and
transcendental  dialectic  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 34a-37d esp 36a-37d;
108a-lllc  2c(2)  The  natural  dialectic  of human reason 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,   la-3b;  7a-8b;  20a;  120c121c;  133d;  192c-193b;  217d-218a;
227a-235a  esp 229b-c / Practical Reason, 335c-337d; 352b-c / Judgement,
570b-572b  2d.  Dialectic as the evolution of spirit or matter 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 32-33 20a-d; part hi, par 342-344 llOc-
llla;   par   353-360   112b-114a,c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  INTRO,
153a-206a,c  esp  178a-179c,  182d-183a,  203a-206a,c;  part  i, 208b-d;
236a-c; 257a-c; part ii, 278a-c; part iv, 315a

[413a]
2d(\)  to  4  CuAPTiiR  18: DIALECTIC 355 50 Marx: Capital, 10a- lid csp
llb-d  54  Freud: ^ew Introductory Lectures, 882c 2</(l) The distinction
between subjective and objective dialectic: the realization of the moral
will 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 26 18b-c; par 31 19c-20a;
part  ii,  par  105  114  40a-42b  esp  par  109 41a-b; par 140 49b-54a;
ADDITIONS,  67-72  126d-127c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 360c-361a
2d{2)  The  dialectic  of  nature  and  of history: the actualization of
freedom 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 4 12d13a; part hi, par
194 66c-d; par 340-344 llOb-llla; par 353-360 112b-114a,c /Philosophy of
History   153a-369a,c   esp   intro,  156cIQOb,  203d-206a,c,  part  iv,
368d-369a,c  3.  Types  of  dialectical  opposition  3^.  The opposition
between being and becoming, the one and the many, the same and the other
7 Plato: Phaedrus, 126a-c; 134b-c / Symposium, 167a-d / Republic, bk hi,
333b-d;  bk  v,  370d373c; BK vi-vii, 383d-398c / Parmenides 486a-511d /
Sophist,   564d-574c  /  Statesman,  594d-595a  /  Philebus,  610d-613a;
615c-617d;  633a-635a  esp  634b-635a  /  Sa'enth  Letter,  809c-810d  8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch 6 505b506b; BK HI, CH I [995^20-25]
514a-b;  bk  iv,  CH  2  522b-524b  esp [1004^15-26] 523d 11 NicoMACHus:
Arithmetic, bk h, 839d-840b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4 lla-c
/ Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 5 51b-d / Third Ennead, TR hi, ch I 93b-c; tr
viz  119b-129a; tr IX 136a-138a,c / Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch I 139c-140c
/ Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-7 209d-212c; tr ii 214c-215c; tr vi 235b-237d
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch 1-3 310d-312b; tr IX, ch 1-2 353d-355a 53
James:  Psychology,  107a-b  3^.  The  opposed  premises  of dialectical
argument: dialectical problems and theses; the conflict of probabilities
8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24^
21-^15] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch II
[77^25-35]
106b / Topics, BK I, cH 11 148a-c; bk viii, ch 2
[157^34-^33]
213d214b / Sophistical Refutations, ch 2 [165^3-4] 228a / Heavens, bk i,
ch  10  [279^4-12]  370d  12  ¥.vicTY.Tus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch ii,
150d-151a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  83,  A  I, ANs
436d-438a.  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 47d-48d 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  i,  43d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch XVI,
sect 9 369b-c

[413b]
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect x, div 86-91 488d-491c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 108a d 3c. The opposed conclusions of dialectical reasoning: the
antinomies  and  paralogisms  of a transcendental dialectic 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk i, cii i [1355^28-40! 594c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c;
7a-8b;  120c173a  esp  129c  130b, 133c; 174b-177b; 187a192d; 200c-209d;
219a-220b;  229b-c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b;
283d284d  / Practical Reason, 291a-292a; 302a-d; 331c-337a,c; 340a-342d;
348d-349a  /  Science  of  Right,  407a-408b  / Judgement, 540a-546d esp
543c-544c   ;  562a-578a  esp  562d-564c,  575b578a:  584c-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 135 47b-d 3>cl. Thesis and antithesis
as  moments  in the advance toward a dialectical synthesis 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  7a-8b;  43d-44a; 133c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par
17 16c; par 26 18b-c; par 31-33 19c-20d; part i, par 104 39b-d; part ii,
par 105-114 40a-42b esp par 109 41a-b; part hi, par 256 79d-80a; par 302
lOla-c;  par 353-360 112b-114a,c / Philosophy of History 153a-369a,c esp
intro,  153a-190b, 203a-206a,c, part i, 208b-d, 235d-236c, 238b, 245b-d,
257a-c, part ii, 279c-d, part hi, 286c-287a, 303c-311d, part IV, 316a-b,
321d-322c,  326d-327a, 333d-334d 53 James: Psychology, 117b; 238b [fn 2]
4. Dialectic in relation to philosophy and science 7 Plato: Republic, bk
vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp bk VI, 386d-388a, bk vh, 396d-398c / Parmenides,
490d-491a  /  Sophist,  570a-574c  esp  571a-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a;
633a-635a  esp  634b-635a / Sa'enth Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24*
21-^15] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 6
[74^18-25]
102c;
[75^18-28] ^103a-b;
ch ii
[77^22-35] 106b; ch 19 [81*^17-24] lllc-d; bk
II, ch 5
[91^11-17] 125b
/ Topics, bk i, ch 1-2 143a-144a; ch io-ii 147b-148c; ch 14
[105^30-31]
149c; BK VIII, CH 3
[i59'*2-i4]
215c-d  / Sophistical Refutations, ch 9-1 i 234b237c / Heavens, bk i, ch
10 [279^4-12] 370d / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*
5-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*
20J-BK II, CH I
[993^18] 499a-512a esp bk
i, ch 3
[983*24-^7] 501c-d, CH 7 506b-d, bk
i,  CH  10 [993*1 i]-BK II, CH I [993^18] 511c-512a; bk hi 513b,d-522a,c
esp ch i
[995^*23-^4]
513b,d; bk iv, ch 2
[1004^15-27] 523d; bk
XI, ch 3 [1061^29-^12] 589c-d; bk xiii, ch 4
[1078^18-32] 610b-c / Soul, BK
I, ch I
[403*
25-^19] 632b-d

[414a]
(4.  Dialectic  in  relation  tophilosophy  and  science.)  9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1^58*3-33]
597d-598b;  ch  4  [1359^12-18]  599d  17 Plotinus: F/r^/ Efinead, tr hi
10a-12b  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch 3-4, 266b-267b 20
Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 57, A 6, REP ^ 40a-41a; part
hi, q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-7&6b 31 Descartes: Rules, u, 2c-3a; iv, 5b-c; x
15d-17a;  xiii,  25b-26a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  37a-b  / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  ofMorals,  261c-d/  Judgement,  551a'552c  43 Mill: Liberty,
287c-288c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 31 19c-20a 54 Freud:
General   Introduction,  545d'546a  5.  The  spheres  of  dialectic  and
rhetoric:   proof   and   persuasion  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  39d-42c  /
Euthydemus,   83a-b   /  Phaedrus,  131b-141a,c  /  Apology,  200a-201b;
203a-205c  /  Gorgias  252a-294d  esp  253b-256c,  258b-259a, 265a-267c,
280d285a   /   Statesman,  595a-d  /  Philebus,  610d613a;  634b-635a  9
Aristotle:  RJietoric, bk i, ch 1-2 593a-598b; CH 4 [i359'3o-^i9] 599c-d
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine, bi: ii, ch 37 653d-654b 19 Aquinas:
Swnma Theologica, part i, q 83, A I, ans 436d-438a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
446d-450a; 453c-455a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60a-c; 66c67c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a 6. The evaluation of dialectic: the line
between dialectic and sophistry 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[8891104] 499b-502a
CWSS-KEFEKENCES tion le, 2b, 2e; Reasoning 5c.

[414b]
?>56  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5/0  6 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52a- b / Euthydemus
65a84a,c  esp  72b-73c / Meno, 176d-177a / Phaedo, 243b-c / Republic, bk
vii, 3S8a-398c esp 396d398c / Theaetetus, 522a-523a; 525d-526b / Sophist
551a-579d  esp 559c-562a, 577c-579d / Philebus, 611d-612b; 633a-635a esp
634b-635a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 1-2 143a-144a; ch 18
[108^17-37] 152b-d; bk
vi, ch 2
[139''
32-i40-'^2l  192d-193a / Sophistical Refutations, ch 2 227d-228a; ch 8-1
i 233c-237c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316^5-14]
411c-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2 [1004^15-27] 523d; bk xi, ch 3
[1061^29-^12]
589c-d  /  Soul,  BK  I,  CH  I  [402^15-403^2]  631d-632a  9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch i [1355^14-22] 595a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  8  113d-114c;  BK  III,  CH  2  177c-178d;  ch  21 193d-195a; ch 24,
207d-208a  17  Plotinus  :  First  Etmead,  tr  hi,  ch  4-6  lla-12b 18
Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 31 651d-652b; ch 37 653d-654b
24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 101b-106a; bk hi, 187b-c;
197b-200d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 75a-77a; 260a-261a; 446d-450a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 60a-c; 66c67c / Novum Organwn, bk i, aph 62-63
113b114a;  APH  65  114b-c  31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2c-3a; iv, 5b-c; x,
16d17a; XIV, 28b-c / Discourse, part vi, 63d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandx,
227a-228a;  234b236b;  329b'336a; 421b-422b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
299b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36a-b; 36d-37d; 109b-c; 120c-121c; 133d;
157d;  187c-188b; 221c-222b / judgement, 600d-601c; 607d-608c esp 608b-c
43 Mill: Liberty, 287c-288c passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
iv, 360c361a 53 James: Psychology, 107a-b; 117b; 238b
[fn
2]  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  545d  For:  The consideration of
dialectic  as logic or a part of logic, and of its relation to the other
liberal  arts,  see  Language  7; Logic i, ib, 3-3 b; Rhetoric la. Other
discussions  of  the conception of dialectic as the highest science, the
supreme  form  of knowledge or wisdom, see Metaphysics i; Philosophy 2b;
Science  ia(2); Wisdom la. Other discussions of dialectic as a method of
argument  in  the  sphere  of  opinion,  see  Opinion  2c; Reasoning 5c;
Rhetoric 40—40(3); and for matters relevant to the use of dialectic as a
method  of inquiry, see Definition 4; Hypothesis i; Principle 30(2). The
role of dialectic in the philosophy of history, see History 4a(2)-4a(3);
Progress  la.  The  discussion  of  the  types  of opposition which have
significance   for   dialectic,   see  OpposiDialectic  in  relation  to
philosophy  and theology, see Metaphysics 3c; Philosophy 3c; Theology 5.
Discussions  of  sophistry,  and  for  the  condemnation of dialectic as
sophistry, see Logic 5;

[415a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below arc works not included in Crcal BooI(S
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and U)pics with which this
chapter  deals.  These works are divided I. Works by authors represented
in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented in this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography ol Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  lite  Great  Ideas. I.
Augustine. Divine Providence and the Problem of Evil, BK II, CH 1 1-16 .
Concerning   the  Teacher  HoBBES.  The  Art  of  Sophistry  Hegel.  The
Phenomenology  of Mind . Science of Logic Engels. Dialectics of Nature .
Hcrr  Eugen  Diihring's Revolution in Science, PART I (12-13) II. Sextus
Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk i-ii Philostratus. Lives ofthe
Sophists  Erigena. De Divisione Naturae, bk v (4) Abailard. Sic et Non .
Dialectica  John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon  Nicolas of Cusa. De Docta
Ignorantia Melanchthox. Dialectica Ramus. Dialccticae Institutiones

[415b]
Chaptlr  18: DIALECTIC 357 •HI to two groups: J. C. FiciiTE. The Science
of  Knotvledge,  partiii, A-D ScHLEi ERMACiiER. Dialel{til{ WiiEWELL. On
the  Philosophy of Discovery, appendix G LOTZE. Logic, BK I, CH 3 (c) C.
S.  Peirce, Collected Papers, vol i, par 284-572; VOL V, par 41-119; vol
vi, par 7-34 Brunetiilre. An Apologyfor Rhetoric Bradley. Appearance and
Reality   McTaggart.   Studies  in  the  Hegelian  Dialectic  Plekhanov.
Fundamental  Problems  of  Marxism Troeltsch. Gesammelte Schriften, \ ol
hi,  ch  3  (4) Lenin. Selected Worlds, vol xi (On Dialectics) BuKHARiN.
Historical Materialism Adler. Dialectic Buchanan. Possibility Santayana.
Reason  in Science, ch 7 . The Realm of Essence, ch 7 Whitehead. Process
and  Reality,  part  i  Jackson.  Dialectics B. Russell. An Inquiry into
Meaning and Truths ch 24

[416a]
IOCKE,  discussing  in  the course of his essay ^ on Human Understanding
"why  a man must keep his word," notes that we meet with three different
answers  to  this  question.  "If  a Christian be asked, he will give as
reason:  Because  God,  who  has  the  power  of eternal life and death,
requires  it  of  us.  But  if  a  Hobbist be asked why? he will answer:
Because the public requires it, and the Leviathan will punish you if you
do not. And if one of the old philosophers had been asked, he would have
answered:  Because  it  was  dishonest,  below the dignity of a man, and
opposite  to  virtue,  the  highest  perfection  of  human nature, to do
otherwise."  With these three answers Locke introduces us to some of the
alternative  views  on  what  is  perhaps the central problem concerning
duty.  All  three  acknowledge  the  existence  of duty and the force of
obligation. By accepting the question they affirm the proposition that a
man  must or ought to keep his word. But why ? What creates the ought or
obligation  ?  Two of the answers Locke cites— that of the Christian and
that  of  the  Hobbist—seem to derive duty from the commands of law, the
law  of  God or of the state, in either case a law to be enforced by the
sanctions  of  a  superior power. Accordingly, the citizen has duties to
the state, the religious man to God. Yet it does not seem to be entirely
the  case that such duties rest exclusively on the superior power of God
or  the  state.  Men  who  obey  either divine or civil law from fear of
punishment  alone, are said to act not from duty but from expediency— in
terms of a calculation of risks and consequences. Obedience to law would
appear  to  be  acknowledged  as  a duty only by those who recognize the
authority of the law or the right of the lawmaker to command. They would
be  willing  to  obey  the  law  even  if  no external sanction could be
enforced against them by a superior

[416b]
Chapter  19:  DUTY  INTRODUCTION  power.  Those  whom  the  law binds in
conscience  rather than by its coercive force obey the law because it is
morally  right  to  do so. The sense of the law's moral authority is for
them  the  sense  of  duty  from  which the dictates of conscience flow.
Locke's  third  answer— that of the ancient philosophers—shows that duty
is  sometimes  understood  without reference to law, divine or human. We
share this understanding whenever, having made a promise or contracted a
debt, we feel an obligation to discharge it even if no superior commands
the  act.  Here,  furthermore,  the  obligation  seems  to be to another
individual—  to a person who may be our equal — rather than to the state
or  God.  As  indicated by Locke's statement of this ancient view, it is
the  honest  or just man who acknowledges such obhgations apart from the
law  or his relation to any superior. Virtue may, of course, also direct
a man to act for the common welfare and to obey the laws of the state or
the  commandments  of God. But the immediate source of the obligation to
act  in a certain way toward one's fellow men is placed by the ancients,
according to Locke, in "virtue, the highest perfection of human nature."
On this view, virtue alone provides the motivation. Without it men would
act  lawfully  only  because of the law's coercive force. Without it men
would  recognize  no  obligations  to  their fellow men or to the state.
These two conceptions of duty— for the moment grouping the Christian and
Hobbist  answers  together against the ancient view—may seem at first to
be  only verbally different. It seems certain that dutiful conduct would
frequently  be  the  same  on either view. Yet they do conflict with one
another, and each, if examined further, presents difficulties. 358

[417a]
The theory that duty arises from a man's own virtue receives its classic
expression,   as   Locke   intimates,   in   the  ancient  philosophers,
particularly  Plato  and  Aristotle.  It  appears  in  the Republic, for
example,  when Socrates has to meet Glaucon's argument that men abide by
moral rules, not simply because they ought to, but in order to avoid the
pain   of  censure  and  punishment.  Glaucon  claims  that,  given  the
possession  of  Gyges'  ring which can render a man invisible to others,
"no  man  would  keep  his  hands off what was not his own when he could
safely take what he Hked." He could "in all respects be like a God among
men."  Against  this  Socrates sets his conception of the "just man" who
does  what  he  ought  to  do because it is just, and because justice is
essential  to  the  very  life  and  health  of  the  soul. According to
Socrates'  way  of  thinking, it is ridiculous to ask "which is the more
profitable,  to be just and act justly and practise virtue, whether seen
or unseen of gods and men, or to be unjust. . . . We know that, when the
bodily  constitution  is  gone,  life  is  no  longer  endurable, though
pampered  with  all  kinds of meat and drinks, and having all wealth and
all  power; and shall we be told that when the very essence of the vital
principle  is  undermined and corrupted, life is still worth having to a
man,  if  only  he  be  allowed  to do whatever he likes with the single
exception  that  he  is  not to acquire justice and virtue, or to escape
from  injustice  and  vice?"  On this view, it seems to be the virtue of
justice  which  lies  at  the  root of duty or obligation. But for Plato
justice,  though  only one of the virtues, is inseparable from the other
three  —  temperance,  courage,  and  wisdom.  It  is almost indifferent
therefore  whether  one  attributes  moral  obligation to the particular
virtue  of  justice  or to virtue in general. As the chapters on Justice
and  Virtue indicate, Aristotle differs from Plato, both with respect to
the virtues in general and to justice in particular. For Aristotle it is
justice  alone,  not  virtue  in general or any other particular virtue,
which  gives  rise to duty or obligation. Justice differs from the other
virtues,  according  to  Aristotle,  in that it "alone of the virtues is
thought to consider 'another's good' because it concerns the relation of
a man to his neighbor." The other virtues, such as temperance

[417b]
Chapter  19:  DUTY  359  and  courage,  do not give rise to obligations,
unless  they  are  somehow  annexed  to or united with justice. Whenever
Aristotle  speaks of duties he does so with reference to the obligations
that  follow  from justice— "the duties of parents to children and those
of  brothers  to each other . . . those of comrades and those of fellow-
citizens."  Whereas  for  Aristotle justice always refers to the good of
another,  or  to  the common good of all, such virtues as temperance and
courage,  when they are isolated from justice, concern the well-being of
the  individual  himself. That is why only justice entails duties, which
are  obligations  to  act in a certain way for the welfare of others. If
the  good of no other individual is involved, it seems that a man has no
duty  to  be  temperate  or  courageous,  even  when  he possesses these
virtues.  Precisely  because  of  the  essentially  social  character of
justice,  Aristotle raises the question "whether a man can treat himself
unjustly  or  not."  He is willing to admit that a man can do justice or
injustice  to  himself  only  in  a  metaphorical  sense.  What he calls
"metaphorical  justice" is not a relation between a man and himself, but
a  relation  between  one  part of himself and another. Aquinas seems to
follow  Aristotle  in  connecting  duty  with  justice and with no other
virtue.  "Justice  alone  of  all  the virtues," he writes, "implies the
notion  of  duty." If he also intimates that duty may somehow enter into
the  acts of other virtues— as when he says that "it is not so patent in
the  other  virtues  as  it  is  in  justice"—his position still remains
fundamentally  Aristotelian.  Referring  to  that  "kind of metaphorical
justice"  to which Aristotle appeals in stating the sense in which a man
can treat himself unjustly, Aquinas explains how "all the other virtues"
can  be  said to "involve the duty of the lower powers to reason." Apart
from  this metaphorical duty of the passions to obey reason, duty in the
strict sense comes, in the opinion of Aquinas, only from the precepts of
justice,  which  concern  the relation of one person to another. On this
theory, duty is not co-extensive with morality, the sense of duty is not
identical with the moral sense, and specific duties obligate a

[418a]
360  THE  GREAT IDEAS man to other men even when no general lawexists to
be  obeyed.  Difficulty  is  found with this theory by those critics who
think  that  the  whole of morality, not simply one part of it, involves
duties.  Does  not the sense of duty operate, they ask, in matters which
do not affect any other individual or even the common good ? Does a man,
for  example,  have  a duty to tell the truth only to others, but not to
seek it for himself? Kant, as we shall see, holds that there are private
as  well  as  public duties, or, in his language, internal duties in the
realm   of   ethics   as  well  as  external  duties  in  the  realm  of
jurisprudence.  The  Hobbist  theory  of  duty  seems  to  face* similar
difficulties.  The  specific duties which are determined by the precepts
of  justice may, as we have seen, not always be the same as the specific
duties  imposed by civil law, though they will be identical whenever the
law  of  the  state is itself an expression or determination of justice.
But when law rather than justice is the principle, duty seems to consist
primarily  in  obedience  to  the  law or rather to the lawgiver who has
superior  power and authority. Only secondarilv, or in consequence, does
it  involve  obligations to other men who are one's equals. With Hobbes,
for  example,  justice,  and  obligation  as  well,  begin only with the
establishment  of a constituted authority with the power of making laws.
"Where  there  is no Commonwealth," he writes, "there is nothing unjust.
So  that the nature of justice consisteth in keeping of valid covenants;
but  the validity of covenants begins not but with the constitution of a
civil  power,  sufficient  to compel men to keep them." Duty and justice
are  both  saici to be "laws of nature," but, Hobbes adds, they "are not
properly  laws,  but  quafities  that  dispose  men  to  peace,  and  to
obedience," until "a Commonwealth is once settled," and then they become
"the commands of the Commonwealth." In other words, "it is the Sovereign
power that obliges men to obey them," and obedience, which is said to be
"part  also  of the law of nature," is its proper expression. So far the
two conceptions conflict or at least diverge. But if the legal theory of
duty goes no further than the enactments of the state, the same question
arises here as before. Does a man have no duties apart from his relation
to the

[418b]
state  ?  Can  duty  be  co-extensive with morality if the only rules of
conduct  to  be  obeyed are laws imposed from without— regulations which
have  authority  simply  because they come from one who has the right to
command  ? Again, as we shall see, Kant would say No. We have now stated
the  questions  about  duty  which  raise difficulties for Aristotle and
Hobbes. Though they differ in their theories of law and justice, as well
as  in  their  conceptions of duty, they seem to concur in thinking that
doing  one's  duty  does  not exhaustively solve all moral problems. The
same  questions  do  not, however, seem to present difficulties to other
moralists—  to  Kant  and  to  the  Stoics  of antiquity, such as Marcus
Aurehus  and  Epictetus.  On  the  contrary,  their moral philosophy, by
making the sphere of duty co-extensive with the whole of the moral life,
seems to prevent such questions from being raised. As we turn to examine
their  conception  of  duty,  we  must observe that, in two respects, it
alters  Locke's  threefold  division of the answers to the question. Why
must a man keep his word.f^ In the first place, Locke's statement of the
answer  given by "the ancient philosophers" seems to have only Plato and
Aristotle  in  mind,  certainly  not  the  Stoics.  In the second place,
Locke's  statement  of the Christian position seems to associate it with
the   Hobbist   answer,  against  that  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.  That
association may be justified on the ground that duty to God, Hke duty to
the  state,  involves  obligation to a superior. But Aquinas, as we have
seen,  seems  to agree with Aristotle about justice as a source of duty;
and,  as  we  shall see, he also seems to agree with Kant and the Stoics
about  the  pervasiveness  of  duty  in  the  realm  of  morals. Locke's
statement  of  the  Christian  position,  which selects one aspect of it
only,  may  therefore  be  inadequate.  The point which unites Kant, the
Stoics, and Aquinas is their agreement concerning the existence of a law
which  is  neither  enacted  by  the  state nor proclaimed by God in his
revealed  commandments.  This  law  the  Stoics  speak of as "the law of
reason,"  Aquinas calls "the natural law," and Kant conceives to be "the
moral law within." The common conception thus vari-

[419a]
ously  expressed  is  more fully treated in the chapter on Law; but that
ampler discussion is not needed to perceive that the law of reason or of
nature  is  a  moral  law,  in  that its general principles and detailed
precepts govern the entire range of moral acts. "Morality," according to
Kant,  "consists in the reference of all action to the legislation which
alone can render a kingdom of ends possible." By this he means that "the
will  is never to act on any maxim which could not without contradiction
be  also  a  universal law." This law is also moral in the sense that it
exercises  only  moral  authority  and  should  prevail even without the
support  of the external sanctions which accompany the positive commands
of  a  superior.  "The  idea  of  duty,"  Kant declares, "would alone be
sufficient  as a spring [of action] even if the spring were absent which
is  connected by forensic legislation . . . namely external compulsion."
Making  the  natural  or moral law^ the principle of duty introduces the
element  of  obligation into every moral act. Whatever is right to do we
are  obliged to do in conformity to the law of nature or in obedience to
the  commands of the moral law. We need no external promulgation of this
law  i.e., no express formulation in words by a lawgiver—for this law is
inherent in reason itself. Its various maxims or precepts can be deduced
from  what  Aquinas  calls  the  "first  principle  ... of the practical
reason"  and  Kant  "the categorical imperative." Or, as the Stoics say,
since  reason  is  the  "ruUng principle" in man, man's duty consists in
"holding fast" to it and "going straight on" so that it has "what is its
own." On this theory, we are obliged in conscience to do whatever reason
declares  right,  whether  or  not  others  are  directly  involved. The
distinction  between  public and private morality between the spheres of
justice  and the other virtues— is irrelevant to conscience. Conscience,
according  to  Kant,  functions  equally  in the spheres of internal and
external   duty.   In  both  the  realm  of  ethics  and  the  realm  of
jurisprudence,  conscience, applying the moral law, dictates our duty in
the  particular case. We stand in no different relation to ourselves and
others,  since  the  moral law is universally and equally binding on all
persons. The obligation is in

[419b]
Chapter  19:  DUTY  361  every case to obey the law. It is not a duty to
persons,  except  as the moral law commands us to respect the dignity of
the  human person, ourselves and others alike. The element of a superior
commanding  an  inferior  seems to be present in this conception of duty
through  the relation of reason to the will and appetites of man. Acting
dutifully  consists  in  the  submission  of  the will to reason, and in
overcoming  all  contrary  inclinations  or  desires.  But  though  Kant
sometimes speaks in these terms, he also conceives duty as carrying with
it  an  obligation to God. "The subjective principle of a responsibility
for  one's  deeds before God," he says, is "contained, though it be only
obscurely,  in every moral self-consciousNevertheless, Kant insists that
"the  Christian  principle  of  morality  itself is not theological." It
rests,  in his opinion, on the "autonomy of pure practical reason, since
it  does  not  make  the knowledge of God and his will the foundation of
these  laws,  but  only  of  the  attainment of the summum bonum, on the
condition of following these laws, and it does not even place the proper
spring  of  this  obedience  in  the  desired results, but solely in the
conception  of  duty,  as  that  of  which the faithful observance alone
constitutes  the  worthiness  to obtain those happy consequences." It is
"through  the summum homun as the object and final end of pure practical
reason"  that,  in Kant's view of Christian morality, we pass from moral
philosophy  to  ^'religion, that is, to the recognition of all duties as
divine  commands.''' A Christian theologian like Aquinas, however, seems
to  go  further than Kant in equating conformity to the moral law—or the
natural  law  of  reason—with  religious  obedience  to God. Nor does he
explain  this  equivalence  by  reference  to the fact that God has made
man's  attainment of the summum bonum—or eternal happiness—depend on his
free compliance with the moral law. Rather, for Aquinas, the natural law
is  "nothing  else  than  the  rational  creature's participation in the
eternal  law" of God— the "imprint on us of the divine light." As God is
the  author  of man's nature and reason, so is He the ultimate authority
behind  the  commands  of  the  natural  law which He implanted in man's
reason at creation.

[420a]
362  THE GREAT IDEAS For a Christian theologian Hke Aquinas, duty to God
involves obedience to the moral law which reason can discover by itself,
no  less  than  obedience  to  those positive commandments which God has
revealed  to  man.  Aquinas seems to think that violation of the natural
law  is  as  much  a  sin as violation of the divine law. Both involve a
rupture of that order laid down by God, the one "in relation to the rule
of  reason,  in  so  far  as  all  our  actions  and  passions should be
commensurate  with  the rule ofreason, ' "in relation to the rule of the
divine  law."  Thus, in all moral matters, it would appear that duty is,
in  Wordsworth's  phrase,  "stern  daughter of the voice of God." If the
natural  law commands us to use our faculties to the ends for which they
were  created,  then  the  possession  of  a  mind  imposes upon us what
Socrates  in  the  Apology  calls man's "duty to inquire." If we fail to
seek  the  truth, we sin against God by sinning against our nature, even
though  "Thou  shalt seek the truth" is nowhere explicitly prescribed in
Holy  Writ.  Ethical  doctrines  can be classified according to the role
which they assign to duty as a moral principle. There is perhaps no more
fundamental  issue  in  moral philosophy than that between the ethics of
duty  and  the  ethics  of  pleasure  or happiness. This issue obviously
belongs to the chapters on Happiness and Pleasure as well as the present
one.  All  three  must be read together—and perhaps also the chapters on
Desire,  Law,  and  Virtue—  to  complete  the picture. According to the
morality  of  duty,  every  act  is  to  be  judged for its obedience or
disobedience  to  law,  and the basic moral distinction is between right
and  wrong.  But  where  pleasure  or  happiness  are central, the basic
distinction  is  between  good and evil, and desire rather than law sets
the standard of appraisal. An analysis of means and ends and a theory of
the virtues are usually found in the ethics of happiness, as a theory of
conscience  and sanctions is usually prominent in the ethics of duty. At
one extreme, there is the position which totally excludes the concept of
duty.  This  fact  more than any other characterizes the Epicureanism of
Lucretius. The good life for him is one where "nature craves for herself
no more than

[420b]
this,  that  pain  hold  aloof  from  the  body, and she in mind enjoy a
feeling  of pleasure exempt from care and fear." The hfe he describes—so
disciplined  and  moderated  that  all  but  the  simplest pleasures are
relinquished  in  the  effort  to avoid pain—seems to leave no place for
obUgation  or  social  responsibility.  In the much more elaborate moral
philosophy  of  Aristotle, virtue entails moderation in the avoidance of
pain  as well as in the pursuit of pleasure. Though he admits that "most
pleasures  might perhaps be bad without qualification," Aristotle claims
that   "the  chief  good,"  which  is  happiness,  "would  involve  some
pleasure."  But even as a good, pleasure is not the only good, for there
are  other  objects of desire. The happy man, according to Aristotle, is
one  who  somehow  succeeds in satisfying all his desires by seeking the
various  kinds  of  goods  in  some  order  and relation to one another.
Happiness  itself  is  something  that  "we choose always for itself and
never for the sake of something else." Although we may also choose other
things  in  some sense for themselves, such as "honor, pleasure, reason,
and  every  virtue,"  still they are chosen "for the sake of happiness,"
since  we  judge  them  as  "the  means  by which we shall be happy." In
Aristotle's  ethics  of  happiness,  duty  is not entirely excluded, but
neither is it given any independent significance. As we have seen, it is
merely  an  aspect of the virtue of justice, and amounts to no more than
the  just  man's  acknowledgment  of  the debt he owes to others; or his
recognition that he is under some obligation to avoid injuring other men
and  to  serve  the  common  good.  At  the  other extreme, there is the
position which identifies the sense of duty with the moral sense. In the
Stoicism  of  Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus, to live well is to do one's
duty,  and  to  set  aside  all  contrary desires. "It is thy duty," the
Emperor  writes,  "to  order  thy  life well in every single act; and if
every  act  does its duty, as far as is possible, be content; and no one
is  able  to hinder thee so that each act shall not do its duty." Man is
not destined to be happy; his happiness consists rather in doing what is
required  of  him  at his post of duty in the order of the universe. The
only good is a good will,

[421a]
a  dutiful  will,  a  will  which  conforms itself to the law of nature.
Kant's   much   more   elaborate  moral  philosophy  presents  the  same
fundamental  teachings. This is indicated by the fact that he associates
what he calls eudaetnonism {i.e., the ethics of happiness) with hedonism
{i.e.,  the  ethics  of  pleasure). Happiness, he writes, is "a rational
being's  consciousness  of  the  pleasantness  of  life  uninterruptedly
accompanying  his  whole  existence," and its basis is "the principle of
selflove."  Therefore,  according to Kant, both eudaemonism and hedonism
commit  the  same  error.  Both  "undermine  morality  and  destroy  its
sublimity,  since they put the motives to virtue and to vice in the same
class,  and  only  teach  us  to  make a better calculation." Both admit
desire  as  a  moral criterion of good and evil. Both are utilitarian in
that  they  are  concerned  with consequences, with means and ends. Both
measure  the  moral act by reference to the end it serves. For Kant, "an
action  done  from  duty  derives  its moral worth, not from the purpose
which  is  to  be  attained  by  it,  but  from the maxim by which it is
determined,  and  therefore  does  not  depend on the realization of the
object  of  the action, but merely on the principle of volition by which
the  action has taken place, without any regard to any object of desire.
. . . Duty," he goes on to say, "is the necessity of acting from respect
for  the law." From this he argues that duty, and consequently all moral
action,  must  be done because it is right, because the law commands it,
and  for no other reason. The recommendation of any action solely on the
ground   that   it  will  contribute  to  happiness  as  satisfying  the
inclination  of  the  person  and  achieving  the object of the will, is
completely ruled out. That would be a judgment of pure expediency. Worse
than  not moral, it is, in the opinion of Kant, immoral. "An action done
from   duty,"  Kant  writes,  "must  wholly  exclude  the  influence  of
inclination,  and  with  it  every  object  of the will, so that nothing
remains  which  can  determine  the will except objectively the law, and
subjectively  pure  respect for this practical law, and consequently the
maxim  that  I  should  follow  this law even to the thwarting of all my
inclinations. . . . The pre-eminent good which we call

[421b]
Chapter  19:  DUTY 363 moral can therefore consist in notliing else than
the conception of law in itself, which certainly is only
[X)ssiblc in a rational being in so far as
this conception, and not the expected effect, determines the will." This
law,  which  is  the  source  of duty and of all moral action, is Kant's
famous   "categorical   imperative"—or,   in   other   words,   reason's
unconditional  command.  According  to  its decree, Kant declares, "I am
never  to  act  otherwise  than  so that I could also will that my maxim
should  become  a universal law." By obeying the categorical imperative,
we  can  know  and do our duty and rest assured that our will is mosally
good.  "I do not, therefore, need any farreaching penetration to discern
what  I  have to do," Kant writes, "in order that my will may be morally
good.  Inexperienced  in  the  course  of  the world, incapable of being
prepared  for  all its contingencies, I only ask myself: Canst thou also
will  that thy maxim should be a universal law.? If not, then it must be
rejected,  and  that  not  because of a disadvantage accruing from it to
myself,  or  even  to others, but because it cannot enter as a principle
into  a  possible  universal legislation." To say that a man ought to do
this  or  refrain  from doing that in order to achieve happiness is, for
Kant,  at best a conditional obligation, ultimately a specious one since
he  is  not  unconditionally  obliged to be happy. Kant does not totally
exclude happiness or the summiim bonum. In fact he says that there is no
need  to  maintain  "an  opposition"  between  them and morality. But he
claims that "the moment duty is in question we should take no account of
happiness."  Just  as Aristotle treats duty only in terms of justice, so
Kant  considers  happiness to have a moral quality only insofar as to be
worthy  of  it  is an end set by the moral law. Two OTHER voices join in
this  great  argument concerning duty and happiness. One is that of John
Stuart  Mill, whose Utilitarianism recognizes Kant as the chief opponent
of  an  ethics  of happiness. Though Mill differs from Aristotle on many
points,  particularly  in  regard  to the virtues as means to happiness.
Mill's  answer  to Kant can be read as a defense of Aristotle as well as
of his own theory. From Kant's point of view, they are both

[422a]
364  THE GREAT IDEAS utilitarians. They both argue in terms of means and
ends. They both make purely pragmatic, not moral, judgments—judgments of
expediency instead of judgments of right and wrong. From Mill's point of
view,  Aristotle  like himself needs no other principle of morality than
happiness,  an  ultimate  end  which  justifies  every  means that tends
towards its reaUzation. "The ultimate sanction of all morality, external
motives apart," Mill writes, "is a subjective feeling in our own minds."
He  asserts  that  "when once the general happiness is recognized as the
ethical  standard,"  it  will  appeal to "a powerful natural sentiment."
Man's nature as a social being, he holds, "tends to make him feel it one
of  his  natural wants that there should be harmony between his feelings
and aims and those of his fellow-creatures." This conviction, in persons
who  have  it, "does not present itself to their minds as a superstition
of education, or a law despotically imposed by the power of society, but
as an attribute which it would not be well for them to be without." This
conviction,  rather  than  an  internal  sense  of obligation or fear of
external  sanctions  imposed  by  a  superior  power,  is  for Mill "the
ultimate  sanction of the greatest happiness morality"—which aims at the
greatest  happiness  for the greatest number. Where Mill answers Kant by
excluding  duty  —even  from  considerations of justice—Aquinas seems to
develop  an analysis in which every moral act can be regarded as obeying
or  disobeying the natural law and yet, at the same time, be judged as a
means  which  serves or fails to serve the ultimate end of man's natural
desire.  "The order of the precepts of the natural law is," in the words
of  Aquinas,  "according  to  the  order  of  natural inclinations." The
dilemma  set up by the opposition between duty and happiness seems to be
denied,  or  at  least  avoided,  by  a  theory  which  finds  a perfect
parallelism  between  the  precepts  of  natural  law and the objects of
natural desire, a parallelism resulting fromi their common source in the
creation  of  human  nature by God. The tension between duty and desire—
between  obedience  to  rule^ of conduct and unrestrained indulgence— is
one of the burdens which no other animal except man must bear. It

[422b]
is  a  constant  theme  in the great poems. It is pivotal to the plot of
most  of  the  great  love  stories.  It  is  a theme of tragedy, for in
whichever  direction the tension is resolved—whether in the line of duty
(as  by  Aeneas  forsaking  Dido)  or in disobedience to law (as by Adam
yielding  to  Eve  in  Paradise Lost)—ruin results. The tragedy of being
both  rational  and  animal seems to consist in having to choose between
duty  and  desire rather than in making any particular choice. It may be
significant,  however,  that the tragic heroes of poetry more frequently
abandon   duty  than  desire  or  love,  though  seldom  without  mortal
punishment,  preceded by a deep sense of their transgression. Sometimes,
however,  they are self-deceived, and cloak desire in the guise of duty.
There  is  another  source of tragic conflict in the sphere of duty. Men
are torn by competing loyalties, obligations which pull them in opposite
directions.  In  the  basic  relationships of the family, the duty a man
owes  to  his  parents  often  cannot be discharged without violating or
neglecting  obligations  to  his wife. When the moral law and the law of
the  state  command contrary actions, duty is weighed against duty in an
ordeal  of  conscience. Sometimes, however, one obligation seems to take
clear  precedence  over  another, as in the mind of Sophocles' Antigone,
for  whom  the  king's edict loses its authority when it runs counter to
the  law  of  God.  Creon the king, not Antigone his subject, may be the
play's  more  tragic  personage.  He  sacrifices a dearly beloved son to
uphold the authority he considers it his duty as a ruler to maintain. If
man  is  not a rational animal or if, whatever his nature, reason is not
its  ruling  principle,  then  the  sense  of duty would appear to be an
imposture  that draws its driving force from the emotional energies with
which  certain manmade rules of conduct are invested. Rather than acting
as  a  counterweight  to  desire, duty is itself the shape which certain
desires  take  to combat others. Conscience, or the super-ego, according
to Freud, is born of the struggle between the ego and the id. Translated
into  "popular language," Freud tells us, "the ego stands for reason and
circumspection,  while the id stands for the untamed passions." What may
originally have had a necessary function to perform in the psychic

[423a]
Chapter  economy  can  grow  to  play  too  dominant  a  part.  For  the
psychoanalyst,  not  tragedy  hut neurosis results from an overdeveloped
sense of duty. When "the ego
[is] forced
to  acknowledge  its  weakness,"  Freud  explains,  it  "breaks out into
anxiety:  reality  anxiety in face of the external world, normal anxiety
in  face  of the super-ego, and neurotic anxiety in face of the strength
of  the  passions  in  the  id."  The relation of ruler and ruled in the
domestic  or  the political community may seem at first to impose duties
or  obligations  onh' on the ruled. The ruler commands. His subjects are
obliged  to  obey. Does the ruler in turn have no duties, no obligations
to those whom he governs ? If he has none, then neither have the persons
he  rules  rights which he must respect. Such absolute rule—defined by a
correlative  absence  of duties in the ruler and rights in the ruled—has
been  one  conception  of  the relation between master and slave. In the
state rulers who are merely officeholders are obligated by the duties of
their  OUTLINE OF TOPICS 1. The concept of duty or obligation: its moral
significance  366 2. Comparison of the ethics of duty with the ethics of
happiness,  pleasure,  or  utility  3. The di\isionsofduty: internal and
external duty; the realms ofethics and jurisprudence 367 4. The sense of
duty 4^. The moral and social development of conscience: its dictates 5.
The derivation of duty from divine, natural, and civil law, and from the
categorical  imperative of reason 6. Conflicts between duties of diverse
origins  369 7. The relation of duty to justice and to rights: oaths and
promises  8.  The tension between duty and instinct, desire, or love 370
9.  The duties of command and obedience in family life 371 10. Political
obligation:  cares,  functions,  loyalties  11.  Duty  to God: piety and
worship 373

[423b]
19:  DUTY 365 office as well as vested with its authority and power. The
office-holder, duty-bound by the constitution, is not an absolute ruler.
He  is,  in  fact, a servant of the state, not its master. The mediaeval
king  who pledged himself in his coronation oath to discharge the duties
of  his  office may not have been bound by human law, but so long as his
conscience  kept him loyal to his pledge, he recognized the supremacy of
the  natural  law  or  of the law of God. The selfgoverning citizen of a
republic is similarly dutybound only when he recognizes the supremacy of
the  common  good. According to the theory of constitutional government,
rights   and  duties  are  correlative.  The  acknowledgment  of  duties
signifies  that  the  holder  of  rights  recognizes  their  limited  or
conditional  character.  To consider oneself entirely exempt from duties
or  obligations  is  to regard one's rights as absolute. Can anyone have
absolute  rights  except on condition of being without a superior of any
sort  }  One  implied answer to this question is that neither despot nor
state, but only God, is autonomous or without duty. PAGE

[424a]
366 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The concept of
duty  or  obligation: its moral significance 7 Plato: Gorgias, 269d-270c
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,   bk  ii,  ch  5,  143d144a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations, bk hi, sect i 259b,d; sect 6 261a-c; bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk
v, SECT 6 269b-d; bk vi, sect 22-23 276a-b; SECT 26 276b-c; bk vii, sect
5 280a-b; bk viii, SECT 26 287c; sect 32 287d-288a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  ix,  ch  4,  287d; bk XIX, CH 14-16, 520c-522a; ch 19 523b-d /
Christian   Doctrine,   bk  i,  ch  22-30  629b633b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 99, A 5 249a-250a; part ii-ii, q 4, a 7, rep 3
407d-409a; qq 183-189 625a-700d passim, esp Q 183, A I, REP 3 625a-626a,
a  3  627a-d  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86c-87c; part ii, 115a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 7a-d; 24c-25c; 233a-b; 319b; 383c-385a; 467b-470a 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 74b-76a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
i,  388d-389a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114d-115a;  149d-150a;  190c-d;
236d-237a  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254d; 256a-279d esp
2765-

[424b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one  column, the letters a and b refer to the upperandlower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 ]ames: Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets, are given in cerBible References : The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g..
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in  the  use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface.
277a;  282d-283d  / Practical Reason, 305d307d; 325a-d; 327d-329a / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  366d-367a;  368a-d; 373b-d / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-390a,c esp 383a-384d, 389a-390a,c; 391a-c;
392b393a / Science of Right, 397c-398a; 416b417b / Judgement, 571c-572a;
594c-596c  esp  595a-d;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 43 Mill : Liberty, 304c-306b
passim  /  Utilitarianism,  453c-454a; 468b-469b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  ii,  par  133135  47a-d;  part  hi,  par  148-150 56a-57a;
ADDITIONS,  84  129b; 95 132b / Philosophy of History, intro, 170d-171c;
part i, 224a; PART IV, 362c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a; 310d-314c
esp  313d-314a;  592b-c  2.  Comparison  of  the ethics of duty with the
ethics  of  happiness, pleasure, or utility 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
ii,  ch  ii  150a-151b;  ch  19  162c-164b;  bk  hi,  ch 24 203c-210a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect 11-12 258a-c; bk viii, sect 10 286b;
sect  28  287c;  SECT  39  288c;  bk  ix,  sect i 291a-c; sect 7 292b 18
Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a289a; bk xiv, ch 8-9 381c-385b

[425a]
3  to 4a Chapter 19: DUTY 367 19 Aquinas: Stimtna Theologica, part i-ii,
o 24, A 2 727d-728c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b
30  Bacon:  Adi'ancement  of  Learning,  69d-76a  33  Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  62b-68b 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v, 336c-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 235a-b; 236b-239a / Fund. Prin. Metaph\sic of Morals, 256a-257d;
258d-264a; 265b; 267b-d; 280d-281a; 282b283d; 286a c / Practical Reason,
297a-319b  esp 298a-300a, 304d-307d; 325a-331a; 338c355d esp 345d-347a /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366d; 369c-373b / Intro.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 387b-388a; 389a390a, c / Science of Right, 446b-c
/  Judgement,  478a-479c;  584d-587a; 588b [fn 2]; 591b-592a; 594c-596c;
605d-606b   [fn   2]   43  Mill:  Liberty,  296a-297b  /  Utilitarianism
445a-476a,c  esp  457c-461c,  464d-476a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  ii,  par  124 44b-d; par 134-135 47b-d; additions, 85-87 129b-d 53
James: Psychology, 813a-814a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
800c801b  3.  The  divisions  of  duty:  internal and external duty; the
realms  of  ethics  and  jurisprudence  7  Plato:  Gorgias, 269d-270c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 16, a 4, rep 3 97a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, A 5, ans 249a-250a; q 100, a 2, rep 2
252b-253a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 95d-96a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 7a
30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning,  74b-c  32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[1334-1379]  368b369b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 89d-91a; 96a-b 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 268d-270c; 272b-273a / Pref.
Metaphysical Elements of Ethics 365a-379d esp 366d, 367b368a, 370d-372a,
374a-c,  378a  /  hitro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383a-384a,c; 386d-387a,c;
389a-390a,c;  391a-394a,c  / Science of Right, 398a-399c; 400b,d-401b 43
Mill:  Utilitaria?iism, 458a-d; 468b-469b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  79  33a-c; part ii, par 1 37-1 41 48a-54d / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  170d-171c;  186b-c; part I, 207b-c; 211a-c; 214d-216b;
part  hi,  290a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689b 4. The
sense of duty 5 Aeschylus: Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[loio1047] 80a-c / Eumenides 81a-91d esp [436-666]
86a-88a

[425b]
5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[i
509]  114a118d  /  Antigone 131a-142d / Electra 156a169a,c / Philoctetes
182a 195a,c 5 KuRii'iDEs: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[^7^-
430]  228b-d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Ueracleidae  248a-257a,c  esp
(748-78^)  254d-255a  /  Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp (87-597 1 258d2b3c /
Fllectra  327a-339a,c  /  Phoenician  Maidens  [1625-1766J  392b-393d  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 397d-398c 7 Plato: Euthydemus,
70d-71b / Meno, 183a-b / Apology, 206b-d / Crito 213a-219a,c / Republic,
BK  VH,  390b-391b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5 llOb-c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vih,  sect 32 287d-288a 14 Plutarch: Marcus
Cato  276b,d-290d esp 282a / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c esp 626d-627b,
632b-c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[859-1004]
174a176b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 301d-303c; 467d-468b 26 Shakespeare: As
You Li^e It, act ii, sc hi
[56-65] 605a
29  Cervantes:  Dow  Quixote, part i, 81b-88b 32 Milton: Comus [170-229]
37a-38b  /  Paradise  Lost,  BK  HI  [194-197] 139b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic of Morali^ 253d-254b / Practical Reason, 325c-327d; 333a-334a
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 375a-h / Judgement, 593a-d;
599b-d  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 458b-461c esp 458b-c 49 Darwin: Descent
of Man, 310a-314a esp 310c-d, 314a; 592b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vh,  275a;  bk  x,  465c-467a;  bk  xi,  513d-514d; 527b-528b 53 James :
Psychology,   807a-808a   Aa.   The  moral  and  social  development  of
conscience:  its  dictates Old Testament: Proverbs, 28:1 / Ecclesiastes,
7:21-22  (D)  Ecclesiastes, 7:22-23 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 17:11—
(D)   OT,  Bool^  of  Wisdom,  17:10  /  Ecclesiasticus,  14:2  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 14:2 New Testament: Romans, 2:14-15 / / Corinthians, 8/7
Timothy, 4:1-2/ Titus, 1:15 5 Aeschylus: Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[loio1076] 80a-d
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 5 257b-c; bk hi, sect 4 260b-261a;
bk   iv,  sect  18  264d;  bk  vhi,  sect  32  287d-288a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk ii, par 9, lOd; bk IV, par 14 22d-23a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 79, AA 12-13 425c-427a; part i-ii, q 19, aa 5-6
705d-708a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, A 4 233a-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxvh
[124-142] 95d-96a

[426a]
(4.  The  sense  of  duty.  4a.  The  moral  and  social  development of
conscience: its dictates.) 23 HoBBEs: Lei'iathaii, part i, 65d-66a; part
ii,  149b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  16a-d; 46b-d; 174d176a; 306d-307a;
381a-395b esp 384d-385a; 467d-468b 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act ii,
sc ii
[i-66] 78d-79c / Merchant of Venice, act
ii, sc II
[1-33] 412a-b / 2nd Henry IV, act
v, sc V 501b-502c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc iii
[78-81]
35a  30 Bacon : Advancement ofLearning, 74b-c; 96a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part hi, the affects, def 27, EXPL 419a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
29b-33b 35 Locke: Human Understandi7ig, bk i, ch ii, SECT 7-9 105d-106d;
bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect 10-12 230b-231c esp sect 12 231b-c 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 255a-266b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 57c-58a; 360d-361a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331c;  343d-345c 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
306d-307d;  321b329a  esp  326b-327d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of
Ethics,  374c-379d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 389a-b / Judgement,
593a-d  43  Mill: Liberty, 295b-d / Utilitarianism, 458b461c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  219a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 136-138
47d-48d;  additions,  87-89  129c130a  / Philosophy of History, part iv,
353c-d  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-305c;  310c318c; 321b-323a;
592b-593b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Kararnazov, bk vi, 160b-163c 53 James:
Psychology,  190a-191a; 661b; 886b888a 54 Freud: Ego and Id, 707b-708b /
War  and  Death,  757c-759d  esp  758c-d,  759b  /  Civilization and Its
Discontents,   792b-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  876b-d  4b.  The
emotional   development   of   conscience:   its  morbid  manifestations
Apocrypha:  V/isdom  of  Solomon,  17—  (D)  OT,  J5oo^  of Wisdom, 17 5
Sophocles:  Electra  [121-633] 157b'161a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi
[10141023] 43a-b; bk v [1143-1160] 76a-b
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 174d-176a 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc
iv  [1-75]  114d-115b;  act v, sc hi [119-206] 144d-145d 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet 29a-72a,c esp act ii, sc II
[617-633] 46c-d, ACT
III, sc I
[56-90]
47c-d,  sc  III  [36-72]  53d-54a,  sc iv 54b-56d, ACT IV, sc IV [32-66]
59a-c  / King Lear, act III, sc IV [23-36] 264c / Macbeth, act hi, sc IV
297c-299b; act v, sc i 306b-307a; sc in 307c-308b

[426b]
II 568 THE GREAT IDEAS 4^/0 5 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [590-605] 352b
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 54d-55a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306d
307d / hitro. Metaphysic of Morals, 389a- b / Judgement, 593a-d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 458b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3776-3834] 92a-93b;
[4405-4612] 110a-il4b
49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 312d-314b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix,
373b-374d; BK X, 406c-410c; 416c-417b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk vi, 160b-163c; bk xi, 319b-c; bk xii, 367c-368a 54 Freud: Narcissism,
407b-409a  / General Introduction, 622c-d / Group Psychology, 689d691c /
Ego  and  Id,  703c-708c  esp  706b-707d;  712b-717a,c  esp  715d-716c /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 792a-799a esp 792b-794a, 797c799a /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  830a-840a  esp 838d-839b; 851d-852d 5. The
derivation  of  duty  from  divine, natural, and civil law, and from the
categorical  imperative  of  reason  Old Testament: Genesis, 22:1-19 esp
22:18  /  Leviticus,  19  esp  19:2, 19:36-37 / Deuteronomy, 5:22-33 esp
5:32-33;  6:17-18,24-25;  11:26-28; 12:28-32 esp 12:32 / Psalms, 17:3-4;
78:1-11;  119  esp  119:4-6,  119:33-40,  119:57-61— (D) Psalms, 16:3-4;
77:1-11;  118 esp 118:4-6, 118:33-40, 118:57-61 / Ecclesiastes, 12:13-14
/ Jonah— {D) Jonas New Testament: Matthew, 7:21 / JoJm, 5:30 5 Aeschylus
:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  /  Seve7i  Against  Thebes  [1005-1078]
38b-39a,c  /  Eumenides  [490-565] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910] 107b-c / Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax
[13 16-1345]
154b-c   5   Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp  [1-41]  258a-b  /
Phoefiician Maidens
[i 625-1 766]
392b-393d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  20id-202c 7 Plato: Apology,
206b-d  /  Crito,  214d-219a,c  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16,
157c158d  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; BK IV, sect I
263a; sect 4 264a; sect 39 267a; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; bk vii, sect 55
283b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14-16, 520c-522a /
Christian   Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  22-30  629b-633b  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  63,  A  I,  ANs  325c-326c  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 96, A 4 233a-d; q 99, a 5 249a-250a; part ii-
ii,  q  4,  A  7,  REP 3 407d-409a 23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86c-87c;
95d96a;  part ii, 110a; 113c; 131a-c; 137b-138b; 159d-160d; 164a,c; part
hi, 165a; conclusion, 282a; 283c

[427a]
6/0  7  CiiAPTKR  19:  DUTY  369  25 Montaigne: Essays, 46b d: 233a b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  ^7,  schoi.  2  435b-436a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk ix [647 654! 261b 35 I.ocKi:: Civil Goicniment, en 11,
sect  4-6  25d-26c;  ch  xvi,  sect 186 68d-69a; sect 195 70a-b / Hwyjan
Understanding,  bk  i,  cii II, SECT 5-6 lOSa-c; sect 12-13 107b 108c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2a-b;  iiK  XXIII, 187d-188a 38
RorssEAu:  Inequality,  330a-331c;  356b  359a  / Social Contract, bk i.
388d-389a;  392b  393c;  BK  II, 397d-398a; 399b c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
114d-115a:  236d-237a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254d;
260a-261d: 268c-270c; 272a-b; 273d 287d esp 275b-d, 277d-279d, 281c-283d
/   Practical   Reason,   297a-314d  csp  307d-314d:  321b-329a  /  Pief
Metaphysical   Elements   of  Ethics,  366a-d;  369a-c;  373d  /  Intro.
Metaphysic   of   Morals,  386b-d;  388b-c;  390b,d-391c;  392b  393a  /
Judgement,   571c-572a;   605d-606b  [in  2]  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,
445d-446d; 470a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 135 47b-d;
additions,  86  129c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 170d-171c; 186b-c;
part  iv,  362b-d  6.  Conflicts  between  duties of diverse origins Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:18-25  esp  2:24  /  Deuteronomy,  21:18-21  New
Testament: Matthew, 8:21-22; 12:46-50; 22:17-21 / Mar\, 12:14-17 / Luke,
20:20-26  5  Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [333-489] 5a7a / Seven Against
Thebes 27a-39a,c / Agamemnon
[184-247]
54a-c  /  Chocphoroe  [885930]  78d-79b / Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles:
Antigone 131a-142d esp
[1-99]
131a-132a / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50122] 182d-183b
5  Euripides:  Electra  327a-339a,c esp [962-987] 335d-336a / Phoenician
Maidens  378a-393d  / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  ii, 71d-72a; bk v, 171d-172a 7 Plato: Crito, 213d-219a,c 13 \'irgil:
Aeneid,   bk  iv  [331-361]  176a-177a  14  Plutarch:  F^^m^,  152b-d  /
Coriolamis,   189d191c  /  Timoleon,  196b-198b  /  Agis,  654c-655a  18
Augustine:  City  ofGod, bk xix, ch 19 523b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii, 101c; 151a-c; part III, 198d-199a; 240a-246a,c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
381a-388c  esp  386a-d; 467b-470a; 486b-488b 26 Shakespeare: Richard II,
act i, sc ii
[1-43]
322d-323a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a  35  Locke:  Toleration.  16c-17b; 18a-b 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  369c  /  Social  Contract,  bk iv, 435a-439c passim 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 193c-194a; 226a-b

[427b]
41 Cmbbon: Decline and Fall, 89b c 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphy<ic of Morals,
392a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  304c-d / Utilitarianism, 456d457b 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 145b; 221d-224a; 542a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pari mi,
par  150  56c 57a 51 loLSTov: War and Peace, bk vii, 275a-276b; epilogue
i,  668a  669c;  670d-671a  7.  The  relation  of duty to justice and to
rights:  oaths and promises Old Testament: Genesis, 28:18-22; 29:15-30 /
I^anticus, 5:4-13; 27 / Numbers, 6; 30 / Deuteronomy, 23:21-23 / Joshua,
2;  6:22-25;  24:1-28—  (D)  Josue,  2;  6:22-25; 24:1-28 / Judges, 1-2;
11:28-40/  I  Samuel,  1:11-28—  (D)  I  Kings, 1:11-28 / Psalms, 50:14;
66:13-14   (D)  Psalms,  49:14;  65:13-14  /  Ecclesiastes,  5:4  —  (D)
Ecclesiastes,  5:3  /  Zechariah,  8:17—  (D) Zacharias, 8:17 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  29:3  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  29:3 New Testament:
Matthew, 5:33-37 / James, 5:12 4 Homer: Iliad, bk iv [153-239] 25c-26b 5
Aeschylus:  Chocphoroe  70a-80d 5 Sophocles: Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[8951292] 190a-193c 5 Euripides: Hecuba
[218-331]
354d-355c  / Iphigenia at Aulis [16-140] 425b-426b 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  hi,  90c-d;  bk iv, 151a-b; 159a-b; bk vi, 197a-b; 201d-202c; BK IX,
311b-312d  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 406a407b; bk hi,
429c-434c;  bk v, 490a-b 7 Plato: Apology, 209a-b / Crito, 216d-219a,c /
Gorgias, 284a-285a / Republic, bk i, 297a-300b / Laws, bk XII, 787d-788c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 9
[1159^251160^9]
411d-412b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 14
[1375^8-11] 619c
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 7 261c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xh
[175-215] 358b-360a
14  Plutarch:  Lysander,  357a-b  /  Agesilaus, 484a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 16, A 4, rep 3 97a-c; q 21, a i, rep 3 124b-125b
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, A 3 51c-52b; q 99, a 5
249a-250a; q 100, A 2, REP 2 252b-253a; a 3, rep 3 253a-d; part ii-ii, q
4,  a  7,  REP 3 407d-409a; q 23, A 3, REP I 485a-d 22 Chaucer: Knight's
Tale
[1128-1176]
178b179a  /  Franl^ins Tale [11,770-844] 363b-364b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  77b-c; 86c-92b; PART II, 115a-116a; 127b; 138c; 142a-d; 145a-b
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 13d-14c; 381a-388c esp 383c-d, 387b-c; 467b-470a
26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act v, sc i
[175-190] 66d-67a / 3rd Henry
VI, act i, sc II
[1-34] 72d-73b
/ Titus Andronicus, act v,

[428a]
(7.  The relation of duty to justice and to rights: oaths and promises.^
sc  I  [68-86]  193a  /  Two Gentlemen of Verona, ACT II, sc VI 239a-c /
Merchant of Venice, act IV, sc I 425c-430b / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc I
[112-140]  575d-576a 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc II
[165-212] 121d-122b; act v, sc iii [1-75] 137a-d / Coriolanus, act v, sc
iii 387a-389b / Sonnets, clii 609c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37,
schol  2  435b-436a  35  Locke:  Toleration  la-22d  esp  5d-lla / Civil
Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d-26c;  sect 14 28b-c; CH XVI 65d-70c
passim,  esp  sect 186 68d-69a, sect 195 70a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Latvs,  bk  viii,  55c-d  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 388c-391b;
392b-393c;  bk  ii,  396d-398b  41  Gibbon:  Decli7ie and Fall, 89d-91c;
532d533d  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 267d268a; 269a-c;
272c-d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  371b-372a / Intro,
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389c-390a,c  /  Science  of  Right,  416b-417b;
429d-430a;  432c-433c  43  Federalist: number 7, 44a-b 43 Mill: Liberty,
302d-312a   esp   305d-306b,   309c-310c;   316b-319d  /  Representative
Goveritment,   392b-393c   /  Utilitarianism,  464d-476a,c  passim,  esp
468b-469b,  475a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 78-79
32d-33c;  part iii, par 154-155 57c; par 221 73b; par 261 83a-d; par 293
98b;  additions,  49  124b-c; 99 133a; 139 139b / Philosophy of History,
part  i,  236a-c;  part  iv, 362c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1716-1731]
41a-b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 505a-511b esp 509d-510a 8. The
tension  between  duty  and  instinct,  desire,  or  love Old Testament:
Deuteronomy,  13:6-11;  21:18^  21  /  Judges,  11:28-40  /  Ruth,  i  /
Zechariah, 13:3— (Z)) Zacharias, 13:3 New Testament: Matthew, 12:46-50 /
Acts,  21:7-15  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  vi [369-502] 43d-45a 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon [184-247] 54a-c 5 Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[373430] 228b-d / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d
5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a-599a,c esp
[706-780] 592b-593b
6  Herodotus:  History, bk vi, 201d-202c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk v, 506b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11211140] 58d-59a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; bk II, CH II 150a-151b; bk
iii, ch 2 177c-178d; ch 24 203c-210a

[428b]
370  THE  GREAT IDEAS 8 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 2 274a; bk
VII, SECT 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect 32 287d-288a; sect 39 288c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk iv 167a-186b 14 Plutarch: Poplicola, 77d-79c / Fabius, 152b-d
/  Coriolanus,  189d-191c  /  Timoleon,  196b-198b  / Agis, 654c-655a 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk ix, ch 4, 287d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q 61, A 5, REP 3 58b-59d; part ii-ii, qq 25-26 501a-520d; q
31,  aa  2-3 537c-539c; q 32, A 5-Q 33' A 8 544a-558d; q 44 592d-598c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell, v 7a-8b; purgatory, X [70-93] 68a-b; xxx-
xxxi 99b-102b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv 88b120a esp stanza
76-79  98b-99a, stanza 219 117a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, conclusion, 279a-c
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk iii, 197b-198b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  83a-86c;  467b-470a; 486b-488b 26 Shakespeare: Two Gentlemen of
Verona  229a-253a,c  esp act ii, sc iv [192-214] 238b, sc VI 239a-c, act
hi,  sc  i  [1-50]  240b-d  /  Romeo  and  Juliet, act hi, sc v [66-205]
307d309b  /  Richard  11, act v, sc ii [56]-sc in [146] 347a-349c / Much
Ado  About  Nothing,  act II, sc I [182-189] 509a-b / Julius Caesar, act
III, sc II [11-44] 583d-584a 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act i, sc vii
[1-28]
289b-c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a-350d  esp  ACT  I,  sc IV [1-33]
315d-316b  /  Coriolanus,  ACT  V,  SC  III  387a-389b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  120b-137d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 24b 32
Milton: Samsoji Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 104 193a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii,
sect 4-6 25d-26c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 77c-78b; 79d-80b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 261c-d; 262a-d; 264a; 284d-285a / Practical
Reason,  306a-b;  325a-327d;  342a-b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of
Ethics,  367a-b  /  Intro. Metaphysic ofMorals, 385c-386b 43 Federalist:
number  22,  83c-d;  number 72, 217a-b; number 73, 218d-219a; number 75,
223c-d  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 458d-459b 44 B0SWEI.L: Johnson, 222b-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part iii, par 149 56b 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i
[3025-3072]
73b74b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 311a-314b; 318d319a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  ii,  77c-81b;  89b-d; bk hi, 122b-c; bk vii, 275a-276b;
301b-302b; bk ix, 365d-366a; bk xi, 520a521b; epilogue i, 669b-c

[429a]
b  9  to 10 Chapter 19: DUTY 371 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karaniazoi', bk
iv,  95b-100c  53  ].KM  Es:  Psychology,  807a  808a  54 Freud: General
Introductioti,  452c-d:  573c;  624a-625b / War and Death, 758c-759d csp
759c-d;  764c-765a  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b-802a,c csp
781a-d,  783c-  789b,  791b-d,  793d-794a, 800c-801b / Neiu Introductory
Lectures,  853a9. The duties of command and obedience in family life Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:18-25;  9:18-29 / Exodus, 20:12; 21:1-21,26-27 /
Leviticus,  19:3  /  Deuteronomy,  5:16;  15:12-18;  21:15-23; 22:13-30;
24:1-4,14-15;  25:5-10;  27:16,20,2223  /  Ruth I Proverbs, 20:20; 30:17
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-18;  4:30; 7:19-28; 30:1-13; 33:24-31 —
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-20;  4:35; 7:21-30; 30:1-13; 33:25-33 New
Testament: Matthew, 15:3-6 / // Corinthians, 12:14 / Ephesians, 5:22-25;
6:1-9 / Colossians, 3:18-4:1 / / Timothy, 5:8 / Titus, 2:9-11 / Philemon
/  I  Peter,  3:1-7  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk i-ii 183a-192d 5 Sophocles:
Oedipus at Colonus
[421-460]
118a-b / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[631-680]
136c-137a   /   Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  esp  [11571258]  180a-181a,c  5
Aristophanes: Clouds [791-885] 498b-499b;
[1321-1451] 504c-506b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  56c;  bk hi, 104c105a; BK viii, 281c 7
Plato: Latvs, bk iv, 683b-c; bk xi, 779b781c / Seventh Letter, 803d-804a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 9
[1159^251160^9]
411d-412b; ch 10
[ii6o^23]-ch
ii
[1161^29]
413a-c  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c  14 Plutarch: Agis,
654c-655a  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 3-8 9blOd; BK XIII, par
47,  123d/  City  of  God, bk XIX, CH 14-16, 520c-522a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, A 4 318b-321a 22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of
Laiv  [4701-4707]  239a  / Wife of Bath's Prologue [5583-6410] 256a-269b
esp [5893-5914] 261a-b, [6385-6410] 269a-b / Tale of Wife of Bath
[6619-6627]
273a-b / Cler}(s Tale 296a-318a esp
[90539088] 317a-318a / Merchant's Tale 319a-338a
esp  [9249-9266]  321a / Franklin's Tale [11,041iio] 351b-352b / Tale of
Melibeus,  par  13-16  404b-407b  /  Parson's Tale, par 79-80, 541a-b 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 109c-110b; 121a; 155b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  219b-222b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 184a-191c;
410a-422b; 427d-430a 26 Shakespeare: Comedy of Errors, act ii, sc

[429b]
d I
[7-43] 152a-c
/  Tafning  of  the  Shretv  199a228a,c  esp  act  v,  sc  ii  [136-179]
227d-228a,c / Romeo and Juliet, act hi, sc v
[127-197)
308c-309b  /  Midsummer-Night's  Dream, Acrr I, sc i [1-121] 352a-353c /
Merchant of Venice, ACT I, sc II 408b-409c / 1st Henry IV, act ii, sc HI
443b-444b  27  Shakespeare:  Othello, act i, sc hi [175-189] 210d-211a /
King  Lear  244a-283a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 75c / Netv
Atlantis, 207b-209d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [288-:}oi] 158b159a;
[440-502]
162a-163a;
[634-638]
166a; bk viii [452-594] 242a-245a; bk x
[144-156]
277b;  [867-936]  293h-294h  /  Samson  Agonis-  ^<?5[87i-902]358b-359a;
[997-1060]  361b-362b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 52-cH VII,
sect  86  36a-44a;  ch  xv,  sect 169-170 64c-65a; sect 173-174 65c-d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 6b-c; 21a-22d;
100b102a;   105a-107b;  lOSc-llOc;  120c-121a,c;  124a-125c;  126d-127b;
136b-c;   283c-d;   312c313a;   321b-324b;   340c-341d;   359b-362c   38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk v, 22d-23a; BK XXIII, 187b,d-189d; bk
xxvi,  216a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-b; 364d-365b / Political
Economy, 367a-368c / Social Contract, BK I, 387d-388a 41 Gibson: Decline
and  Fall,  82b-84a;  86b42  Kant: Science of Right, 404d; 419a-422d esp
419b-c,   420a-d;  445c-446a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  317c-318a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 174 61b; additions, hi 134d-135a /
Philosophy  of  History, part i, 211c-213a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  249b-d;  267c-d; bk vi-vii, 271c-276b; bk vii, 291a292b; 301b-302d;
bk  viii,  305b-307a  54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 244a-c / New
Introductory  Lectures, 876c 10. Political obligation: cares, functions,
loyalties  Old  Testament:  Exodus, 20:13-17 / Leviticus, 19:9-20,32-37;
25:14-55  /  Numbers, 35 / Deuteronomy, 5:17-21; 15; 17:8-20; 19; 22:14;
23:15-25;   24:10-13;  27:17-19,24-25  /  Proverbs,  3:27-28;  16:10-15;
28:15-18;  29:2,4,12,  14  /  Jeremiah,  29:7—  (Z))  Jeremias,  29:7  /
Zechariah,  8:16-17—  (Z))  Zacharias,  8:16-17  New Testament: Matthew,
5:21-24; 22:17-21 / Marl{, 12:14-17 / Lul{e, 20:20-26 / Romans, 13:1-7 /
Titus,  3:1  /  I Peter, 2:13-19 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix [1-172] 57a-58d 5
Aeschylus:  Seven  Against Thebes [1-77] 27a28a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King [1-77] 99a-d / Antigone
[631-680]
136c-137a / Phtloctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[297-331]
261a-b / Iphigenia at Aulis [1368-1401] 437c-d

[430a]
372   Political   obligation:   cares,  functions,  loyal-  (10.  ties.)
Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii, 223c-d; 239a-c Thucydides : Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  355b-c; 359b-360c; 370d; 378c-d; bk ii, 395d-399a; 402b-c;
403b-c;  406a-407b;  bk hi, 430c; 432c-d; bk vi, 513a; bk vii, 555d-556a
Plato:  Apology,  206a-d  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  6  6  esp 216d-219a,c /
Republic,  bk  iv,  342a'd;  344a;  bk  vii, 390b-391b; 401a-b / Seventh
Letter, 802b-804b; 814b-c Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 17 [1391^20-26]
638c-d  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c-d;  bk  III, CH 22
195a-201a  Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 4 260b261a; bk ix, sect 42
295c'296a,c Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi
[90-98] 149b; bk
iv
[189-278] 172a-174b; bk
vi
[845-853] 233b234a
Plutarch:  Lycurgtis 32a-48d esp 45a-c, 48a-b / Ntima Pompilius, 51c-52b
/  Sohn,  71d  /  Marcus  Cato  276b,d-290d  esp  282a / Crassus-Nicias,
455d-456d   /  Agesilaus,  480b,d481a;  486d-487b  /  Cato  the  Younger
620a648a,c  esp 626d-627b, 632b-c / Cleomenes, 659d-660a / Galba, 859a-b
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  32b-d  /  Histories, BK I, 211c-212b; bk ii,
234b-235a  Augustine:  Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b/ City of God, bk
xix,  ch 6 514b-515a Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-h, q 13, A 5, REP
3  675c-676b  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 61, A 5, rep 3
58b-59d;  q  96,  aa 4-6 233a235d; Q 105, AA 1-3 307d-318b Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, vi
[76151] 61c-62c
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix-x  14c-16d passim; CH xiv 21b-22a; ch xvh,
24a-b;  ch  XVIII,  25a-b;  ch  xxi,  32d-33a HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
86c-96b;   part  H,  101a-104d;  110b-117b;  132b-136b;  138c-d  143c-d;
152d-160a; 164a,c; part hi, 165a 199b-204a; 245c-246a,c; part iv, 270c-d
273b-c;  conclusion  279a-283a,c  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
hi,  127b,d-130a;  131b,d-133b Montaigne: Essays, 7a-d; 24c-25c; 48a-51a
passim;   67c-d;   303a-c;   381a-388c  esp  383c-d,  386b-d;  486b-488b
Shakespeare: Richard II, act v, sc ii
[71]-
sc III
[146] 347a-349c /
1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc II [218-240] 437c-d; act hi, sc ii [93-161]
453d-454c  /  2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v 494b496d; act v, sc ii [35-145]
498b-499b; sc v
[60-75] ^^2a / Henry V, act iv, sc
i [123-301] 552d-554c Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act ii, sc iii 366a-369a:
act  v,  sc  iii  [93-209]  388a-389b  / Henry VHL act i, sc 11 [18-102]
552d-553d 27

[430b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  10  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii, 331a336a;
340b-343a;   ^345a-348c;   352b-356d;  360d-364a;  366d-369b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Lear?7ing, la-2c; 24b; 74b-75a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  prop  51, schol 439d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii )6] 120b121a /
Samson Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a  35  Locke:  Toleration, 3a: 16c-18c / Civil Government, CH II,
SECT  4-6  25d-26c; ch vi, sect 57-63 36d-38c; ch vih, sect 96-98 47a-c;
sect  1  13-122  51b-53c;  ch ix, sect 128131 54b-d; ch xi, sect 134-135
55b-56b;  ch  XH,  sect  143  58c-d; ch xih-xix 59b-81d passim 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part ii, 75b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 12d13c; BK
XI,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  93c-95b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 356b'359a;
366c-d  /  Political  Economy  367a-385a,c  passim, esp 369c, 370b-373b,
377b-c / Social Contract, BK I, 388c-391b; 392b-393c; bk h, 396d398b; BK
HI,  414d;  419a; 421c-423a; bk iv, 427b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  303b304c  40  Gibbon:  Decliiie  and Fall, 130b-d; 242c-246c passim;
288b-289a;  292b-d;  338d-339c; 342a-c; 577c-d; 630d 41 Gibbon: Decli?ie
and  Fall,  102d-103a;  504c505a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 433a-b;
438d-439a;  457a-458a,c  43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b passim 43
Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d  passim 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
lla-20d  passim  43 Federalist: number 40, 130c-132a; number 44, 147a-b;
number  62,  190a-b;  number  65  198a-200c passim; number 70, 212c213c;
NUMBER  75,  223c-d;  number 76, 225d226b; number 85, 256d-257a 43 Mill:
Liberty,   272b-c:  290d-291a;  302d-303a;  317c-319d  /  Representative
Government, 348c; 350a; 355b-362c; 392b-393c; 401a-406a; 410a-d; 436b-c;
439b-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  i45b;  247c-d;  355b-d; 379b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 290-296 97d-99b; par 299 99c-100b: par
309311 103b-104a; par 324 107a-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 171b-c;
part i, 211b-214d; part iv, 342c-d; 365b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,252-259]
249b250a;  [10,455-500]  254b-255b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk ii,
89b-d;  bk  v,  206d-207a; 232a-234a esp 233b-234a; bk ix, 365d-366a; bk
xi.  475b  476c;  epilogue  i,  668a-669c; 670d-671ci 54 Freud: War an^l
Death, 757b-c

[431a]
11  Chapter  19:  DUTY  373  1  1.  Duty  to  God: piety and worship Old
Testament:  Genesis,  4:2-5; 8:18-22; 12:7-8; 13:1-4; 22:1-19 esp 22:18;
28:18-22  /  Exodus,  12-13: 35-40 / Letiticus passim, csp 1-7, 16, 23 /
Numbers,  9:1-14;  19 / Deuteronomy, 6; 8; 10-12; i\.i!.\-i-i^ I Joshua,
22:1-6;  24:14-28—  (D)  ]osue,  22:1-6;  24:14-28 / Judges, 11:2840 / /
Samuel, 15:10-35— (D) / Kings, 15:1035 / U Kings, 12:1-16— (D) IV Kings,
12:1-16  /  /  Chronicles,  16:29—  (D)  /  Vuralipomenon,  16:29  /  //
Chronicles,  1-7;  29-31 — (D) // Paralipomenon, 1-7; 29-31 / Ezra—{D) I
Esdras  / Nehemiah— {D) II Esdras / Psalms passim / Ecclesiastes, 5:2-7;
12:13—  (D)  ^^' clesiastes, 5:1-6; 12:13 / Isaiah, 1:11-20— (D) Isaias,
1:11-20  /  Daniel,  9  / Micah, 6:8— (D) Micheas, 6:8 Apocrypha: Tobit,
4:5-11,19; 12:8-10— (D) OT, Tobias, 4:6-12,20; 12:8-10 / Judith, 4; 8-9—
(D)  OT,  Judith,  4;  8-9  /  Ecclesiasticus, 18:2224; 35:4-12— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  18:2224; 35:6-15 / Baruch, i; 4:1-3— (D) OT, Baruch, i;
4:1-3  /  Bel  and  Dragon, 2-28— (D) OT, Daniel, 14:1-27 / / Maccabees,
4:38-61—  (D)  OT,  I Machabees, 4:38-61 New Testament: Matthew, 4:1-11;
5:33-36;  6:1-8,16-18;  7:21;  18:23-35; 22:21,34-40 / MarJ{, 12:28-34 /
Luf{e,  2:21-24; 4:1-13; 9:2326,57-62; 10:25-42; 17:7-10; 18:1-14; 20:25
/  Acts,  5:17-32; 20:22-24 / Romans, 12-13 / Ephesians, 4 esp 4:17-32 /
Colossians, 3 / / Timothy, 2:1-8 / // Timothy / Ja?7ies, 5:1318 / I John
esp 2:3-11, 2:15, 3:23, 4:7-5:5/ II John 4 Ho.mlr: Iliad, bk i [206-222]
5b;  bk  ix  [485514]  62a-b;  bk xxiv [424-431] 175d / Odyssey, BK XIII
[125-184] 256b-257a 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c esp
[600-709]
8d-10b / Agamemnon
[369-398]
56a-b / Ewnenides [490-565] 86b-87a 5 SopiiocLr.s: Oedipus the King
[863-910]
107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus [461-509] 118b-d / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[441-470]
134d135a,
[1347-1353]
142d / Ajax
[748-779]
149c-d;
[1316-1421]
154b-155a,c / Electra
[1058-1097]
164d-165a / Philoctetcs
[14401444] 195a,c
5 Euripides: Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp [1-41] 258a'b,
[513-563] 262d-263b
/ Electra
[167212] 328c-d / Bacchantes 3^0a-3S2a,c / Hecuba
[799-805] 359d
5 Aristophanes: Birds 542a-563d csp
[11701266] 557b-558b
6  Herodotus:  History,  rk  v,  171d-172a;  bk  vi, 201d-202c; bk viii,
282b-c; bk ix, 308a-c 7 Plato: Euthyphro 191a-199a,c / Apology, 206b-d /
Timaeus,  447a  /  Laivs,  bk iv, 682d683b; bk x, 769c-771b 8 Aristotle:
Topics,  bk  1, ch ii [105^2-6] 148c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 9
[i329'*26-34] 533d

[431b]
12 Ltjcrktius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[56-79)
81a  b  12  Lpictetus:  Discourses,  ijk  i,  ch  16  121d  122d; ch 27,
132c-133a;  bk  ii,  ch  16, 158b-d; bk HI, CH 24 203c 210a; bk iv, ch 3
224b  d;  cii  12  242d  244a  12  At kklius: Meditations, bk i, sect 17
255d256d;  bk ii, sect 13 258c; bk v, sect 7 269d; bk IX, SECT I 291a-c;
sect  40  295b  13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk v [42-103] 188a-190a 14 Plutarch:
Aeinilius  Paulus,  214b-d  15  Tacitus:  Histories, bk iv, 282d-283b 16
Kepler:  Harmonies  ofthe  World, 1011a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i,
par 4 2a; bk HI, par 15 17a-b / City of God, bk vii, ch 27 31 259c 262a;
bk  x,  ch 1-7 298b,d-303a; CH 16 308b-309c; ch 19 310d-311b; bk xix, CH
14-16,  520c-522a;  ch 19 523b-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 10 627b;
ch  22-30  629b633b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 63, A I, ans
325c-326c;  part  i-ii, q 19, a 5, rep 1-2 705d-707a; a 6, ans and rep 2
707a-708a;  Q  21,  A  4 719d-720a,c 20 Aquinas: Sumtna Theologica, part
i-ii, q 91, AA 4-5 210c-212c; q 96, a 4 233a-d; qq 98108 239b-337d; part
ii-ii,  q  4, a 7, rep 3 407d-409a; q 16 454c-456d; q 22 480d-482c; q 44
592d-598c;  qq  183-189  625a-700d;  part  HI,  Q 25 839c-845a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xiii
[103-129] 73a-b; xvii [82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c;
xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, hi
[i]-v
[87]
109b-113a passim; vii
[25-33]
115c;
[64-102]
115d-116a;   xxvi   [115-117]   147a   22  Chaucer:  Second  Nim's  Tale
[15,829-16,021]  468a-471b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80c; part ii,
137b-138b;  part  ii-iii,  159d-167b;  part  hi,  177c-180d;  198a-207b;
240a-246a,c;  part iv, 261d-262a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 152b-156d; 233a-b
26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc ii
[1-41]
322d-323a 27 Shakespeare: Hetiry VIII, act hi, sc ii
[4^5-457] 573c-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a; lOOd'lOla 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  69b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop 41 462d-463b 32
Milton: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Paradise Lost 93a-333a csp bk i [242-283]
98b'99b, bk iv
[411-439] 161b-162a,
[720-739] 168a-b, bk v
[136-210] 178a-179b, [506-543] 186a-187a, bk
VII
[449-518]
227a-228b, bk viii
[311-333]
239a-b, [630-643] 246a, bk ix [647-654] 261b, BK XI
[133-161]
302a'b, BK XII
[386-410]
327b-328a / Sajnson Agonistes
[1334-1409]
368b-370a  / Areopagitica, 402a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 78b-80b
/ Pensees, 476 256b-257a; 482 258a; 489,491 259a; 539 265b

[432a]
d (11. Duty to God: piety and worship^ 35 Locke: Toleration, 2a-b;3b-4a;
lOd-lla; 15d16a; 16c-17b / Civil Government, ch ii, sect 6 26b-c; ch vi,
sect  56  36d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 255a'268a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  187d-188a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 435a-439c passim
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 81d-82b; 180c182c esp 181b-c; 184d-185d;
191a-194a  passim; 226a-b; 291d-292d; 350b-d; 533b-d; 593b,d599a passim,
esp  593b,  41 Gibbon: Declifie and Fall, 226c-227b; 232c233c; 259b-260a
CWSS-KEFEKENCES  ure,  see  Happiness  3; Pleasure and Pain 6-6a, 8b. I.
Epictetus.   The   Manual  Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning
Government  and  Society,  ch 13 Hume. A Treatise ofHuman Nature, bk hi,
part  ii,  sect  vii-x  Fielding.  Amelia  A. Smith. The Theory of Moral
Sentiments,  part  hi  Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics,  pp 11-47, 1^6-253 .
Religion  Within  the  Limits  of  Reason  Alone  Dostoevsky.  Crime and
Punishment  IL  Cicero.  De Finibus {On the Suprejne Good) . De Officiis
(On Duties)

[432b]
374  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 11 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 325a-327d; 345c-d /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383b,d-384a,c  /  Judgement, 502d-503a;
504b-505a;  509a-c; 593a-d; 611a-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 296b'd;310d-311a 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  84b-c; 262b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
225b  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 30a-36b; 39a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  i, 50b-c; bk hi, 122b-c; bk v, 218b-220a; bk vi, 271c-d; 273c274a,c;
bk xi, 476c-480a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv, 83c84a; bk v,
127b-137c;  bk  vi,  164a-165a;  167b170b  For: Other discussions of the
issue  between  the  ethics  of  duty  and  the  ethics  of happiness or
pleasMatters  relevant  to  this issue, see Desire 2b, 3a; Good and Evil
3a-3b(2); Justice le-if, 4; Law 3a(i), 4-4a, 4C-4d; Temperance 3; Virtue
and Vice id, 6a; Will 8b(2), 8c-8d. Other treatments of conscience, both
psychological   and  ethical,  see  Honor  2a;  Punishment  5c;  Sin  5;
Temperance 3. The consideration of duty in relation to law, justice, and
rights,  see  God 3d; Justice le, 3, lib; Law 2, 4a, 4c-4d, 6a; Religion
2;  Will  8d.  The  conflict between duty and desire or love, see Desire
6a—6b;  Love  3c. The treatment of specific duties, domestic, political,
and religious, ^<f<f Citizen 4; Family 6d; God 3d; Justice iib; Religion
2;  State  8a;  Truth 8e. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not
included  in  Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea
and  topics  with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into
two  groups: L Works by authors represented in this collection. IL Works
by  authors not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas.  Seneca.  Moral  Essays Maimonides. Eight Chapters on
Ethics  Boccaccio.  Patient  Griselda  Beaumont and Fletcher. The Maid's
Tragedy  Sanderson.  De  Obligatione Conscientiae {On the Obligations of
Conscience)  Corneille.  Le  Cid . Horace . Polyeucte J. Taylor. Of Holy
Living  .  Ductor  Dubitantium Racine. Andromaque Baxter. Chaptersfrom A
Christian  Directory  Pufendorf, De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem
Naturalem {Of the Duties of Man and of the Citizen Accordi?ig to Natural
Law)

[433a]
J.  Butler.  Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature, in, X, XIII T. Reid.
Essays  on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, III, PART III, CH 5-8 D.
Stewart.  Outlines of Moral Philosophy, i'art ii, CH 2 J. G. Fichte. The
Vocation  of  Man,  part  hi Wordsworth. Ode to Duty Bentham. Deontology
Whewell.  The  Elements  ofMorality,  bk  ii, ch 5-12; BK V, CH 2, 10-17
Mazzini.  The  Duties  of  Man  Maurice. The Conscience P. A. Janet. The
Theory of Morals, bk ii, ch 2 H. SiDGwicK. The Methods of Ethics, bk ii,
ch  5;  BK  III,  CH  2  Bradley. Ethical Studies, iv-v T. H. Green. The
Principles  of  Political  Obligation,  (a) Guyau. Esquisse d'une morale
sans obligation ni sanction

[433b]
Chapter  19:  DUTY 375 Nietzsche. The Genealogy of Morals, 11 Bren lANo.
The  Origin  ofthe  Knowledge  ofRight and Wrong, par i-i 3 Spencer. The
Principles  of  Ethics,  vol  h, part iv, ch 9-29; part v-vi Dewey. "The
Idea  of  Obligation,"  in Outlines of a Critical Theory of Ethics . The
Study of Ethics, ch 7-8 BosANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 16 Croce. The
Philosophy of the Practical, part i, sect ii; part ii, sect i (iv); sect
ii  (i);  part hi (iv) RoYCE. The Philosophy of Loyalty Moore. Principia
Ethica,  ch  4 . Ethics, CH 4-5 Prichard. Duty and Interest N. Hartmann.
Ethics,  vol  i,  Moral  Phenomena,  sect  4-6  Kirk. Conscience and Its
Problems  Ross.  The  Right and the Good, i-ii, vii Bergson, Two Sources
ofMorality and Religion, ch i Muirhead. Rule and End in Morals

[434a]
INTRODUCTION  THE great books assembled in this set are offered as means
to  a  liberal  or  general  education.  The authors of these books were
educated  men;  more  than that, they typified the ideal of education in
their various epochs. As their writings reveal, their minds were largely
formed,  or  at  least  deeply  impressed, by reading the works of their
predecessors.  Many  of  them  were  related  as  teacher  and  student,
sometimes  through  personal contact, sometimes only through the written
word.  Many  of  them  were  related  as divergent disciples of the same
master,  yet  they  often differed with him as well as with one another.
There  is  scarcely  one  among them—except Homer—who was not acquainted
with  the  minds  of the others who came before him and, more often than
not,  profoundly  conversant  with  their  thought.  Yet  not one of the
writings  in  this  set  is specifically a treatise on education, except
Montaigne's  essay  Of  the Education of Children. Some of these authors
speak more or less fully of their own education, as does Marcus Aurelius
in  the  opening  book of his Meditations, Augustine in his Confessions,
Descartes   in  his  Discourse,  and  Boswell.  Others  refer  to  their
educational  experience  in fictional guise, as does Aristophanes in the
argument  in  the  Clouds  between  the  Just  and Unjust Discourses; or
Rabelais when he tells of Gargantua's schooling in Gargantua's letter to
Pantagruel.  Sometimes  they  report  the  way  in  which other men were
trained  to  greatness,  as  does  Plutarch; or, like Gibbon, Hegel, and
Mill, they describe and comment on the historic systems of education. In
still  other  instances  the  great  books  contain sections or chapters
devoted  to  the  ends and means of education, the order of studies, the
nature of learning and teaching, the training of statesmen and citizens;
as for example,

[434b]
Chapter   xo:   EDUCATION   Plato's   Republic,   Aristotle's  Politics,
Augustine's  Christian  Doctrine,  Bacon's Advancement of Learning, Adam
Smith's   Wealth   of  Nations,  Hegel's  Philosophy  ofRight,  and  the
psychological  writings  of James and Freud. But in no case is education
the principal theme of these books, as it is for most of the works cited
in  the  Hst of Additional Readings, among which will be found treatises
on  education by authors in this set. Education is not itself so much an
idea  or  a subject matter as it is a theme to which the great ideas and
the  basic  subject  matters  are  relevant.  It is one of the perennial
practical  problems  which  men  cannot  discuss without engaging in the
deepest  speculative  considerations.  It  is  a  problem  which carries
discussion into and across a great many subject matters the liberal arts
of  grammar, rhetoric, and logic; psychology, medicine, metaphysics, and
theology;,  ethics, politics, and economics. It is a problem which draws
into  focus  many  of  the  great  ideas—virtue and truth, knowledge and
opinion,  art  and  science;  desire,  will, sense, memory, mind, habit;
change and progress; family and state; man, nature, and God. This can be
verified  by noting the diverse contexts in which education is discussed
in the great books. In each connection we shall find some of the special
questions  which  together make up the complex problem of education. For
example,  the  nature  of teaching and learning is examined in the wider
context  of psychological considerations concerning man's abilities, the
way  in which knowledge is acquired, and how it is communicated by means
of language or other symbols. Different conceptions of the nature of man
and  of  the relation of his several capacities surround the question of
the ends of education. In this context 376

[435a]
questions  also arise concerning the parts of education— the training of
man's  body,  the  formation  of  his  character, the cultivation of his
mind—and  how  these are related to one another. The whole theory of the
virtues  and  of  habit  formation  is  involved in the question whether
virtue  can  be  tauglu  or  must  be acquired in some other way, and in
related questions about the influence of the family and the state on the
growth  of character. These questions are also asked in terms ot general
political theory. Different views of the state are involved in questions
about  the  division  of  responsibility  for  education  among  various
agencies.  Questions  about  the  purpose of education, and what sort of
education  shall  be  given  to  the  diverse  classes in the state, are
differently   raised   and   differently  answered  in  the  context  of
discussions  of  different forms of government. Though they are far from
exhaustive, these examples should nevertheless suffice to make the point
that  there can be no philosophy of education apart from philosophy as a
whole.  It may therefore not be a disadvantage to find the discussion of
education  in  the  great books almost always imbedded in the context of
some  more  general  theory  or problem. One opinion from which there is
hardly  a  dissenting  voice in the great books is that education should
aim  to  make  men  good as men and as citizens. "If you ask what is the
good  of  education,"  Plato  writes, "the answer is easy that education
makes  good  men, and that good men act nobly, and conquer their enemies
in battle, because they are good." Men should enter upon learning. Bacon
declares,  in  order "to give a true account of their gift of reason, to
the  benefit  and use of men"; while William lames stresses the need for
"a  perfectly-rounded  development."  Thus  it would seem to be a common
opinion   in  all  ages  that  education  should  seek  to  develop  the
characteristic  excellences  of  which  men  are  capable  and  that its
ultimate  ends  are  human  happiness and the welfare of society. Within
this  area  of general agreement there are, of course, differences which
result  from the different views that are taken of man's relation to the
state or to God. If the good of the state

[435b]
Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 377 takes precedence over individual ha|)pincss,
then  education  must be directed to training men for the role they play
as  parts  of  a  larger  organism. Education then serves the purpose of
preserving  the  state.  Of  all  things,  Aristotle  says,  "that which
contributes most to the permanence of constitutions is the adaptation of
education to the form of government. . . . The best laws," he continues,
"though  sanctioned  by  every citizen of the state, will be of no avail
unless the young are trained by habit and education in the spirit of the
constitution." Rousseau seems to take a similar view when he calls for a
system  of  public  education  run by the state. Its object is to assure
that  the  citizens  are "early accustomed to regard their individuality
only  in  its  relation to the body of the state, and to be aware, so to
speak,  of  their  own existence merely as a part of that of the state."
Taught in this way, the citizens, Rousseau flaims, "might at length come
to  identify  themselves in some degree with this greater whole, to feel
themselves  members of their country, and to love it with that exquisite
feeling  which  no  isolated  person has save for himself." If happiness
cannot be fully achieved on earth, then whatever temporal ends education
serves  must  themselves  be ordered to eternal salvation, and the whole
process  of  human  development  must be a direction of the soul to God.
"What  did  it  profit me," Augustine asks in his Confessions, "that all
the  books  I  could  procure of the so-called liberal arts, I, the vile
slave  of  vile  affections, read by myself and understood ? . . . For I
had  my  back to the light, and my face to the things enUghtened; whence
my  face,  with which I discerned the things enlightened, was not itself
enlightened.  Whatever  was  written,  either  on  rhetoric,  or  logic,
geometry, music and arithmetic, by myself without much difficulty or any
instructor,  I  understood.  Thou  knowest,  O Lord my God; because both
quickness of understanding and acuteness in discerning, is Thy gift; yet
did  I  not  thence  sacrifice  to Thee." Wherefore, Augustine concludes
concerning  this  stage of his learning, "it served not to my use but to
my  perdition." But Augustine does not therefore conclude that, under no
circumstances, can liberal education be put to good use. In his

[436a]
378  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  treatise  On Christian Doctrine, he considers in
detail  how  the Uberal arts, which serve so well in the study of Sacred
Scripture,  may also serve to bring the soul to God. Such differences do
not,  however,  annul  one consequence of the general agreement, namely,
the conception that education is concerned with the vocation of man, and
prepares  him in thought and action for his purpose and station in life.
In  these  terms  Adam  Smith argues for a minimum general education. He
claims  that "a man without the proper use of the intellectual faculties
of  a  man,  is,  if possible, more contemptible than even a coward, and
seems to be mutilated and deformed in a still more essential part of the
character  of  human  nature." He explicitly points out that this is the
condition  of  "the  great  body of the people," who, by the division of
labor,   are  confined  in  their  employment  "to  a  few  very  simple
operations,"  in  which  the  worker  "has  no  occasion  to  exert  his
understanding,  or  to  exercise his invention in finding out expedients
for  removing  difficulties which never occur." The result, according to
Smith,  is  that "the torpor of his mind renders him, not only incapable
of  relishing  or  bearing  a  part in any rational conversation, but of
conceiving any generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of
forming any just judgment concerning many even of the ordinary duties of
private life." When the vocation of man is thus understood, a general or
liberal  education  is  vocational  in that it prepares each man for the
common  conditions and callings of human life. In this sense specialized
training,  which  by  implication  at  least  seems  to be the object of
Smith's  criticism,  is  not  vocational.  It  fits  a man only for some
specialized  function,  according  to  which  he  or his social class is
differentiated  from  some  other  man  or  class.  In our day, the word
"vocational" is used in the opposite sense to mean specialized training,
whether  it  is  preparation  for the least skilled of trades or for the
most  learned  of  professions.  Since  all  men  are  not called to the
practice  of  law or medicine—any more than all are called to productive
work in the various arts and crafts, or the tasks of commerce and

[436b]
industry— the training they may need to perform these functions does not
fully  develop  their  common  humanity. It is not adequate to make them
good as men, as citizens, or as children of God. The traditional meaning
of  the  word  "liberal"  as  applied to education entails a distinction
between  free  men  and  slaves.  Slaves, like domesticated animals, are
trained  to perform special functions. They are not treated as ends, but
as  means,  and so they are not educated for their own good, but for the
use to which they are put. This is true not only of slaves in the strict
sense  of  household chattel; it is also true of all the servile classes
in  any  society  which  divides its human beings into those who work in
order  to  live  and  those  who  live  off  the  work of others and who
therefore  have  the  leisure  in  which  to  strive  to  live  well. In
accordance  with  these  distinctions,  Aristotle divides education into
"liberal"  and  "illiberal."  Certain  subjects are illiberal by nature,
namely,  "any  occupation, art, or science, which makes the body or soul
of the freeman less fit for the practice or exercise of virtue." In this
category  Aristotle  includes "those arts which tend to deform the body,
and  likewise  all  paid  employments,  for  they absorb and degrade the
mind."  It is not only the nature of the subject, but also the end which
education  serves,  that  determines whether its character is liberal or
illiberal.  Even  a liberal art becomes, in Aristotle's opinion, "menial
and  servile  .  .  . if done for the sake of others." A man's education
"will  not  appear iUiberal" only so long as "he does or learns anything
for  his  own  sake  or  for  the sake of his friends, or with a view to
excellence." In other words, to be liberal, education must serve the use
of  leisure  in  the pursuit of excellence. It must treat man as an end,
not  as a means to be used by other men or by the state. It follows that
any  society which abolishes the distinction of social classes and which
calls  all  men  to  freedom,  should  conceive education as essentially
liberal  and  for  all men. It should, furthermore, direct education, in
all  its  parts  and phases, to the end of each man's living well rather
than to the end of his earning a living for himself or others.

[437a]
In  the  classification  of the kinds of education, the word "Hberal" is
frequently  used in a more restricted sense to signify not all education
designed  for free men, but only the improvement of the mind through the
acquisition  of  knowledge and skill. In this sense liberal education is
set  apart  from  physical  education  which  concerns bodily health and
proficiency,  and  moral  education  which concerns excellence in action
rather  than  in  thought. These divisions are clearly made, perhaps for
the  first  time,  in  Plato's  Republic.  The education described there
begins  in the early years with music and gymnastic. Gymnastic "presides
over the growth and decay of the body." Music, which includes literature
as  well  as  the  arts  of  harmony  and rhythm, is said to educate its
students  "by the influence of habit, by harmony making them harmonious,
by  rhythm  rhythmical," and its function is to develop moral as well as
aesthetic  sensibilities.  The second part of Plato's curriculum, "which
leads  naturally  to  reflection"  and  draws  "the soul towards being,"
consists  in the mathematical arts and sciences of arithmetic, geometry,
music,  and  astronomy. The program is capped by the study of dialectic,
to  which  all the rest is but "a prelude"; for "when a person starts on
the  discovery  of the absolute by the light of reason only, and without
any  assistance  of  sense, and perseveres until by pure intelligence he
arrives at the perception of the absolute good, he at last finds himself
at the end of the intellectual world." Up to this point, the program can
be  taken  as  liberal education in the narrow sense of learning how and
what  to think. The fifteen years of experience in civic affairs and the
tasks  of  government, which Plato interposes at the age of thirty-five,
seem  to  function  as  another  phase  of  moral  training. This period
provides  "an  opportunity  of  trying  whether, when they are drawn all
manner  of  ways  by temptation, they will stand firm or flinch." To the
extent that physical training aims, beyond health, at the acquirement of
skill  in  a coordinated use of one's body, it can be annexed to liberal
rather  than  moral  education. Plato notes, for example, that gymnastic
should  not  be too sharply distinguished from music as "the training of
the body" from the "train-

[437b]
Chapter  20: EDUCATION 379 ing of the soul." Gymnastic as well as music,
he  claims,  has  "in view chiefly the improvement of the soul," <nul he
considers  the two as balancing antl tempering one another. Whether they
produce  competence  in gymnastic or athletic feats, or, like the manual
arts,  proficiency  in  productive  work,  all  bodily  skills, even the
simplest,  involve the senses and the mind as well as bones and muscles.
They  are  arts  no  less than music or logic. Apart from their utility,
they  represent a certain type of human excellence, which will be denied
only  by  those  who  can  see  no  difference  between the quality of a
racehorse  and  the  skill of his rider. Whether these skills as well as
other  useful  arts  are  part of liberal education in the broader sense
depends,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  end for which they are taught or
learned.  Even  the arts which are traditionally called liberal, such as
rhetoric  or  logic, can be degraded to servility if the sole motive for
becoming  skilled in them is wealth won by success in the law courts. In
the  two  traditional distinctions so far discussed, "liberal education"
seems  to  have  a  somewhat  different  meaning  when  it signifies the
opposite of servile training and when it signifies the opposite of moral
cultivation.  In  the  first  case,  the  distinction  is based upon the
purpose  of  the education; in the second, it refers to the faculties or
functions  being  cultivated.  When the second is stated in terms of the
distinction  between  the  intellectual  and  the moral virtues, liberal
{i.e.,  intellectual) education is conceived as aiming at good habits of
thinking  and  knowing,  and  moral education is thought of as aiming at
good  habits  of will, desire, or emotion, along with their consequences
in action. Although he does not use these terms, Montaigne seems to have
the  contrast  between  moral  and intellectual training in mind when he
criticizes  the  education  of  his  day  for  aiming "at nothing but to
furnish  our  heads  with  knowledge,  but  not  a  word of judgment and
virtue."  It is, to him, a "pedantic education," which not only fails to
achieve  the  highest  educational  purpose, but also results in a great
evil,  in  that "all knowledge is hurtful to him who has not the science
of goodness." A too sharp separation of the intellectual

[438a]
380  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and  the  moral  may  be questioned, or at least
qualified,  by  those who, like Socrates, tend to identify knowledge and
virtue.  Yet they seldom go to the opposite extreme of supposing that no
distinction  can  be made between the task of imparting knowledge to the
mind  and that of forming character. Socrates, for example, in the Meno,
recognizes  that  a man cannot be made temperate, courageous, or just in
the same way that he can be taught geometry. From another point of view,
the  notion  of  moral  training is questioned by those who, like Freud,
think  that  the patterns of human desire or emotion can be beneficially
changed apart from moral discipline. It is the object of psychoanalysis,
he  writes,  "to  strengthen the ego, to make it more independent of the
super-ego,  to  widen  its  field  of  vision,  and  so  to  extend  its
organization  that  it can take over new portions of the id." To do this
is   radically  to  alter  the  individual's  behavior-pattern.  "It  is
reclamation  work,"  Freud  says, "like the draining of the Zuyder Zee."
Emotional  education,  so conceived, is therapeutic—more like preventive
and  remedial  medicine  than  moral  training.  Religious  education is
usually  regarded as both intellectual and moral, even as the science of
theology  is  said  to  be  both  speculative  and practical. Citing the
admonition  of  St.  James,  "Be  ye  doers of the word, and not hearers
only,"  Aquinas  holds  that  religious  education is concerned with the
knowledge  not  only  of "divine things" but also of the "human acts" by
which  man  comes  to  God. Since man is infinitely removed from God, he
needs  for  this  purpose the grace ot God, which, according to Aquinas,
"is nothing short of a partaking of the divine nature." Both on the side
of  man's  knowledge  of  God and on the side of his love and worship of
God, religious education involves the operation of supernatural factors—
revelation,  grace,  sacraments. Hence God is Himself the primary source
of  religious  education. But as the dispenser of the sacraments whereby
"grace  is  instrumentally  caused,"  the  church, according to Aquinas,
functions  instrumentally  in  the  service  of  the divine teacher. The
conception  of  the  means  and ends of moral education will differ with
different ethi-

[438b]
cal  theories  of  the  good  man  and  the  good life, and according to
differing  enumerations  and  definitions of the virtues. It will differ
even  more  fundamentally  according  to whether the primary emphasis is
placed  on  pleasure  and  happiness  or duty. The parties to this basic
issue  in  moral  philosophy, which is discussed in the chapters on Duty
and  Happiness,  inevitably  propose  different  ways  of  forming  good
character—  by  strengthening  the  will  in  obedience  to  law,  or by
habituating  the  appetites  to  be  moderate  or  reasonable  in  their
inclinations.  On either theory, the basic problem of moral education is
whether  morality  can  be  taught  and  how. The Greeks formulated this
question  in  terms  of virtue, by asking whether such things as courage
and  temperance  are  at  all  teachable,  as  geometry and horsemanship
plainly are. The problem remains essentiallv the same if the question is
how  the  will  can be trained. Can it be trained by the same methods as
those which work in the improvement of the understanding ? The answer to
the  question,  whichever way it is formulated, depends on the view that
is  taken  of the relation between moral knowledge and moral conduct. Do
those  who understand the principles of ethics or who know the moral law
necessarily act in accordance with their knowledge ? Can a man know what
is  good  or  right to do in a particular case, and yet do the opposite?
St.  Paul seems to suggest this when he says, "For the good that I would
I  do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do." If something more
than  knowledge  or straight thinking is needed for good conduct, how is
it  acquired  and how can one man help another to acquire it ? Certainly
not  by learning and teaching in the ordinary sense which applies to the
arts  and  sciences.  Then  how—  by practice, by guidance or advice, by
example,  by  rewards and punishments; or if by none of these, then by a
gift  of nature or by the grace of God } These questions are necessarily
prior  to  any  discussion of the role of the family, the state, and the
church  in  the process of moral training. They also provide the general
background  for  the consideration of particular influences on character
formation  in men and children, such things as poetry and music, or laws
and cus-

[439a]
toms.  All of these related problems of moral education have a political
aspect,  which  appears  in  the  issue  concerning the state's right to
censor  or regulate the arts for morality's sake; in the question of the
primacy  of  the family or the slate in the moral guidance of the young;
in  the  distinction between the good man and the good citizen or ruler,
and the possible difference between the training appropriate for the one
and  for the other. The MAIN" PROBLEM of intcllcctual education seems to
be  the  curriculum  or  course  of  study.  The traditional attempts to
construct  an  ideal  curriculum  turn on such questions as what studies
shall  be  included,  what  shall  be their order, and how shall they be
taught  or learned. A variety of answers results from a variety of views
of  man's  faculties  or capacities, the nature of knowledge itself, the
classification  and order 9f the arts and sciences. Especially important
are  the  various  conceptions of the nature and function of the liberal
arts.  Subordinate  questions  concern  the place of the fine and useful
arts  in  liberal  education, and the role of experience and experiment—
both  in  contrast  to  and  in  cooperation  with the role of books and
teachers.  In  addition  to  the  problem  of  the  curriculum  and  its
materials,  the  theory  of intellectual education necessarily considers
methods of teaching and learning. Here the various proposals derive from
different views of the learning process—of the causes or factors at work
in  any  acquisition  of  skill  or  knowledge.  The contribution of the
teacher  cannot  be  understood  apart  from a psychological analysis of
learning,  for  the teacher is obviously only one among its many causes.
It  makes  the  greatest  difference to the whole enterprise of learning
whether  the teacher is regarded as the principal cause of understanding
on  the  part  of  the  student;  or whether the teacher is, as Socrates
describes himself, merely "a midwife" assisting the labor of the mind in
bringing  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  birth,  and  "thoroughly examining
whether the thought which the mind . . . brings forth is a false idol or
a  noble and true birth." This Socratic insight is later reformulated in
the comparison which Aquinas makes, in his

[439b]
Chapter 20: EDUCATION 381 tract Concerning the Teacher, between tiic art
oi  teaching  and  the  art  oi healing. Both are cooperative arts, arts
which  succeed  only  as  "ministers  of  nature  which is the principal
actor,"  and  not by acting, like the art of the cobbler or sculptor, to
produce  a result by shaping |ilastic but dead materials. The comparison
which  Hippocrates makes of instruction in medicine with "the culture of
the  productions of the earth" exhibits the same conception of teaching.
"Our  natural  disposition,"  he  writes, "is, as it were, the soil; the
tenets of our teacher are, as it were, the seed; instruction in youth is
like  the  planting  of the seed in the ground at the proper season; the
place where the instruction is communicated is like the food imparted to
vegetables  by the atmosphere; diligent study is like the cultivation of
the  fields;  and  it  is  time which imparts strength to all things and
brings  them  to  maThis  conception  of  teaching as a cooperative art,
analogous  to  medicine  or  to agriculture, underlies the principles of
pedagogy in the Great Didactic of Comenius. It gives significance to the
distinction  that  Aquinas  makes between learning by discovery, or from
experience,  and  learning  by  instruction, or from a teacher—even as a
person  is  healed  "in one way by the operation of nature alone, and in
another  by  nature  with  the  administration  of  In  addition  to the
technical  considerations  raised by the nature of the learning process,
the  discussion  of teaching deals with the moral or emotional aspect of
the  relation  between  teacher  and student. Without interest, learning
seldom  takes  place,  or  if it does, it cannot rise above the level of
rote  memory.  It is one thing to lay down a course of study; another to
motivate  the  student. Though he does not hesitate to prescribe what is
to  be learned by the student, Plato adds the caution that there must be
no  "notion  of  forcing  our  system of More than interest is required.
Teaching,  Augustine  declares, is the greatest act of charity. Learning
is  facilitated  by love. The courtesies between Dante and Virgil in the
Divine  Comedy  present  an eloquent picture of love between student and
teacher, master and dis-

[440a]
382  THE  GREAT IDEAS ciple. Not only love, but docility, is required on
the  part of the student; and respect for the student's mind on the part
of  the  teacher.  Intellectual  education may not be directly concerned
with  the  formation  of  character,  yet  the  moral virtues seem to be
factors  in  the  pursuit of truth and in the discipline of the learning
process.  We  have  already  noted  some  of  the  political problems of
education.   Of  these  probably  the  chief  question  is  whether  the
organization  and  institution  of education shall be private or public.
Any  answer  which assigns the control of education largely or wholly to
the  state  must  lead to a number of other determinations. Who shall be
educated, all or only some? Should the education of leaders be different
from  the education of others? If educational opportunity is to be equal
for all, must the same kind as well as the same quantity of education be
offered  to  all? And, in every case, to what end shall the state direct
the education of its members— to its own welfare and security, or to the
happiness  of men and the greater glory of God ? Should education always
serve  the  status  quo  by  preserving  extant customs and perpetuating
existing  forms  of  government;  or  can  and should it aim at a better
society  and  a  higher  culture  ? These are some of the questions with
which  statesmen  and  political philosophers have dealt, answering them
differently   according  to  the  institutions  of  their  time  and  in
accordance  with  one or another theory of the state and its government.
There  are  still other questions. Is freedom of expression, in teaching
and   discussion,   indispensable  to  the  pursuit  of  truth  and  the
dissemination  of knowledge ? To what extent shall the state control the
content  and  methods  of  education  or leave such determination to the
teaching  profession ? How shall pubHe education be supported? Should it
be  carried beyond childhood and youth to all the ages of adult hfe; and
if so, how should such education be organized outside of schools ? Mill,
for  example, holds it to be "almost a self-evident axiom that the State
should  require  and  compel the education, up to a certain standard, of
every human being who is born

[440b]
its  citizen." Yet he deprecates the idea of a "general state education"
as  a  "mere  contrivance  for  moulding  people  to  be exactly hke one
another."  Discussing  the  pro's  and con's of this issue, Mill touches
upon  most,  if  not all, of the questions just raised. He believes that
the  difficulties  could be avoided if the government would leave it "to
parents  to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content
itself  with  helping  to  pay  the school fees of the poorer classes of
children,  and defraying the entire school expenses of those who have no
one else to pay for them." Schools completely established and controlled
by the state, he maintains, "should only exist, if they exist at all, as
one  among  many  competing  experiments,  carried on for the purpose of
example  and  stimulus,  to  keep the others up to a certain standard of
excellence."   So  far  as  the  problem  of  adult  education  concerns
citizenship.  Mill's  answer, like Montesquieu's and Plato's before him,
is  that nothing can take the place of active participation in political
life.  Men  become  citizens by living and acting as citizens, under the
tutelage  of  good  laws and in an atmosphere of civic virtue. So far as
the problem of adult education concerns the continued growth of the mind
throughout  the  life  of  mature men and women, the answer is not to be
found  in  the  great books in the words of their authors. Yet the great
books  as a whole may constitute a solution to that problem. The authors
of  these books, from Homer to Freud, are the great original teachers in
the  tradition  of  our culture. They taught one another. They wrote for
adults,  not  children,  and in the main they wrote for the mass of men,
not  for  scholars  in  this  or that specialized field of learning. The
books  exhibit  these  teachers at work in the process of teaching. They
contain,  moreover,  expositions or exemplifications of the liberal arts
as  the  arts of teaching and learning in every field of subject matter.
To  make  these books and their authors work for us by working with them
is,  it  seems  to  the  editors  and publishers of this set of books, a
feasible and desirable program of adult education.

[441a]
OUTLINE  OF TOPICS 1. The ends of education 384 lb. The disadvantages of
being  educated  2.  The  kinds  of education: physical, moral, liberal,
professional,  religious  386  3.  The  training  of  the  body  and the
cultivation  of  bodily skills: gymnastics, manual work 4. The formation
of  a  good character, virtue, a right will ^c. The role of the state in
moral  education:  law,  custom,  public  opinion  4^.  The  effect upon
character  of  poetry, music, and other arts: the role of history and 5.
The  improvement  of  the  mind  by  teaching  and  learning 390 5^. The
profession  of  teaching:  the  relation  of teacher and student 5^. The
means  and  methods  of  teaching  5^. The emotional aspect of learning:
pleasure, desire, interest 6. The acquisition of techniques: preparation
for  the vocations, arts, and professions 394 7. Religious education ya.
God  as  teacher: divine revelation and inspiration 8. Education and the
state 396 8^. The educational responsibility of the family and the state
8^.  The  economic support of educational institutions 8^. The political
regulation  and  censorship of education Sd. The training of the prince,
the  statesman,  the  citizen:  aristocratic  and democratic theories of
education  9.  Historical  and  biographical observations concerning the
institutions and practices of

[441b]
Chapter 20: EDUCATION 383 PAGE examples 389

[442a]
384  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  The  ends  of  education  4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix
[430-441]  61c 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp [866II 14] 499a-502b
7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45d-46d / Apology, 201b-c / Republic, bk ii-iii,
320c-339a  passim,  esp  bk  III,  333b-c, 338a-339a; 341b-c; bk vi-vii,
383d-398c  /  Timaeus,  474b-d  /  Laws, bk i, 648b-649d; bk ii, 653a-c;
656b-c; bk vii 713c731d passim; bk xii, 796b-799a,c 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk  i, ch 2 143d-144a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2 499a-501c 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^1-15] 161a-b / Ethics, bk
i, ch 2 339b-d; ch 13 [1102^5-25] 347b-c / Politics, bk ii, ch 5
[1263^36-1264*1] 459a; bk vii, ch 13-BK viii,
ch 7 536b-548a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi [1053-1075] 43c-d; bk v
[1-54]
61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 22
127c-128c;  bk hi, ch 15 190a-191a; ch 21 193d-195a; CH 24 203c-210a esp
208d-210a  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  iv, sect 3 263b264a; sect 16
264d;  bk  x,  sect  ii  -12 298b-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii [508-519]
272b-273a

[442b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upperandlovverhalvesofthepage. For example, in 53
James :/'jrv<r/ro/o^v,116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half of
page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lov.er half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand  side  of  page  164. Author's Divisions : One or more of the
main  divisions  of  a  work  (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes
included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in brackets, are given in
cerBible  References:  The  references  are to book, chapter, and verse.
When  the  King  James and Douay versions differ in title of books or in
the  numbering  of  chapters  or verses, the King James version is cited
first  and the Douay, indicated by a (£)), follows; e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a  /  Coriolanus,  174b,d-175a  17 Plotlnus: First
Ennead,  tr  hi  10a-12b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14 par 16
5a-b;  par  19  5d;  par  24  7a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3b-4a; q 94, a 3, ans 504a-505a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 153a-156b
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk ii, 81a-83b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  55d-62a esp 60c-61c; 64c-66b; 69d-72a 26 Shakespeare: Taming of
the Shrew, act i, sc I [1-40] 202c-203a 29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part
i,  145d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, la-28d esp 4c-d; I, a 9c-d,
16d-17a  31  Descartes:  Rules,  i  la-2a; in. 3c-d / Discourse, PART I,
42d-43a;  44a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, iv 447bc; IX 448a
32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  385b:  390b-391a;  394b-395b; 397a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, hk ii, ch XXXIII, SECT 8 249c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver,
p\rt iv, 165a-167a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 417b-419b

[443a]
b  hi to \b CuAriER 20: RDUCATION 385 38 MoMcsQUiEu: Spirit of La us, hk
iv,  13b,d16a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 346d-347a 39 Smith: Wc-alth of
Nations,  \\k  v, 340b-343d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 223a-d / l-'und. Prin.
Mctaphysic  of  Morals,  266a43  Mill:  Uherty,  303b-d / Representatiic
Government,  344b-c; 424b-c 46 HEf;tL: Philosophy ofRight, intro, par 20
17a;  PAkf  111, par 187 65a-c; adoitions, 97 132c133a 50 Marx: Capital,
238b-c  51  ToLsrov:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 47b-c: bk \i, 244d-245d 53
Jamls:  Psychology, 274b 275a; 7 lib- 7 12b 54 I RLC d: Sew Introductory
Lectures,  868d-871a  csp  870a-871a \a. The ideal of the educated man 7
Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18b / Laches, 37c-d / Republic, BK II, 319c-320c; bk
hi, 33Sa-339a; BK VII 388a-401d esp 390b-391b / Timaeus, 454a / Laws, bk
i,  649b-d;  bk  ii,  653a-654a;  BK  VI,  704a-b; bk xii, 796b-799a,c 8
Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  3  144a-b  /  Metaphysics, BK I, CH 1-2
499a-501c esp ch 2
[982-'^5-2o] 500b-c
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639'^i-i5] 161a-b / Politics, bk vii, ch 13-BK
VIII, ch 7 536b-548a,c passim / Rhetoric, bk i, CH 8
[1365^32-39]
608a-b; bk ii, ch 6
[1384^33-35] 630d; CH
8
[1385^24-28] 632c;
CH  23  [i399''i2-i7]  647c  12  YLpict^ti^s:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 27
132b-133b; bk III, CH 10 185d-187a; ch 15 190a-191a; CH 21 193d-195a; bk
iv, ch 6 230b-232c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i 253a-256d; bk II, sect
17  259b-d;  bk  iv,  sect  3  263b-264a; SECT 16 264d; bk x, sect 11-12
298b-d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Panfagruel,  bk  ii,  81a-83b  25
Montaigne: Essays, 59b-61c; 63d-80b esp 70d-72b, 74b-75a 26 Shakespeare:
Taming of the Shrew, act i, sc I
[1-40] 202c-203a / Love's Labour's Lost,
act iv, sc 11 [22-34] 266c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, la-28d esp
17b-27c;  86b-c  31  Descartes: Rules, in, 3c-d 32 Milton: Areopagitica,
397a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 34-37 177a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
i.  div  1-4  451a-452c  37  FieldixVg:  Tom  Jones, 99d-100a: 274b-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  346d-347b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v.
340b-343d  esp  343c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 88c-d; G44b-645d esp
644d-645a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  223a-d  / Fund. Prin, Mctaphysic of
Morals, 260d-261d / Practical Reason', 337a-338c / Judgement, 508c-509a

[443b]
43 Mill: Liberty, 294b-296d / Uti/i/arianism, 451c 452b 44 r>ns\\\.i A.:
Johnson,  130b;  283c  46IIi.c,i-l:  Philosophy  of Right, additions, 15
118d; 68 126d 127a; 98 133a; 119 136b 47 CJoethe: Faust, part i
[i7()5
1775I  42b  50  Marx: Capital, 176d-178a; 238b c 52 OosTOEVsKv: Brothers
Karamazov, epilogue, 411b-412d 53 I AMES : Psychology, 736b-737a \b. The
disadvantages  of being educated 5 I'A RiPiDEs: Medea [276-505! 214c-d 5
Aristophanes: C7oi/^:f 488a-506d 6 I'hucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
370a-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 47a-b / Gorgias, 272b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric,
bk it, ch 21 [i394"29-34l 642a;
[i394''25-32] 642c; ch 22 [1395^27-32]
643d;  CH  23  [i399"i2-i7]  647c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 21
193d195a;  ch  24,  205c-206a;  207d-208a;  bk  iv,  ch  i, 221b-c; ch 8
235b-237d  12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 25-26 7a-c; bk IV, par 28-31 26a-27a 22 Chaucer:
Miller's  Tale  [3448-3464] 217a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56d; part
ii,  150c-d  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 7 7b- 78b 25
Montaigne:   Essays,  55d-62a;  75a-77d;  150d151a;  232d-240a;  321a-c;
397a-398c;  448b449a;  502c-504c;  508a-512a; 520b-d 26 Shakespeare: 2nd
Henry Vl, act i\, sc ii
[92-117] 58d-59a / Love's Labour's Lost, act
i,  sc t [55-94] 254d-255b; [143-147] 255d; act v, sc II [69-72] 274d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  la-28d esp 2c-17b; 30b-c; 73d-74c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2a-b / Discourse, part I, 42b-c 35 Locke: Human
LJyiderstanding,  bk i, ch ii, SECT 20 llOc-llla; bk ii, ch xxxiti, sect
i^  248c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  58a-b:  part  hi, 94b-95a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a;  158a-161d  esp 158c-159a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  344d-345c: 346d-348a; 362a-d; 363a-366d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk v, 337a-d; 340b-c 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 304d-305a: 358a
/ Judgement, 608b-c 44 Boswell: /o/z;2io«, 201b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part
i
[:554-4I7]
lla-12b;
[614-807] 17a-21a; [i 583-1606] 38b-39a: [18031815] 43a; part
ii
[4917-4922]
122a;
[62286238] 152a-b
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 19c-20b; bk v, 215b-c

[444a]
2.  The  kinds  of  education:  physical,  moral, liberal, professional,
religious  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 46b-d / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-339a
esp  bk  hi,  333b-339a;  bk  vi, 380d381a; bk vii, 391b-401a / Sophist,
555b-c  /  Laws,  BK  I, 649b-d; bk ii, 653a-663b esp 662d-663b; bk vii,
717b-d;  728b-730d;  bk XII, 797b-798b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch
15   [1334^7-28]  539b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  542b-543d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  15 190a191a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ix [590-620]
295a-b  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi  10a-12b  18  Augustine  :
Confessions, bk hi, par 7-9 14c15b; BK IV, par 28-31 26a-27a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  II, CH 8-42 639d-656d; bk iv 675a698a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, A 4, ANS 318b-321a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
57b-61c  esp  60b-61c;  63d-75a passim 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
30b-c;  53d54b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  42d-43a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  34-37  177a-b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  166b-167a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk iv, 15c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par 197 67a'b 50 Marx: Capital, 237d-238c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk i, 47b-c; bk vi, 244d-245d 3. The training of the body and the
cultivation  of  bodily  skills: gymnastics, manual work 5 Aristophanes:
Clouds  [866-1  11  4]  499a-502b  esp  [1002-1024]  500d-501a  7 Plato:
Protagoras,  46c  /  Gorgias,  261a-262a;  289d-290a  / Republic, bk ii,
310c-d;  320c321a;  bk  hi, 334b-335b; bk vi, 380d-381a; bk vii, 391c-d;
398c-399d  /  Timaeus,  475b-d  /  Statesman,  599d-600a  /  Laws, bk i,
644b-646a;   bk  II,  653b-654a;  663a-b;  bk  vii,  717b-d;  721d-722c;
726a-727c;  bk  vhi,  734a-  735a  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk vii, ch 3
[246^10-^19]  329c-330a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292^14-^18] 383d-384b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 6
[1106^*35-^8]
352a/Po////<:/, BKiv, ch i [1288^10-20] 487a-b; BK VII, CH 15
[1334^7-28]
539b-d; ch 17
[1336^4-39] 541a-c; bk viii, ch 3-4 542d-544c
10  Hippocrates:  Articulations,  par 52 109b-110a; par 55, 111c; par 58
112b-113a  / Aphorisms, sect I, par 3 131a-b; sect ii, par 49-50 133d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch 15, 190a-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ix
[590-620]  295a-b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 40c-42a / Coriolanus, 175b /
Philopoernen, 293d-294a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 8, 86d-87b

[444b]
386  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2/0 4 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50,  A I, ANS 6a-7b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 28a-29b
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43d;  66c-67a;  73b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  53d-54a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 166b-167a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 335a-b; 348d-349a 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk i, 42d-43c;
53a;  bk  V,  337d-338a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 5a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 52, 25c / Philosophy ofHistory, part
ii,  267b-268b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 269b-271a; 278c-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  164b-166a;  170c-171b; 237d240c 53 James: Psychology, 74a-75a;
332a;  774a 4. The formation of a good character, virtue, a right will 5
Euripides: Suppliants
[857-917]
266a-b  /  Hecuba [592-602] 357d-358a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [866-11 14]
499a-502b  7  Plato:  Laches,  30a-b / Protagoras, 45d-46d / Euthydemus,
66b-67b / Phaedrus, 128a-d / Meno 174a-190a,c / Republic, bk ii, 314b-c;
BK  ii-iii,  320c-339a  /  Timaeus,  474c-d / Laws 640a-799a,c esp bk i,
644b-645c, 649b-650b, 651a-c, BK II, 653a-b, 656b-c, bk vi, 706c, BK VII
713c-731d / Seventh Letter, 801b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[iio2''281103^3] 348c; BK II, CH 3 [1104^4-14] 350a; bk
HI,  CH  12  [1119*35-^19]  366a,c / Politics, bk ii, CH 7 461d-463c; bk
vii,  ch 13-BK viii, ch 7 536b-548a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
hi
[1-30]
30a-b;  bk  v  [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-42] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses
105a-245a,c  esp bk i, CH 1-5 105a-110c, CH 18 124a-125a, bk i, ch 24-BK
II, CH 2 129a-141c, bk ii, ch 21-24 166c-174b, BK HI, ch 3 178d-180a, ch
8-1  i  184b-187b,  ch  13 188b-189c, ch 23-26 201a213a,c, BK IV, CH 3-7
224b-235a,CH 9-13 237d245a,c 12AuRELius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk i,
sect  7-9 253b-254a, sect i i 254b, sect 14-16 254b-255d, bk ii, sect 17
259b-d,  bk iv, SECT 18 264d, BK V, SECT 14 271b, sect 16 271C-d, BK VI,
SECT  12  274c,  BK  VII,  SECT 69 284d, BK VIII, SECT I 285a-b, sect 13
286c,  BK  IX, SECT 41 295c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ix [590-620] 295a-b 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a  /  Pericles, 121a-122b / Coriolanus,
174b,d-175a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk xih, 125d-126a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 2 lOd; ch 6 lld-12b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i,
par  13-31 4b-9a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, A 2, ANS
231c-232b;  q  99, a 6, ans 250a-251a; Q 100, A 9 261b-262b; q 105, a 4,
ans 318b321a; q 108, a 3 334a-336b

[445a]
4fl  Chapter  20: EDUCATION 387 21 Dante: Divine Comedy 22 Chaucer: Tale
of Wife of Bath (6691 6788] 274b-276a / CleTl(i Tale
[8031-80^7]
298a;
[8269-8317] 302b-303a
24  Rabelais:  Gargantiia  and  Pantagruel,  bk ii, 81a83b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  16c;  43a-c; 55d-62a csp 60c 61c; 63d-75a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  76a-81c csp 78d-80b 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 394b-395b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  71  197b-198a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  35a-49a,c;  380c-381a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  iv  13b,  d18d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 221b-c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphvsic of Morals, 260d-261d; 263a-b; 264b
[fn
i];  273d-275d;  278a-b  / Practical Reason, 305d-307d; 356a-360d / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-d;  368d;  376d-377b  43 Mill:
Liberty,  303b-d  /  Utilitarianism, 451c452b: 453a-c; 457c-461c passim,
esp  460d461a; 463d-464d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 187
65a-c; additions, 15 118d; 97-98 132c-133a / Philosophy of History, part
hi,  312d-313a; PART IV, 346a-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a-319a esp
304a-305a, 310c-317d, 318d-319a; 592d-593b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,   47b-48d;  bk  VI,  244d-245d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,
epilogue, 411b-412c 53 James : Psychology, 78b-83b esp 81b-83a: 199b204b
esp  202a-2b3b;  661b;  711b-712a;  751b752a;  827a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  573c  / Ego and Id, 706b-708c esp 707a-d / War and Death,
757d-759d  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 792a-796c esp 794c-795a /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  844b-c  4a.  The possibility and limits of
moral   education:   knowledge   and  virtue  Old  Testament:  Proverbs,
1:20-2:22; 4:1-12; 8; 14:16; 15:21 5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-430]
228b-d / Supplia?2ts
[857-917]
266a-b  /  Iphigenia at Aulis [543-572] 429d-430a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
488a-506d 7 Plato: Charmides, 7b-c / Laches 26a-37d / Protagoras 38a-64d
esp  42d-47c,  56b,  57d,  62a-b  /  Euthydemus,  66b-67b  /  Symposium,
166c-167d  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  174a-c,  177d-178b,  183b-190a,c /
Apology,  203c-204b  /  Gorgias,  258d-259b; 262d-263c; 277d; 287c291b /
Republic,  bk  ii, 319d-320c; bk vii 388a-401d esp 389d-391b, 397a-401d;
bk x, 439b-441a,c / Timaeus, 474c-475c / Sophist, 556c-558d / Statesman,
607b-608d / Laws,

[445b]
bk I, 649b-d / Seventh letter, 801b 802d; 806b c; 809c 810d esp 810c-d 8
Aristotle:  Categories,  ch 10 [i3''i6-3i) 18d / Prior Analytics, bk 11,
ch 25 [69''2o-28] 91a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch ^ [io94^27-io95* 11]
340a;  cii  9 345a-c; bk ii, ch 1-4 348b,d351b; BK VI, CH 1-2 387a 388b;
ch 12-13 393b-394d; bk vh, ch 23 395c 398a; bk x, ch 9
[ii79''S1^3"l 434a-c
/ Politics, bk v, ch 12
[i:5i6'*i-io] 518d-519a; bk
vii, ch 13
[i332'*39-^ii]537a-b
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi \T,o'j--i^22\ 34a-b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 5 llOb-c; ch 17 122d-124a; ch 28 133b-134d; bk ii,
ch  22 167d-170a; ch 26 174c-d; bk hi, ch 3 178d180a; CH 6 181d-182b; ch
8  184b-c;  ch  15  190a-191a;  bk iv, ch i 213a-223d esp 216c218c; CH 4
225a-228a;  ch 9 237d-238d; ch 12 242d-244a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk
ii,  sect i 256b, d; bk V, sect 16 271c-d; bk vii, sect 22 281b; sect 26
281c;  bk  ix,  sect 42 295c-296a,c; BK XII, sect 12 308b-c 14 Plutarch:
Dion,  782c-788b  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi 10a-12b esp ch 6
lld-12b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x, par 3-6 72a73a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 94, A 3, rep 3 504a-505a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, AA 1-2 70b-72d; q 95, a i, ans 226c-227c; A
3,   ANS   228c-229b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43a-c;  65d-66a;  69d72b;
232d-240a;  321a-c;  502c-504c;  509a-512a  26  Shakespeare: Merchant of
Venice,  act  i,  sc  II  [19-22]  408b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus and
Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [163-173]  115b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,  26c-27a;  69d-70a; 76d-78d 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 390b-391a
33  Pascal: Pensees, 88 189b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii,
SECT  8  105d-106a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect 71 197b-198a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect i, div i 451a-b; div 3 451d; sect viii, div 66, 480b
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  122d-123a;  313a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
344d-345c  /  Political  Economy, 375d-377b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
34d;   435b-d  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  258b-c;
260d-261d;  265b;  282b-283d  /  Practical  Reason,  357c-360d  /  Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 365b-d; 368d / Judgement, 513d-514b 43
Mill:  Liberty,  303  b-d;  306c-307a / Utilitarianism, 464b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 132 46b-47a; additions, hi 134d-135a;
119 136b

[446a]
(4.  The  formation  of  a good character, virtue, a right will. Aa. The
possibility  and  limits  of  moral  education: knowledge and virtue^ 49
Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 313d-314b; 317c319a 51 Tolstoy: War and Fence,
bk   vi,  244d-245d  52  T>ostov.wsk.y:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue,
411b412d   53   James   :   Psychology,   806a-808a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  573c-d;  592b-c; 596b-c; 624d-625b / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 781a-d; 784a-789b; 796d
[fn2];
800c-801a  /  New Introductory Lectures, 870a-c 4^. The influence of the
family  in  moral  training  Old Testament: Exodus, 20:12 / Deuteronomy,
5:16;  6:6-7; 11:18-19; 27:16 / Proverbs, 1:8-9; 3:12; 6:20-24; i3:i»24;
15:5;  19:18;  22:6,15;  23:13-26;  29:15,17 Apocrypha: Tobit, ^—{D) OT,
Tobias,  4  /  Ecclesiasticus, 7:23-24; 30:1-13— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
7:25-26; 30:1-13 New Testament: Ephesians, 6:1-4 / Colossians, 3:20-21 7
Plato:  Protagoras,  45d-47a / Meno, 186a187b / Republic, bk v, 366a-c /
Laws, bk v, 687d-688a; bk vii, 713c-716d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[i 180^25-^^14]
435a-c / Politics, bk iv, ch ii
[1295^14-18]
495d;  bk  vii,  ch 17 [1336^23-^3] 541b-c 12AuRELius: Meditations, bk i
253a-256d  esp  SECT  1-4  253a,  sect  14  254b-c,  sect 16 254d255d 14
Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  286c-287b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
14-15  4c5a;  bk  ii,  par 2-8 9b-10d esp par 7 lOb-c; BK III, par 19-20
18b-19a; bk ix, par 19-22 67a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  95,  A  I,  ANs  226c-227c;  q  105,  a  4, ans 318b-321a 22 Chaucer:
Physician's  Tale  [12,006-037]  367b368a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  83a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 16c; 43a-c; 63d-64b;
66c-67a;  184a-187d;  344a-c;  414a-d; 534c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  251b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 55, schol, 413d; the
affects,  def  27  419a-b;  part  iv,  appendix, XX 449a 35 Locke: Civil
Government, ch vi, sect 55-69 36c-40b; ch xv, sect 170 64d-65a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-30a;  part iv, 166b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
250b-251a  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 108c-110c: 136a-c; 217d-219c; 283c-d;
310b-313b;  359b-362c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk iv, 15c 38
Rousseau:   /,'2^^«^//>v,  326c-327a;  327c-328a  /  Political  Economy,
376b-377a 39 Smith: Wealth ofSations, bk v, 337c-d

[446b]
388  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4^ to 4c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 420b-421c 44
Boswell: Johnson, 372c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 173175
61a-d;  par  239  76d;  additions,  hi 134d135a; 147 140c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk xii, 395b-d 54 Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  17d-18a  / Sexual Enlightenment of Children 119a'122a,c
passim  / Narcissism, 408b / Ego and Id, 704d- 707d / Civdhation and Its
Discontents,  794c-795a  esp  795b  ifn  2] / New Introductory Lectures,
834b-c;  844b-c;  876b-c  Ac.  The role of the state in moral education:
law,   custom,   public  opinion  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 35c-d 6 THucYmmis : Pelopofi7iesian War, bk
i.370a-c;  bk  ii,  396d-397a  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 45b-47c / Apology,
203c204b  /  Gorgias,  287c-291b / Republic, bk iiIII, 320c-339a; bk vi,
377a-379c  /  Timaeus,  474c-d / Statesman, 607a-608a / Laws 640a799a, c
esp  bk  i,  643a-644a,  645c-646d,  bk in, 676b-c, BK IV, 683d-685a, bk
v-vi,  696c-697d,  BK  VI, 704a-c, 710d-711c, bk vii 713c-731d, BK VIII,
735c-738c,  bk  ix,  757a,  bk  xii,  792c-d  / Seventh Letter, 800b-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[1099^29-32]
345b; CH 13
[1102^8-25] 347c; bk
ii, ch i
[1103^3-7] 349a; bk v, ch
i [1129^12-24] 377a; CH 2 [1130^20-30] 378b; bk x, ch 9
[i 179*^311180^28]
434c-435c / Politics, bk ii, ch 5
[1263^36-1264^*1] 459a; ch
7  461d-463c;  bk  vii,  ch  13-17  536b-542a,c; bk viii, ch i 542a-b 12
Aurelius:  Meditatioiis,  bk  iv,  sect 18 264d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[845-853]  233b-234a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  LycurgusNuma,
63d-64a / Solon 64b,d-77a,c passim / Marcus Cato, 284b- 286b / Lysander,
361  b-d  /  Agesilaus, 480b,d-481a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
14-16  4c5b;  par  19-30  5d-8d; bk vi, par 2 35a-c; par 11-13 38b-39c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch 12-13 662c-663c; ch 18-22 664d-666c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 92, a i 213c-214c; a 2, rep 4
214d-215a,c; q 95, a I 226c-227c; a 3 228c-229b; q 96, aa 2-3 231c-233a;
q  98,  a  6,  ans  244c-245b;  q  100,  A  9 26ib-262b; q 105, a 4, ans
318b-321a   21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [52105]  77b-d
23HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  149b-c;  154a156b;  part  iv,  272c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  42b-43c;  46b-48b;  60c61d;  63d-64b; 13l'b-132a 27
Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, sc I [225-270] 181a-c; act hi,
sc ii [91-12S] 190c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, ySdSOa

[447a]
4./  Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 389 PART III, THE Al-IECTS, DCF 31 Simnoza:
Ethics, 27 419a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lo>t, b;< xii [285-306] 325b326a /
Areopagitica,  383a-395b  csp  394b 395a IZ P\s( Ai.: Pensets, 6 173a 35
Lock  I.:  Toleration,  15c-d / Human Understanding, BK I, CH II, SECT 8
105d-106a;  sect  20 llOc-llla; BK II, CH XXI, sect 71, 197d; CM xxviii,
sect  10-12  230b-  231c esp sect 12 231bc 35 Hime: Human Understanding,
sect  viii, div 66, 480b 36 Swift: Gulliier, part i, 29b-31a 38 MoNTESQi
lEu: Spirit of Latins, bk v, 18b, d25c; BK \T, 37d-43d; bk xii, 85c-86d;
87c88a;  bk  xiv,  104a-108d;  bk  xvi,  118a-119d; BK XIX. 138c-142a 38
RoissEAu:  Inequality,  359d  /  Political  Economy,  375d-377b / Social
Contract, bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 340c-343d;
346c-347d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 23c-d; 92c-94b pasr.im: lOOc-
lOlb; 291d-292d 41 Gibbon: Declifie and Fall, 93c-94a: 161c-162a; 389c-d
42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 263a-b / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  368d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383a-b; 387b;
387d-388a  43  Federalist: number 12, 58b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 269c-270c;
294c-296b;  303b306c  / Representative Government, 336c-340c passim, esp
337a-b;  342b-344d passim; 346c350a; 381b-382b / Utilitarianism, 456a-d;
457c-458b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 150153 56c-57c:
par  239  76d;  par  270, 84d-85a; 89a-b; par 315 104c; additions, 96-98
132ci33a;  131  137d;  162,  143b-144a;  183  148d149a  /  Philosophy of
History,  part  iv, 365c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-317d esp 317a-c
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk vi, 244d-245d; bk viii, 303a-305b esp
303d-304b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk xii, 398a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  190a-191a  54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightejjfnent of Children,
122a,c  / Narcissism, 408b / War and Death, 757b-759d passim, esp 757c /
Civilization   and   Its  Discontents,  781a-c;  784a-d;  800b-d  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  834c  Ad.  The effect upon character of poetry,
music,  and other arts: the role of history and examples 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [626-658] 462b-d /
Wasps  [1009-1070]  519d-520c  / Frogs [10081098] 576b-577c; [1482-1533]
581d-582a,c 6 Herodotus : History, bk i, 35c-d

[447b]
7 Plato: Protagoras, 46b c / Phaedrus, 136b c / Republic, hk ii hi, 320c
339a;  bk  iv, 344b d; BK VII 388a 401 d csp 391b 398c; bk x. 427c434c /
Timaeus,  455c  / Laws, hk h 653a 663d; BK III, 675c 676b; bk v, 696b d;
bk  vh,  717b721a: 724b 725d; 726d-728b 9ARisTorLE: Politics, bk vii, ch
17
[i336"^()-
^24]  541b-d;  bk  viii,  ch 3 542d-543d; ch 57 544c-548a,c 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk i 253a-256d csp SECT 15-16 254c-255d 13 Vircil: Aeneid,
bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk VI
[845 85?]
233b-234a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b 14 Pluixrch: Lycurgus, 33d-34a; 43b-d / Solon, 76a / Pericles,
121a-122b  / Timoleon, 195a-b / Demetrius, 726a-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xiv,  146b-147a:  bk xv, 173a-b; bk xvi, 183c; 184a,c 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 1-2 lOa-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 20-27
^^' 7d; BK III, par 2-5 13c-14b; bk vi, par 11-13 38b-39c; bk x, par 1-6
71c-73a;  par  49-53 83c-85a; bk xi, par i 89b-c / City of God, bk I, ch
31-33  147d-149a;  bk  ii, ch 8-14 153d157c; BK IV, CH 26-27 202a-203c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 6 638a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q i, A 2, rep 2 4a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxii
[55-93]
87a-c; paradise, i
[1-36]
106a-b;  XVII  [100-142]  133a-c  22  Chaucer:  Intro,  to  Man of Law's
Prologue
[4465-4510] 234b-235b
/ Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,444-452] 460a-b / UEnvoi 550a-b
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  68b-69a;  197a-199c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of
Venice,  act  v,  so I [66-88] 431b-c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i,
12b-16c; 186d-187c; part iir427c-429a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
4c-6c;   38c39d   esp  38d-39a;  78a-d;  79c-80a;  85a-c  31  Descartes:
Discourse,  part  i, 43a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 55 413b414a
32  MihTos  :  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [1-47] 247a-248a / Areopagitica,
385a-386b   33   Pascal:   Pensees,   11   173b-174a   35   Hume:  Human
U?idersta?iding,  sect  i,  div  i  451a-b  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
250b-251a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 254a-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  iv,  17b18d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365b-366b / Political Economy,
376c-377a 39 Smith: Wealth of Natiotjs, bk v, 337d-338c; 347d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  94a-b; 284a-c; 338d-339a; 449a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 40d-41a; 225a-c; 311a-312a

[448a]
c  (4.  The formation of a good character, virtue, a right will. Ad. The
effect  upon  character  of  poetry,  music, and other arts: the role of
history and examples^ 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 263a-b;
264b
[fn
i]; 266d
[fn 2]
/ Practical Reason, 325d-327d esp 327b-d; 356a-360d / Judgement, 504a-b;
513d-514b;  521b-523c; 586d-587a 44 BoswELi.: Johnson, 308b-d; 347c-d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 267a268b; 276a-b; part iv, 347b-d
53  James:  Psychology,  826b-827a  5.  The  improvement  of the mind by
teaching  and  learning  5a. The profession of teaching: the relation of
teacher   and  student  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b  5
Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  7 Plato: Laches, 29d-31b / Protagoras,
38a-47c esp 39d-41a, 42a-c / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Symposium, 169c-170a
/  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  179b-183a  /  Apology, 203a'204c; 206b-208c /
Crito,  215a-c  / Gorgias, 252a-259c; 290b-291b / Theaetetus, 515d-517b;
544a-c  /  Sophist,  556b-559a  / Laws, bk vii, 723c-d / Seventh Letter,
801c-802d;  808b-c  8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch i [165®
19-24]  227c;  CH  2  [165^38-^3]  227d-228a; ch II [171^18-35] 236b-d /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[981V9] 499d; CH 2 [982^13-14] 500b; [982^
28-30]  500c;  bk IV, CH 2 [1004^18-27] 523d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix,
ch i
[ii64^22-''6]
417a-b; bk x, ch 9 [1180^28-1181^19] 435d436a, 10 Hippocrates: The Oath,
xiiia 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[1-30]
30a-b;  bk  v [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-42] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  ii,  ch  17  158d-161a  esp  160b-161a; ch 24 172d-174b; bk hi, ch 2
177c-178d;  ch  9,  185b-d;  ch 21-23 193d203b; bk iv, ch 8 235b-237d 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  122d-123d  /  Alcibiades, 155b,d-158b / Alexander,
542d-544a  /  Cato  the  Younger,  623a-b  / Dion, 782c-788b 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk xiii, 125d-126a; bk xiv, 153d-155a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i, par 22 6b-c; bk IV, par 2 19d; bk v, par 22 33b-c; bk vi, par 1 1
38b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch 4 676d-677a; ch 27 696a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  proi^ogue  la-b;  part I, Q 76, a 2, rep 5
388c-391a; q 106 545c-549a; q 107, a 3, ans and rbp i 551a-c; Q III, a I
568c-569b; q 117, aa 1-2 595d598c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-
ii,  q  i,  a  7,  rep  2 385c-387a; Q 2, a 3, ans 392d-393c; Q 181, a 3
618c-619b; q 188, a 6, ans 681b-

[448b]
390  THE GREAT IDEAS 5/0 5^ 682c; PART III suppL, o 96, a 7 1061b-1062a;
A  II,  ANS  and  REP 1,5 1063d-1064d; a 12 1064d-1065b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell la-52d passim, esp i-ii la-4a, vii
[64]-ix
[105] 10b-13b, xv
21a-22c, xxiv
[1-78]
34d-35b;  purgatory  53a-105d  passim,  esp  v  [1-21] 59a, xviii [1-96]
79d-80d, xxvii 94c-96a, xxx
[22-81]
99c100b; paradise, iv [115-142] llld-112a 22 Chaucer: Prologue [285-308]
164a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargaiittia  and  Pantagruel, bk i, lb,d; 18b-25a
passim;  bk ii, 101b-106a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 57b-60c; 64c-79c passim,
esp  70c-72a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 7d-lla; 14c-15a; 16c;
29c-32c;  68b-69b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  42b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix, ix 448a 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 398a-b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  423b-424b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 41a-43b;
45d-46a;  94d95a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 326c-d / Political Economy,
376d-377a  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 57b-58b; bk V, 331b,d334c;
338c-340b;  354d-355d  esp 355c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 669a-671b
43 Mill: Representative Government, 420b-d; 424b-c 44 BoswELi.: Johnson,
23b-c;  191b-c;  199d-200b; 300a-c 47 Goethe :F^w^/, part ii [6689-6818]
164a-166b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d; bk VIII, 306b 54
Freud  :  New Introductory Lectures, 870b-c 5b. The means and methods of
teaching 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 50c-52d /
Cratylus,  85d88a  esp  87c-d;  112d-113d  /  Phaedrus,  131b141a,c  esp
139b-140b  /  Meno,  179b-183a  /  Apology,  206b-d  / Republic, bk vii,
388a-398c  esp  389d-390b;  399c  / Theaetetus, 515d-517b; 549c-550a,c /
Sophist,  551d; 556b-559a / Statesman, 590d-591c / Philebus, 610d-613a /
Laws,  bk  II,  656b-c; bk iv, 684c-685a / Seventh Letter, 809a-811a esp
809a-c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71^1-10] 97a
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 2
[165*38-^3]
227d'228a; ch 10
[171^27-^2]
235d-236a; ch ii [172^15-21] 237a / Heavens, bk I, CH 10
[279^32-280^11] 371b-c
/  Metaphysics,  bk  II,  CH  3  513c-d  /  Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436^18-437^17] 673d-674a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639^1-^12] 161a-d / Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 [1139^
18-34]  388b-c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [921-950] 12b-c; BK
IV [1-25] 44a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 24, 172d173c; BK HI,
CH 9, 185b: ch 23, 203a-b

[449a]
;  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  i-:^ 10a11a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13  4b-c;  par  19-20  5d'6a;  par 23 6d-7a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  11,  ch  6  638a-d;  ch  36-37 653d654b; BK IV
675a-698a,c  19 Aquinas: Siimma Theoiogica,PROLOGViL lab; PART I, Q I, A
5, REP 2 5c-6a; A 9 8d-9c; q 79, A 10, REP 3 423d-424d; q 84, a 3, rep 3
443d-444d;  q 106, a i, ans 545d-546d; g iii, A I, ANS 568c-569b; q 117,
a  i  595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica, part ii-ii, q i, A 7, rep 2
385c-387a;  q  181,  a  3, ans and rep 2 618c-619b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  55a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19a;
26d-30c passim 25 Montaigne: Essays, 57b-61c passim; 63d-80b passim, esp
73b-74a;  446d-450a; 453c-454d 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268c / On
Animal  Generation,  336d-337a,c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16c;
31a-d;  39b-d;  61d-62c;  64b-c; 65a-c; 68b-69c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  i,  42b; 42d-43a 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 384a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
9-10  173b;  40 177b-178a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3c-4a; 7a-b; 15c / Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch x, sect 34 299d300a; bk iv, ch vti, sect ii,
340d-341a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 109b-110b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  417b-418a;  421b422b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 42a-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  339d-340a 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v, 337c-d 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  2d-4a,c  /  Practical  Reason,  335b-c  43 Mill: Liberty,
283c-288c  esp  284b-d  /  Representative  Government,  331a;  424b-c 44
Bos^'ELi.:  Johnson,  7d-8a;  144c;  191b-c;  199d200b;  448a-b; 471d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 175, 61c-d 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i  [522-601]  15a-16b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 48b-d 53
James:   Psychology,  290a-291a;  692a-b;  711b712b  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  'H9aA51bpsiSsim  5c.  The nature of learning: its several
modes  7  Plato:  Laches,  29d-30b  /  Euthydemus,  67b68d  /  Cratylus,
llld-112d  / Phaedrus, 124a126c esp 126a-c ; 139b-140b / Meno, 179b-183a
188d-189a  /  Phaedo,  228a-230c  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-401d /
Theaetetus,   541d-543a   /   Philebus,  610d-613a  8  Aristotle:  Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 21
[67*
21-25]  S^  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  97a-d; bk ii, ch 19
136a-137a,c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 2
[165^38-^3]
227d-228a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247^1-248^6] 330b-d;
BK VIII, ch 4
[255^30-^23]
340a-c / Meta-

[449b]
Chapter  20: EDUCATION 391 physics, BK I, CH I [980*28-981"! ^5] 499a-c;
ch  9 [992''24-99^''7] 511a-c; bk ii, ch 2 [9(>4"2530] 512c; BK IX, CH 6
(io4H**i8-:^4) 574a-c; CH 8
[1049^29-1050*3] 575c-d
/  Soul,  bk ii, CH 5 [417*21-418*3] 647d-648c / Sense and the Sensible,
ch i
[436'^i8-437*i7J 673d-674a
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[45i'*i9-'*9]
692b-d; [452*4-7] 693c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[1147*18
23]  397b-c  / Poetics, ch 4 [1448^4-20] 682c-d 10 Hippocrates: The Law,
par 2-3 144b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[1-25]
44a-b  12  Hpictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 26 131b132b; BK hi, ch 23,
202d-203a  14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger,  620b-c 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr hi 10a-12b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 13 4b-c; par
23  6d-7a;  bk  iv,  par  28-31 26a-27a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 2
624d-625a;  bk  H, CH 36-37 653d-654b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  76,  a 2, rep 5 388c-391a; q 84, a 3, rep 3 443d444d; Q 117, A I,
ans and rep 4 595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, A
7,  REP  2  385c-387a; q 2, a 3, ans 392d-393c; PART HI, q 9, a 4, REP I
766b-767b;  q 12 776c-779d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55d-56a; 66c-d;
68b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19a; 26d-30c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a  passim;  63d75a  esp  64c-66b;  446a-450a;
453c-454d  28  Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268c / On Animal Generation,
332a-335c  esp 334d-335c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16a; 57d58b;
64b-c  / Novum Organum, pref 105a106d 31 Descartes: Rules, iii-iv 3b-7d;
xii-xiii  18b-27d  esp  xii, 23c, 24d-25a / Discourse, PART VI, 61d-62c;
63a-b  /  Meditations, i 75a77c / Geometry, bk i, 297a-b; bk hi, 341b 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 6 173a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect
15 98d-99a; sect 23 101b-102a; ch hi, sect 25 120c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  221a-222a  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 99d-100a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  528c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 14a-15c; 113b-114a; 244c245c /
Judgement, 526a-527b 43 Mill: Liberty, 283c-288c 44 Bosv^'ELi.: Johnson,
121d;  126d;  257c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements ofChemistry, pref, lc-2b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i, par 69, 30b-c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  245b  53  James:  Psychology,  15b-17a; 49b-52b esp 52a; 71a-73b;
83a-b;   110b;   331b-336a   passim;  362b-364a;  433a-438a;  443a-444a;
448b450a; 664b-665a; 691a-b; 827a-835a

[450a]
(5. The improvement of the mind by teaching and learning.) 5d. The order
of  learning:  the  organization  of the curriculum 7 Plato: Protagoras,
46b-c  /  Meno,  179b'183a  /  Gorgias,  272b-273b  /  Republic,  bk ii,
320c321a;  bk  in,  333b-334b;  bk vi, 380d-381a; BK vi-vii, 383d-401d /
Timaeus,  465d-466a  /  Sophist, 552b-c / Philebus, 610d-613a / Laws, BK
II,  653a-654a;  bk  v,  696b-d; bk vii, 728b730c; bk XII, 798a-799a,c /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; ch 7
[189^30-33] 265b-c / Metaphysics, bk
ii, ch 3
[995*12-14] 513c; bk IV, CH 3 [1005^2-5] 524c;
CH 4 [1006*5-12] 525a-b; bk v, ch i
[1013*1-3]
533a; bk vii, ch 3 [1029*35-^12] 552a; bk ix, CH 8
[1049^29-1050*3] 575c-d
/ Soul, bk i, CH I
[402^15-403*2] 631d-632a; bk
ii, ch 2
[413*11-13] 643a
9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639*12-^12]
161b-d / Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^28-1095*3] 340a; bk vi, ch 3
[1139^2529] 388c / Politics, bk vii, ch 15
[1334^20-28]
539c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  3  542d-543d  11  NicoMACHUs:  Arithmetic, bk i,
812b-813d  12  Eptctetus: Discourses, bk i,ch 26 131b-132b; BK II, CH 25
174b-c  16  Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6b passim 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  847b-848a  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 1-4 lOa-llc 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13-31 4b9a; bk iv, par 30 26b-c /
Christian   Doctrine,  BK  II,  ch  8-42  639d-656d  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  prologue la-b; part i, q i, a 9 8d-9c; q 2, aa 1-2 10d-12c;
Q  10, a I, ANS and rep i 40d-41d; a 2, rep i 41d-42c; a 6, ans 45c-46d;
q  11,  a  2,  rep  4  47d-48d; q 14, a 6, rep 2 80a-81c; q 18, a 2, ans
105c-106b;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  3  443d-444d;  A  6 447c-449a; Q 85, a i
451c-453c;  a  3  455b457a;  a  8 460b-461b; Q 117, a i, ans 595d597c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti-ii, q 100, A 6, ANS and rep 2 257c-258c
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  parti,  56b;  59b-c;  71c-d;  72a-d;  part  iv,
268c-269b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19d; 25a-30c;
bk  ii, 75c-77a; 78b-80d; 82c-83b 25 Montaigne : Essays, 63d-80b passim,
esp  69d70c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-336a esp 334c-d,
335c-336a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4C'5b; 14c15a; 30b-c;
31a-d;  44c;  56b-66a;  68c-69c;  79c-80a;  85a-c  / Novum Organum, pref
105a106d;  BK  I,  aph  19-36  108b-109b; aph 90 124d-125a 31 Descartes:
Rules,  iv-vi  5a-10a;  viii-x 12a17a; xiii 25b-27d / Discourse, part i,
42b-

[450b]
m  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5dto5e  44a;  part  ii,  47a-b; part vi, 61d-62c /
Geometry, bk i, 297a-b; 298b; bk hi, 341b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
ek  i,  ch i, sect 15 98d-99a; sect 20 lOOc-d; sect 23 101b-102a; ch hi,
sect  13  116a-b;  bk ii, ch i, SECT 6-8 122b-123a; sect 22 127a; ch xi,
sect  8-9  145b-c;  bk  hi,  ch  ii,  sect  7  254a-b;  CH III, sect 7-9
255d-256c; ch v, sect 15 267c-d; ch ix, sect 9 286d-287b; bk iv, ch VII,
sect  9 338d-339b; sect ii 340a-342d passim, esp 340d-341a; ch xii, sect
3  358d359c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
421b-422b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 334c-337b; 338c-d; 342b 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason,  2948-  b  / Judge7nejit^ 551a-552c; 572a-b 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  llb-d;  15a-c;  23d-24b; 121d; 128c; 135b-c; 273a-b;
309c-d;  448a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 213c 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part i [1868-2045] 44b-48a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
x,  291d-292b  53  James:  Psychology,  317b-319a; 323a-b; 360a; 406a-b;
453a-457a  esp  453b,  456b-457a;  503b;  524b-525a; 711b-712b 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  768b-c 5e, The emotional aspect of
learning:   pleasure,   desire,  interest  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,
374a-375a;  bk  vii,  388a-389c;  399b-401a  esp 399c; bk ix, 421a422b /
Laws, bk ii, 660b / Sevejith Letter, 808b-809a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk i, ch i
[980*2227] 499a
9  Aristotle:  Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5 [644^ 22-645*37] 168c-169b /
Ethics, bk vii, ch 12
[1153*22-24]
404c; BK x, ch i
[1172*16-21]
426a / Politics, bk viii, ch 5
[i 339*25-3 i]544d;
[1339^10-20] 545a; ch 6 [1340^25-30] 546b
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1371^30-33] 614d; bk
III, CH 10
[1410*^9-12] 662c
/ Poetics^ ch 4
[1448V19] 682c-d
10  Hippocrates: The Law, par 2 144b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk hi,
ch 10, 207d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things^ bk i
[41-53]
Ic-d; bk II
[1023-1047] 28a-b; bk hi
[1-30]
30a-b;  bk  iv  [1-25]  44a-b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv, ch 4
225a-228a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 lOa-lla 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-16 4c5b; par 19-27 5d-7d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, A I, ANS 50c-51c; A 8, rep 4 57b-58b; part
i-ii,  Q  3,  A  8,  ANS  628d-629c;  q 30, a i, rep i 749a'd; Q 37, a i
783d-784c   21   Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxvi  [112-142]  39b-c;
PURGATORY, XX [i24]-xxi [75]84c-85d; PARADISE, IV [115-142] llld-112a 22
Chaucer: Prologue [285-308] 164a-b

[451a]
5/  Chapter  20:  EDUCATION  393  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 52d-53b;
pari-  n, 154a 24 Rabi.lais: Gargantiia ami Pantagrucl, bk hi, 190a-191a
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 70d-74a: 244d-246a 26 Shakespeark: Taming off/it
S/in-u\  act  i,  sc I [1-40] 202c-203a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
331c-332a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  79b-c  31  Descartes:
Geometry,  bk  i,  297a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part hi, prop 55, schol
413b-d; the affects, def 27 419a-b 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
440b442a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h, ch XXXIII, sect 15 250c 37
Fielding:  Tom Jones, 7b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 326c-d; 338c-339a 42
Ha'st:  Judgement,  551d  44 Boswell: Johnson, 7d-8a; llb-d; 14b; 15a-c;
130b;  135b-136a;  151d;  199d-200b; 273a; 309c-d; 360d; 423c; 448a-b 45
Lavoisier:  EkTne?its  ofChemistry,  pref, ld-2a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 175, 61c-d; par 197 67a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-736]  lla-19b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d; bk VIII,
306b   53   James:   Psychology,  271b-275a  esp  274b-275a;  290a-291a;
433a-434a;  448b-449b;  524a-525a;  711b-712b  5/.  Learning  apart from
teachers  and  books: the role of experience Apocry^pha: Ecclesiasticus,
25:3-6—  (Z))  OT,  EcclesiasticHS, 25 :5-8 4 Homer: Odyssey 183a-322d 5
Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[160-257] 53d-54d
7  Plato:  Laches,  29d-30b;  37c-d  / Gorgias, 253a / Republic, bk 111,
333b-d;  337b-d;  bk  v,  366a-c;  bk  vi,  377a-379c;  bk  vii,  401a /
Theaetetus,  535d  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch 30 63d64b /
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  97a-d;  bk II, CH 19 136a-137a,c /
Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316^5-14] 411c-d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980^22-981*13] 499a-c; bk ix, ch 8 [1050^1015] 575d
/ Soul, bk I, ch i
[402^11-403*2]
631d-632a;  bk  hi,  ch 8 [432*3-9] 664c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^28-1095*3] 340a; ch 4 [1095*30-^13] 340c-d; bk h, ch i
[1103*14-17] 348b; bk
vi, ch 8
[1142*12-19]
391b; ch II
[ii43*25-*'i3] 392d-393a; bk
x,  CH  9 [1180^13-23] 435b-c; [ii8i*i8->^6] 436a / Politics, bk III, CH
16   [1287*32-33]   485d;  bk  VIII,  CH  6  546b-547b  10  Hippocrates:
Articulatiofis,  par  10 94d-95a / The Law, par 3-4 144c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk v [925-1457] 73b-80a,c passim, esp
[1448-1457]
79d-80a,c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vih [508-519] 272b-273a

[451b]
14   Pi.nARCii:   Demosthenes,  691b,d-692b;  692d695d  18  Ai'gi'stine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 13 4b c / Christian Doctrine, bk iv, ch 3 676a-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 84, A 6 447c-449a; q 85, a i
451c-453c;  q 87, AA 1-3 465a-468a passim; q 94, a 3, rep 3 504a-505a; q
117,  a i, ans and rep 4 595d597c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part in,
q  9,  A 4, rep i 766b-767b; q 12, a i, rep i 776c777b; A 2 777b-778b; a
3,  rep  2  778b-779a  21  Dante:  Dit'i?ie  Comedy, hell, xxvi [49-142]
38c-39c  23 HoBBEs: leviathan, intro, 47b-d; part i, 60a-61a; 66c-68b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 29d-30c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
24a-c;  66b-69d;  74d75a;  395b-398c;  520d-522d  26 Shakespeare: Lovers
Labour's Lost, act iv, sc HI
[296-365] 271c-272a / Henry V, act
i,  sc I [22-66] 533b-c / As You Lil^e It, act iv, sc I [1-26] 617a-b 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-b 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268c / On
Aniinal  Generation,  331b-332a;  333b-d;411c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  16a;  16c;  30d-31a;  82c-d  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 97-98
126c-127b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3b; xii, 22c-23a / Discourse, part
i,  43a;  44a-c;  part  hi, 50b51a; part vi, ^\6.-^2c I Geometry , bk i,
297a-b;  BK  HI,  341b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol 1-2
387b-388b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 6 173a / Vacuum, 355a-358b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i-xii  121a-148d  passim;  ch xxiii, sect 3
204c-d;  BK  HI,  CH  hi,  sect  7-8 255d-256a; bk IV, CH xii, sect 9-13
360d-362d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 30-31 418c-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect viii, div 65, 479d-480a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 12d;
99d-100a;  142c-d;  274c;  296b,d-297c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
iv,  15c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 334c 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v,
337c-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-15c; 146a-149d esp 148b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,   287b-c;   288a-b;   294c-295a  /  Representative  Government,
341d-343a   passim;  418b-d  /  Utilitarianism,  456a-d  44  Bosv/Ei.1.:
Johnson,  257c;  378b-c 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, Id2b;
PART  HI, 87b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part iii, par 197 67a-b /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  230c231b  47  Goethe:  Faust, part i
[522-601] 15a-16b

[452a]
(5.  The improvement of the mind by teaching and learning. 5/. Leartiing
apartfrom teachers and books: the role of experience.) 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  82a;  243a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk x, 424a-b; bk XIII,
584c-585b  53 James: Psychology, 362b-364a passim; 453b454a; 767'b-768a;
852b-862a  esp  852b-853a,  856b-857a,  859b-860a  6. The acquisition of
techniques:  preparation  for  the  vocations,  arts,  and professions 5
Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[461509] 494b-d, [723-812] 497b-498c
7 Plato: Phaedrus, 136a-b / Gorgtas, 258d-262a esp 260a-d / Republic, bk
ii, 319a-c; bk hi, 337b-338a; bk v, 366a-c; bk vi, 377d-378c / Philebus,
633a-d / Laws, bk i, 649b-c; bk iv, 684d-685a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i,
ch 3 144a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102^17-22]
347c; BK II, CH I 348b,d-349b; ch 4 350d351b; BK X, ch 9
[1180^13-1181^13]
435b436a, c passim / Politics, bk iv, ch i [1288*^1020] 487a-b; bk viii,
ch 6 546b-547b / Athenian Constitution, ch 42, par 3 572c 10 Hippocrates
:  Ancient  Medicine, par 1-4 la-2c; par 9 3b-d / Epidemics, bk hi, sect
III, par 16 59b-c / Articulations, par 10, 94d / The Law, par 2-5 144b-d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10911104] 75b-c; [1241-1408] 77b-79b
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  viii [512-517] 272b 14 Plutarch: Demosthejies,
692c-695d  18  Augustine:  Christia?i  Doctrine,  bk  iv, ch 3 676a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q i, a 7, rep 2 385c-387a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  27d-30c; bk ii, 76b-77a;
85c-87c  esp  87a;  bk  IV, 232a-233b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i,
82b-83c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 30b-c; 53d-54b; 82c-d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part vi, 66c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 29b-31a
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42d-43c;  51c-58b esp 51c-53b,
54c-55a;  bk v, 301a305c; 339b-c; 342d-343c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
5a-c;  245b-d;  411d-412c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 75d-78b passim;
298a-300a  esp  299c-300a;  311d-312a;  355a-c; 508d-509d 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government,
415a-417c  passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 197 67a-b;
par  252 78d-79a; par 296 99a-b; additions, 126 137a-b 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i [1868-2050] 44b-48b

[452b]
394  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 6/0 la 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 278c-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  81d;  165c-166a;  170c-171c;  237d-241a  esp  240c-d 53 James:
Psychology,  774a  54  Freud: ''Wild'' Psycho-Analysis, 130b-c / General
Introduction,  449a-452a  passim  7.  Religious education Old Testament:
Exodus,  12:24-27;  18:19-20;  24:12  /  Deuteronomy,  4:9-10,14;  5:31;
6:1,69;  11:18-21;  31:9-13  /  Joshua, 8:30-35— (D) Josue, 8:30-35 / //
Kings,  23:1-2—  (D)  IV Kings, 23:1-2 / // Chronicles, 34:29-30— (D) //
Paralipomenon, 34:29-30 / Nehemiah, 8— (D) UEsdras, ^/Psalms, 78:i-4-(D)
Psalms,  77:1-4  New  Testament:  Ephesians,  6:4  7  Plato:  Laws, bk x
757d-771b;  bk  xii,  797b798b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 22
195a201a  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine 621a-698a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  prologue  la-b  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
105,  A  4,  ANS 318b-321a; q hi, a i, ans 351d352d; A 4 354c-355d; part
ii-ii,  q  2,  a 6, ANS 395b-396a; q 16, a 2, ans and rep 2 455c-456d; q
188,  a  5  679d-681a;  a  6,  ans  681b-682c;  part hi suppl, q 96, a 7
1061b1062a  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 123a-b; 153a156b passim, esp
154d-155a;  part  hi,  208d209a;  211b-c;  241c-242a;  part  iv, 269a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 24c-d; 27a; bk ii, 82c-83b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  185-194  205a-209b;  285  224a  35 Locke: Toleration,
3c-4a;  7a-b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv, 202b-c 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk v, 343b,d-356d passim; 357c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  82d; 601b-c 42" Kant: Practical Reason, 325a-327d esp 326b327a 43
Mill:  Liberty,  285b;  290a-292a  passim  /  Representative Government,
437d-438b   44   BoswELi.:   Johnson,  151b-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  150d-153d la. God as teacher: divine revelation and
inspiration  Old Testament: Genesis, 9:1-17 / Exodus, 4:10-17; 20:1-20 /
Deuteronomy, 4:1-5,10-13; 5:1-20 esp 5:4-11 / / Kings, 8:35-36— (Z)) ///
Kings, 8:35-36 / Job, 33:14-17; 34:31-32; 38-41 / Psalms, 25:4-5,8-9,12;
32:8-9; 94:1013; 143— (D) Psalms, 24:4-5,8-9,12; 31:8-9; 93:10-13; 142 /
Proverbs,  6:23  / Isaiah, 28:913— (D) Isaias, 28:9-13 / Daniel, 2:19-23
Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 17:6-14—(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:5-12

[453a]
la  to  lb  Chapter 20: EDUCATION 395 New Testament: Matthew passim, esp
-1:23,  7:28-29,  10:1-20, 11:25 / Mar\ passim, esp 4:1-2 / Luke passim,
esp  2:41-50  / ]ohn passim, esp 3:2, 15:15, 18:37 / Romans, 1:16-20 / /
Corinthians,  2  /  Galatians,  1:11-12 / Ephesians, 3:2-5 / // Timothy,
3:15-16 / I John, 2:24-27 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 7 lOb-c;
BK IV, par 30-31 26b-27a; bk vi, par 8 37b-c; BK XI, par 2-5 89c-90c; bk
xiii,  par  16-18 114d-115c / City of God, bk vii, ch 30, 261b; BK X, CH
13  307b-c;  bk xi, ch 2-4 323a-324d; BK XX, CH 28 556c-557a / Christian
Doctrine, BK II, CH 15 643c-644a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i  3a10c;  Q  3, A I, rep 1-5 14b-15b; q 12, a 13 61c62b; Q 32 175d-180d
passim;  q  46, a 2 253a255a; q 57, a 3, rep i 297b-298a; q 68, a i, ANS
354a-355c;  q  89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; Q 94, A 3 504a-505a; q 105, a 3
540c-541b; Q 106, A 3, ANS 547c-548b; q 113, a i, rep 2 576a-d; q 117, a
i, rep i 595d-597c; a 2, rep 1-2 597c-598c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  63,  A  3 65a-d; q 68 87c-96c; q 91, aa 4-5 210c212c; QQ
98-108  239b-337d esp q 98, a 2 240c-241b, q 107, A I 325c-327b; q hi, a
4  354c-355d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a 7, rep 3 385c387a; q 4, a 4, rep 3
405a-406a;  part hi, q i, A 3, ANS 704d-706a; Q 3, a 8 729b-730b; q 7, A
7  750a-d;  q  ii,  a  6,  rep  2  775d-776b; q 12, a 3, ANS and rep 1-2
778b-779a;  a 4, ans and rep I 779a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xix
[i99] 135a-136a; xxiv-xxvi 142d-147b
passim, esp XXIV
[52-147]
143b-144a, xxv
[64-96]
145a-b 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,787-816]
467a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  137b-138b; 160b-c; part iii,
165a-167b;   176d-177b;   181a-186c;   205b-d;   241c-242a;  conclusion,
281d-282a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  239b-c;  267c-268a; 273a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 38a; 54b-c; 95b-101d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk v
[2I9]-bk
viii
[653] 180a-246b esp bk
viii
[283-451] 238b242a; bk xi [99]-bk xii [649] 301b-333a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  185  205a;  622 286a; 642-692 290b-301a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  XVI,  SECT  14  371b-c; ch xviii-xix
380d-388d passim, esp ch xviii, sect 2-5 381a-382d, SECT 7 383b, ch XIX,
sect  4 385a-b, sect 14 387d-388a, sect 16 388c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   307d-308a   41   Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  231a-d  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  455a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 159b-d;
part III, 306d-308a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50b-c

[453b]
52 Dostokvsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b 137c; bk vi, 150d 153d lb.
The  teaching  function  of  the  church,  of  priests  and prophets Old
Testameni  :  Exodus,  4:10-17;  24:12  /  Deuteronomy,  4:1-5;  5:4-11;
17:9-13; 24:8; 31:913; 33:8-10 / Joshua, 8:30-35— (D) josue, 8:30-35 / /
Samuel,  12:20-25—  (D)  /  Kings,  12:20-25 / ^ ^i^gs^ 8:35-36— (D) ///
Kings,  8:35-36  /  // Kings, 17:26-28; 23:1 -2 -(D) IV Kings, 17:26-28;
23:1-2 / // Chronicles, 17:7-9; 18:7-24; 34:29-30— (D) // Paralipomenon,
17:7-9; 18:7-24; 34:29-30 / Ezra, j1^io—{D) I Esdras, 7:9-10 / Nehemiah,
8—  {D)  II  Esdras,  8  /  Isaiah  passim— (D) Isaias passim / Jeremiah
passim—  (D)  Jeremias  passim  / Eze^iel passim— (£)) Ezechiel passim /
Daniel  passim—  (D)  Daniel, 1:1-3:23 passim; 3:91-12:13 passim / Hosea
passim—  (D)  Osee  passim / Joel passim / Amos passim / Obadiah passim—
(Z))  Abdias passim / Jonah passim. {D) Jonas passim / Micah passim, esp
3:9-12  —  {D)  Micheas  passim, esp 3:9-12 / Nahum passim / Habal{l{u/{
passim—  (D)  Habacuc  passim / Zephaniah passim— (D) Sophonias passim /
Haggai  passim—  (D)  Aggeus  passim  /  Zechariah passim— (D) Zacharias
passim  /  Malachi  passim {D) Malachias passim Apocrypha: Song of Three
Children  passim— (D) OT, Daniel, 3 :24-90 passim / Susanna passim — (D)
OT, Daniel, 13 passim / Bel and Dragon passim— (D) OT, Daniel, 14 passim
New  Testament:  Matthew,  7:28-29;  10;  23; 28:18-20 / Mar^, 1:1-1 1 ;
6:7-13;  13:9-13;  16:14-20  /  LuJ{e,  9:1-6;  10:1-20 /John, 21:1517 /
Romans,  10:14-18 / / Corinthians, 14 / // Corinthians, 3-4 / Ephesians,
3:1-12; 4:11-15 / / Timothy, 3:2; 4 / // Timothy, 2:24-26; 4:1-5 / Titus
passim  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk xx, ch 9, 538d539a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 15 643c644a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, prologue
la-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, partii-ii, q i, A I, rep 3 385c-387a;
q  184,  a  5,  ans  633c634c;  Q  185,  A  3, ans 643a-644a; q 187, a i
663c-665a;  q  188,  aa  4-6  678b-682c;  part  hi  SUPPL,  Q  96,  A  7
1061b-1062a; aa 11-12 1063d1065b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xii
[22105] 123d-124d; xxix [67-126] 151a-c
22  Chaucer: Prologue [477-528] 167b-168a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
123a-b;  part  III,  166a-b;  182d-183a; 208d-211c; 224d-225c 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [656-749] 313b315b; [802-834] 316b-317b; bk xii
[235-248]  324b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 585-588 277a-b; 622 286a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  7d-8c; lOd-lla; 18c / Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xviii,
sect  4  381d-382a;  sect 6 382d-383a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
343b,d-348a

[454a]
(7.  Religious  education,  lb.  The teaching function of the church, of
priests  and  prophets.)  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 194d; 302d-304a
passim, esp 303d; 307d-308a; 355b-d; 601b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
230c-231d; 522d523a 43 Mill: Liberty, 285b / Representative Governme72t,
341a-c  44 BoswEi.!.: Johnson, 313d-316d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory,
part  hi, 308b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 245a-b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karajnazov, bk vi, 152a-153a; 164a-165a 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 793c 8. Education and the state Sa. The educational
responsibility  of  the  family  and  the state 7 Plato: Crito, 217a-b /
Laws,  bk  vii,  721d722c;  BK  viii,  723c-d;  bk xi, 778d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 9 [ii79''3i-ii8o^ 13] 434c-435b / Politics, bk i, ch 13
[1260''
9-19]  455c; BK VIII, CH i 542a-b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i, sect 4
253a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39a-45b  esp  40c-41a  /  Lycurgus-Numa,
63d-64a,c  20  Aquinas:  Sumfna  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 95, a I, ANS
226c-227c;  q  105,  a  4, ans and rep 5 318b-321a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  155b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  344a-c 30 Bacon: New Atlantis,
207c-d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch vi, sect 58-59 37b-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part i, 29b-31a; part iv, 166b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
376b-377a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 338C'339a; 340c-343d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86b-c;  92c  42  Kant:  Science  of Right,
420b-421c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 174 61b; par 239 76d; additions, 111-112 134d135a;
147  140c  50  Marx:  Capital, 176d-178a; 195b-196d; 237d241d; 245a-d 50
Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,   ^21h-c   54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  17d-18a  Sb.  The  economic support of
educational  institutions 7 Plato: Apology, 209b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  30c-31a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 29b-31a; part hi,
106a-b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 56b-58b; bk v, 331b,d-356d 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 669d-670d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 298c

[454b]
396  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  8/08^  43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b  passim  /
Representative  Government,  382c-383b  44 ^os^NEYA.: Johnson, 300a-c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 325d 8c. The political regulation
and censorship of education 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [366-384] 459c-d;
[497-508] 460d-461a
7 Plato: Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-339a; bk iv, 344b-d; bk v, 365d-366c;
bk  x,  427c-434c  esp  432d-434c  / Statesman, 601c-602c / Laws, bk II,
654c-655b;  bk hi, 675c-676b; bk vii 713c- 731d; bk viii, 732c-d; bk xi,
782d-783b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 13
[1260^9-19]
455c; BK V, CH 11
[1313*38-^5] 516a; bk vii,
CH 17
[1336*30-^24]
541b-d; bk viii, ch i
[1337*10-19] 542a
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c passim / Solon, 76a 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  hi,  56d-57b;  bk  iv,  67c;  72b-73a; bk xiv, 152d-153c 18
Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 9 154a-c; CH 12-14 155c-157c; bk viii,
ch 13 273b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 102d-103a; 114d115a; 123a-b;
150c-151a;  part  hi, 224d-225d; conclusion, 282d-283a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  117d-119d;  184a-187c  30  Bacon  :  Advancement  of
Learning,  7a  /  New  Atlantis,  210d-214d  esp  213d,  214b 32 Milton:
Areopagitica  381a-412b esp 384b389a, 398a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
29b-31a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv 13b,d18d; bk XII, 90b-c 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  347c'd 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 148a-b; 355b-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 220b-221b; 223a-c 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, i 17a
43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b passim; 317d-319b passim / Representative
Government,  343b;  344b-c;  368c-369a;  387b-c;  437d-438b 44 BoswELi.:
Johnson,  222d-223b;  512c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
270,  89a-b / Philosophy of History, part i, 213b214a; 217c-218a 8d. The
training  of  the  prince,  the statesman, the citizen: aristocratic and
democratic  theories  of  education Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 38:24-34—
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 38:25-39 5 Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c /
Clouds  488a-506d  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c; BK II,
396d-397a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43a-47c / Republic, bk II-III, 320c-339a;
bk ih, 340b-341a; bk v, 366a-c; bk vi-vii, 383b-401d esp bk vii, 389d401
d / Tifnaeus, 442c-d / Statesman, 607b-

[455a]
^dto  9 Chapter 20; EDUCATION 397 608d / Laws 640a-799a,c csp bk i, 640d
641a,  644b-645c, bk in, 672d 676b, bk iv, 683d685a, BK v-vi, 696c-697d,
bk vi, 704a-c, 706c, BK vii-viii, 713c-735b, bk xii, 784d785b, 796b'799a
/ Serent/i Letter, 801c-802d Q Aristotle: Polities, bk i, ch 13
[1260^9-19]
455c; BK II, CH 5
[i264"i2-4o] 459b-c; ch 7
[i266^26-i267''2] 462b-c; bk
hi, ch 4 [1277* i4-*'i3l 474a-c: en 18
[r288'^:54-''3] 487a,c; bk
IV,  CH  9  [1294^18-28]  494c-d;  en  15  [i3oo*'3-8]  500d; BK V, CH 9
[i3io'*i2-36]  512b-c;  bk  vii,  CH 14 537b-538d; bk viii 542a-548a.c /
Athenian Constitution, en 42 572b'd / RhetoriCy bk i, CH 8
[ 1 365*^32-39] 608a-b
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 5 261a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii
[508-519] 272b-273a
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d / LyewgusNuma, 63d-64a / Solon 64b,d-77a,c
passim,  esp  64b,d-65c,  74b-75b  /  Pericles,  122d-123d / Alcibiades,
156b-158b  passim  /  Lysander,  354b,d-355a  / Agesilaus, 480b,d-481a /
Alexander,  542d-544a  /  Dion,  781b,d-788b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xii,
Hid;  bk  xni,  125d126a;  bk xiv, 153d-155a / Histories, bk iv, 267c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii [115148] 118b-c 23 Machiavelli:
Prince la-37d esp ch vi, 8c-d, ch xiv-xix 21b-30a 23 Ho bees: Leviathan,
intro,  47b-d;  part  i, 94b-c; part ii, 114d-115a; 128c-130a; 150c151a;
153a-156b;  158b-d;  164a,c;  part  iv, 273a-c; conclusion, 282d-283a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  18b-19d; 24a-30c; bk ii,
75a-77a;  78b-83b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60a-62a;  63d-64d; 71d72b 26
Shakespeare:  1st  Henry IV, act i, sc ii [218240] 437C'd / Henry V, act
i, sc i
[22-66]
533b-c / As You Like It, act i, sc i
[1-28]
597a-b  29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part ii, 332C'336a; 362a-c 30 Bacon:
Advaficewent  of  Learning,  20b-28d;  94b-95a  32 Milton: Areopagitica,
384b-389a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 29b'31a; part iv, 166b-167a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv  13b,d18d 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  372a-377b  esp  375d-377b  /  Social  Contract, bk hi, 414b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  303b-304c;  337d-338c;  340c-343d;
346c-347d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 62a-c; 86c; 260a-b; 275c-276b;
284a-c;  435b-c; 534a-c; 633b; 669b 41 Gibbon: Declifie and Fall, 15b-c;
298c;  508c509d  43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d; number 35, 113b-c;
number  53,  168b-169b;  number  56  174d-176d esp 175d-176a; number 62,
190b-d; number 84, 253d-254b

[455b]
43  Mill:  Liberty,  284d  285b;  298b  299a;  302a  c;  317d  323a,c  /
Representative  Goverrnricnt, 336c341d: 344b c; 349a 350a; 351b-c; 357c;
362c366a;  375a 377a; 380c 389b passim, r-^p 3«2c383b; 401a 406a passim,
esp  405d  406a; 407d408b; 415a 417c; 418b d; 420b d; 424b c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  201  b-c;  307d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, |)ar
151-153  57a-c;  par 209 69d; par 296-297 99a-b; additions, 98 133a; 169
145d;  171  146b-c  /  Philosophy of History, part i, 21 2d214d; 243b c;
part  n,  281d;  part  iv,  368b 50 Marx: Capital, 237d-241d csp 238b c.
240c241a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 427c; 429b 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk vi, 244d 245d 54 Freud: Sexual Enlightenrnent nf Children,
122a,c  9.  Historical  and  biographical  observations  concerning  the
institutions   and   practices  of  education  5  Aristophanes:  C/ow^i"
488a-506d  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 32a-b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bki,  370a c; bk II, 396d-397a 7 Plato: Gorgias, 290b-291b / Laws,
bk  i,  644b-646b;  bk  hi, 672d-673d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 9
[1294^18-28] 494c-d; BKVii,cHi4[i333*4i-i334*io]538b-d; BK VIII, ch I
[1337*19-33] 542b; en 4 544a-c
10 Hippocrates: The Oath, xiiia 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i 253a-256d
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 38a-45b passim / Alcibiades, 155b,d-158b / Marcus
Cato, 286c287b / Alexander, 542d-544a / Demosthenes, 691b,d-692b / Dion,
782c-788b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14-31 4c-9a; bk hi, par
6-7  14b-d  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part it, 155d-156b; part IV, 267c-269c
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19d; 24a-30c; bk it,
75c-83b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 57b-63d; 68b-69a; 77d80b; 194c-199c; 395b
401a  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, xia-xvid 30 Bacon: Advanceinent
of Learning la-lOld passim, esp 8c-d, 29c-32c / Novum Organum, bk I, aph
78  119b-c;  aph  80-81 120a-c; aph 90 124d-125a 31 Descartes: Discourse
41a-67a,c  / Meditations, I 75a-77c / Objections and Replies, 278a293a,c
passim  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384b-389a 33 Pascal: Pensees, (i:i(i
286b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk i, en iii, sect 25 120c-d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i, 3a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk. iv,
15c; 16a-18d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 335a-b / Political Economy, 377a

[456a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  Labor  2b. edge 9b; Liberty 2a; Opinion 5b; Poetry 9b;
Truth  8d.  ^'  ies,"  in  Essays  Plutarch.  "A  Discourse Touching the
Training  of  Milton.  Of  Education  . Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq
166-167 Goethe. William Meister

[456b]
398  THE  GREAT IDEAS 9 . ,. , , . 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 40a-41a;
210c-d;  (9.  Historical  and  htographtcal  observattons  con298a-300c;
325d-328a,c; 452a-b; 522b-528a,c cemmg the tnstttuttons and practices of
43  j^j^l:  Liberty,  288a-b  education:)  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 7b-9b;
llb-12c;  15a-17b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 57b-58b; 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 98 BKV, 303b-304c;334C'340c;354d-355d
133a  /  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 213b-c; 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  23d-24a;  245b-d;  part  iv, 325d 260a; 344c-347b passim; 355b-d;
364a-c; 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-685]
lla-18a 543d; 644b-c; 668d-671b passim For: Matters relevant to physical
education  or  the  training  of  bodily  skills,  see Art 9b; Habit 5a;
Matters  relevant to moral education, see Art loa; Custom and Convention
5b; Good and Evil 6a; Habit 5b; History 2; Knowledge 8b(i); Pleasure and
Pain  loa;  Poetry  9a;  Punishment 3a; Virtue and Vice la, 4-4C, 4d(2),
4d(4),  8b;  and  for  the  training of specific virtues, see Courage 6;
Temperance  4.  Matters  relevant  to  liberal education or intellectual
training,  see Art 6b; Habit 4a-4b, 5d; History 2; Knowledge 9a; Man 6a;
Mind  4a-4c;  Pleasure  and Pain loa; Poetry 5a, 9a; Truth 3d(3); Virtue
and Vice 4b-4c; and for discussions of the Hberal arts, see Language la,
7-8; Logic 3-3b; Mathematics ib; Rhetoric ib, 2c-2d, 6. Matters relevant
to professional education or training in the useful arts and crafts, see
Law  9;  Medicine  i,  2c;  Philosophy  5; Rhetoric 6; State 8c. Matters
relevant  to  religious education, see God 6c(i)-6c(3); Knowledge 6c(5);
Prophecy  ic-id;  Religion  ia-ib(3),  5c; Theology 2, 4a-4c; Virtue and
Vice  8b,  8e;  Wisdom  ic.  The  consideration  of  factors involved in
learning  and  teaching,  see  Emotion 5d; Experience 2-3b; Habit 4a-4b;
Knowledge  4a-4b,  9a;  Language  8; Logic 4; Mind 4c; Pleasure AND Pain
4c(2); Truth 3d(3), 8e; Virtue and Vice 4b-4c. The role of the family in
education,  see  Family  2c,  6d; Virtue and Vice 4d(i). The role of the
state  in  education, see Law 6d; Virtue and Vice 4d(3), 7a; and for the
problem  of  education in relation to different forms of government, see
Aristocracy  5;  Citizen  6;  Democracy  6;  Monarchy  3a; State 8c. The
discussion  of  freedom  in the conmiunication of knowledge and art, see
Art lob; KnowlADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in
Great  BooJ^s  ofthe  Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
II.  Works  by authors not represented in this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. F. Bacon. "Of Custom and Education," "Of
Stud-

[457a]
Kant.  Educational  Theory I'ARADAY. "Observations on Mental Education,"
in  Lectures on Education J. S. Mill. "Professor Sedgwick's Discourse on
the Studies of the University of Cambridge," \n vol i, Dissertations and
Discussions  .  Inaugural  Address  .  Autobiography  II.  Xenophon. The
Education   of   Cyrus  Cicero.  De  Oratore  {On  Oratory)  QuiNTiLiAN.
Institutio  Oratoria (institutes of Oratory), BK i; BK II, CH 1-3; BK X,
CH I Sextus Empiricus. Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk hi, CH 27-32 Martianus
Capella.  De  Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii Cassiodorus. Institutiones
(An  Introduction  to  Divine and Human Readings) Hugh of Saint V^ictor.
Didascalicon:  De Studio Legendi John of Salisbury. Metalogicon T. More.
Utopia, bk i Luther. To the Councilmen ofAll Cities in Germany That They
Establish  and  Maintain Christian Schools Castiglione. The Bool{ of the
Courtier Erasmus. The Education of a Christian Prince . De Pueris Statim
ac  Liberaliter Instituendis {On Liberal Education) Elyot. The Governour
VivES.  On  Education  Ignatius  of  Loyola. Constitutions Lyly. Euphues
CoMENius.  The Great Didactic . School of Infancy Fenelon. a Treatise on
the  Education  of  Daughters  .  Adventures of Telemachus Chesterfield.
Letters to His Son Voltaire. "University," in A Philosophical Dictionary
Helvetius.  a  Treatise  on  Man  Franklin.  Autobiography  Lessing. The
Education  of  the  Human  Race  Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning Political
Justice,  bk V, CH 2 Schiller. Letters upon the Esthetic Education ofMan
Pestalozzi.  How  Gertrude  Teaches Her Children HerbART. The Science of
Education  Jean  Paul.  Levana  J.  G.  FicHTE.  Addresses to the German
Nation,  ii-iii,  ix-xiv  De  Quincey.  Letters  to  a  Young  Man Whose
Education Has Been Neglected

[457b]
Chapter  20:  EDUCATION  399 Froe BEL. The Education of Man Emerson. The
American  Scholar  Dickkns.  Nicholas  Nicl{leby  Whewfll.  Of a Liberal
Education  .  The  Elements  of Morality, bk v, ch i 5 Schopenhauer. "On
Education,"  in  Studies  in  Pessimism  J.  H.  Newman.  The  Idea  ofa
University  .  University  Sketches  Spencer.  Essays  on  Education and
Kindred Subjects^ PART I Meredith. The Ordeal of Richard Feverel Arnold.
Culture  and  Anarchy  Nietzsche.  On  the  Future  of  Our  Educational
Institutions  S.  Butler.  The  Way  of  All  Flesh Bain. Education as a
Science  Clifford.  "Virchow  on  the  Teaching  of Science," in VOL II,
Lectures and Essays T. H. Green. The Principles of Political Obligation,
(l)  H.  Adams.  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams  MoNTESsoRi. Method of
Scientific Pedagogy Bryce. The Functions of a University Shaw. Pygmalion
T. Veblen. The Higher Learning in America Whitehead. The Organization of
Thought,  ch  1-5  .  The  Aims  of  Education Kelso. The Doctrine ofthe
English  Gentleman  in the Sixteenth Century Gorky. Forty Years—the Life
ofClim Samghin, vol i, Bystander B. Russell. Education and the Good Life
.  Skeptical  Essays,  xiv Pius XL Divini Illius Magistri (Encyclical on
Christian Education of Youth) Ortega y Gasset. Mission of the University
Rank.  Modern  Education  Jaeger. Paideia T. S. Eliot. "Modern Education
and  the Classics," in Essays, Ancient and Modern Dew^ey. The School and
Society  .  Interest and Effort in Education . Democracy and Education .
Experience   and   Education   Richards.   Interpretation   in  Teaching
Livingstone.  On  Education  Meiklejohn.  Education  Between  Two Worlds
HuTCHiNS.  The  Higher  Learning  in  America  .  Education  for Freedom
Maritain.  Education  at  the  Crossroads  Van  Doren. Liberal Education
Barzun.  Teacher  in  America  Hook.  Education  for  Modern Man Conant.
Education in a Divided World

[458a]
INTRODUCTION THE words "atom" and "element" express basic notions in the
analysis  of  matter. To some extent their meaning seems to be the same.
Atoms or elements are usually understood to be ultimate units, the parts
out  of  which  other  things  are formed by combination. But as soon as
further  questions are asked about the divisibility or indivisibility of
these  units,  or  about their number and variety—we are confronted with
differing  conceptions  of  the  atom, and with a theory of the elements
w^hich  is  opposed  to the atomic analysis of matter. Even when the two
notions  are  not  opposed to one another, they are not interchangeable.
"Atom"  has  a  much  narrower  meaning.  It  usually designates a small
particle  of  matter,  whereas  "element"  signifies the least part into
which  anything  at  all  can  be divided. It is this broader meaning of
"element" which permits Euclid to call his collection of the theorems in
terms  of  which all geometric problems can be solved, the "elements" ot
geometry.  According to Aristotle, this is true, not only of geometrical
proofs,  but  also "in general of the elements of demonstration; for the
primary   demonstrations,   each   of   which   is   implied   in   many
demonstrations,"  he  says, "are called elements of demonstration." From
this  it  follows  that  elements will be found in any subject matter or
science in which analysis occurs, and not only in physics. "An element,"
writes  Nicomachus  in his Introdiiction to Arithmetic, "is the smallest
thing  which  enters  into  the  composition of an object, and the least
thing  into  which  it can be analyzed. Letters, for example, are called
the  elements  of literate speech, for out of them all articulate speech
is  composed  and  into  them  finally  it  is  resolved. Sounds are the
elements of all melody; for they are the beginning of its

[458b]
Chapter  -LT.  ELEMENT composition and into them it is resolved. The so-
called  four  elements  of  the  universe in general are sim^ple bodies,
fire,  water,  air,  and earth; for out of them in the first instance we
account  for  the constitution of the universe, and into them finally we
conceive  of  it  as being resolved." This explains why books in so many
different  fields have the word "element" in their titles. There are the
elements  of  grammar  or  logic, the elements of language or music, the
elements  of  psychology or economics. Elements in one subject matter or
science are analogous to elements in another because in each sphere they
stand  to  everything else as the simple to the complex, the pure to the
mixed,  the parts to the whole. Thus the factors of price may be said to
function  in  economic analysis as do the parts of speech in grammatical
analysis.  Another illustration comes from the theory of the four bodily
humors in ancient physiology. In the traditional enumeration, which goes
back  to  Hippocrates,  they  are  blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black
bile,  and  they function analytically as do fire, water, air, and earth
in  ancient  physics.  They  "make  up  the  nature of the body of man,"
according  to  a Hippocratic treatise on the nature of man, "and through
them he feels pain or enjoys health." Perfect health is enjoyed by a man
"when  these elements are duly proportioned to one another in respect of
compounding,  power,  and  bulk,  and  when they are perfectly mingled."
Galen,  in  an  analysis  of  temperaments,  explains  all  varieties of
temperament  and  all  complexions of physique in terms of these humors,
either  by  their mixture or by the predominance of one or another. Thus
the  sanguine,  phlegma-tic,  choleric,  or  melancholic  temperament is
accounted for by the excess of one and a deficiency of the other humors.
400

[459a]
Chapter  21:  ELEMENT  Still  another  physiological  application of the
notion  of  element  is to be found in the ancient (.li\'ision of tissue
into  flesh  and  bone,  or in the more elaborate modern analysis of the
types  of  cells  which comprise all li\'ing matter. These illustrations
indicate  that  the  irrcducibility of elements to anything simpler than
themselves   does   not   necessarily  mean  that  they  are  absolutely
indivisible.  Cells can be further divided into nucleus, protoplasm, and
membrane  without  ceasing  to  be  the elements of tissue. The parts of
speech—  nouns, verbs, adjectives— can be further divided into syllables
and letters without ceasing to be the elements of significant utterance.
Letters, treated as the elements of language, can be physically divided.
The  fact  that terms are sometimes regarded as the logical elements out
of  which  propositions  and  syllogisms  are  formed does not prevent a
distinction from being made between simple and complex terms. Nicomachus
calls  the  triangle elementary among all plane figures, "for everything
else is resolved into it, but it into nothing else"; yet the triangle is
divisible  into  the  lines which compose it and these lines in turn are
divisible  into  points.  When  Nicomachus says that the triangle is the
element  of  all  other figures "and has itself no element," he does not
mean  that  the  triangle is absolutely indivisible, but only relatively
so.  Relative  to  the  analysis  of  plane figures, there is no simpler
figure  out  of which the triangle can be formed. Similarly, relative to
the  analysis  of  significant speech, there is no simpler part than the
word.  Relative to the analysis of melody, there is no simpler part than
the  tone.  Musical tones may be physically, but they are not musically,
complex.  The  definition of element can also be approached by comparing
its  meaning  with  that  of  principle  and  cause. All three terms are
brought  together  by Aristotle in the beginning of his Physics^ when he
declares that we attain "scientific knowledge" through acquaintance with
the  "principles,  causes, and elements" of things. The word "principle"
occurs  almost  as  frequently as "element" in the titles of books which
claim to be basic expositions or analyses.

[459b]
40!  The  two  words are often used as synonyms. Lavoisier, for example,
says  that  we  can use "the term elements , or principles of bodies, to
express  our  idea  of  the  last  point  which  analysis  is capable of
reaching."  To  discover  any diflerence in the meaning of "element" and
"principle,"  it  is  necessary to specify their correlatives precisely.
Out  of  elements,  compounds  or  mixtures are formed. From principles,
consequences  are  derived. In logic, for example, we say that terms are
the  elements  of  propositions  (the  proposition  'Socrates  is a man'
comprising  the  terms 'Socrates' and 'man'), but we say that axioms are
the principles from which conclusions are derived. This does not prevent
the  same  thing  from  being  viewed  in  djlferent connections as both
element and principle—as an element because it is the simple part out of
which a more complex whole is composed, and as a principle because it is
the  source from which something else is derived. The parts of speech in
grammar are the elementary components of phrases and sentences; they are
also  the  principles  from  which  the rules of syntax are derived. The
third  notion  which  belongs  with  element and principle is cause. Its
correlative  is  effect.  Again  it  can  be  said that that which is an
element  in one connection and a principle in another can be regarded as
a  cause  from  still  a  third  point  of view. In Aristotle's physical
treatises,  for  example, matter is regarded in all three ways: it is an
element  of  all  bodies, for they are substances composed of matter and
form;  it  is  a  principle  of  change,  since  from  matter, form, and
privation change is derived; it is a cause {i.e., the material cause) of
certain  results.  But it must also be observed that everything which is
any one of these three is not necessarily both of the others also. Since
an  element,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  a  "component immanent in a
thing,"  anything  that  is an extrinsic principle or cause cannot be an
element.  Thus  the  action  of  one  body upon another is a cause and a
principle,  but not an element. Referring to these distinctions, Aquinas
declares  that  ''principle is a wider term than cause, just as cause is
more  common than element.'' The chapters on Cause and Principle tend to
substantiate  this  observation  about  the  scope of these ideas in the
tradition of western thought.

[460a]
402  THE  GREAT  IDEAS The basic issues concerning elements occur in the
analysis  of  matter.  Before  Plato  and  Aristotle,  the  early  Greek
physicists  had  asked such questions as, From what do all things come ?
Of  what  are  all things made ? A number of answers were given, ranging
from one kind of ultimate, such as earth or fire, through a small set of
ultimate kinds, to an infinite variety. The classical theory of the four
elements  is  the  middle  answer,  avoiding  the  extremes of unity and
infinity. According to Galen, it was Hippocrates who "first took in hand
to  demonstrate  that  there  are,  in  all,  four  mutually interacting
qualities"  and  who  provided "at least the beginnings of the proofs to
which Aristotle later set his hand" in developing the theory of the four
elements.  Galen  also  indicates  that  it was a subject of controversy
among  the ancients whether the "substances as well as the qualities" of
the  four  elements  "undergo this intimate mingling" from which results
"the  genesis  and destruction of all things that come into and pass out
of  being."  Aristotle,  in  his  treatise On Generation and Corruption,
enumerates the various senses in which the physicist considers elements.
"We  have  to  recognize  three 'originative sources' (or elements)," he
writes:  "firstly, that which is potentially perceptible body; secondly,
the  contrarieties  {e.g., heat and cold); and thirdly. Fire, Water, and
the  like."  The "potentially perceptible body" is identified with prime
matter,  and, since this "has no separate existence, but is always bound
up  with  a  contrariety,"  it can be ruled out from the usual notion of
element.  The  elementary qualities, the "contrarieties" named secondly,
are  the  hot  and cold and dry and moist. The so-called elements. Fire,
Air,  Water,  and  Earth,  are left to the last, and are mentioned "only
thirdly,"  Aristotle  says,  because they "change into one another . . .
whereas  the  contrarieties  do  not  change,"  The elementary quafities
"attach  themselves"  by couples to the "apparently 'simple' bodies." In
consequence,  Aristotle writes, "Fire is hot and dry, whereas Air is hot
and  moist  .  .  . and Water is cold and moist, while Earth is cold and
dry."  Each  of  them,  however,  "is  characterized par excellence by a
single quality."

[460b]
In  terms  of these simple bodies and the elementary qualities all other
material  things can be explained. In contrast to the elements stand the
mixed,  or  compound,  bodies,  in the constitution of which two or more
elements  combine.  There may be many kinds of mixed bodies, but none is
irreducible  in  kind,  as  are the four elements; any mixed body can be
divided  into the different kinds of elementary bodies which compose it,
whereas  the  elementary  bodies  cannot be divided into parts which are
different  in  kind  from  themselves.  A  living body, for example, may
contain  parts of earth and water, but the parts of earth are earth, the
parts  of  water,  water.  It is precisely the mode of divisibility that
Aristotle  declares  is  "the  fundamental  question." In answering this
question  he  opposes  the  theory of the four elements to another Greek
account  of  the constitution of matter— the atomic theory, developed by
Leucippus and Democritus, and expounded for us in Lucretius' poem On the
Nature  of  Things,  According  to  the  Greek  atomists,  matter is not
infinitely  divisible.  "If  nature  had set no limit to the breaking of
things," Lucretius writes, "by this time the bodies of matter could have
been  so  far  reduced  .  . . that nothing could within a fixed time be
conceived  out of them and reach its utmost growth of being." There must
then  be  "a fixed limit to their breaking"—a limit in physical division
which   ultimately   reaches   units   of  matter  that  are  absolutely
indivisible.  Lucretius  calls  them  "first  beginnings  ...  of  solid
singleness,  .  . . not compounded out of a union of parts, but, rather,
strong  in everlasting singleness"— the "seeds of things," or atoms. The
Greek word from which "atom" comes literally means uncuttable. From this
it  is  evident  that Aristotle can deny the existence of atoms while at
the  same  time  he  affirms  the  existence  of  elementary bodies. The
elements,  unlike  the  atoms,  are  not  conceived  as  indivisible  in
quantity,  but  only  as  incapable  of  division  into diverse kinds of
matter.  In  the  Greek  conception  of atom and element, the difference
between them lies in this distinction between quantitative and qualita-

[461a]
tive indivisibility. The atom is the least quantity of matter. It cannot
be broken into quantitative parts. The elementary body is not atomic. It
is always capable of division into smaller units, but all of these units
must be of the same kind as the elementary body undergoing division. The
element  is  indivisible  only in the sense that it cannot be decomposed
into  other l^inds of matter, as a mixed body can be decomposed into its
diverse  elements.  The atom cannot be divided in any way. Only compound
bodies  can  be  divided  into their constituent atoms, all of which are
alike  in kind, differing only quantitatively—in size, shape, or weight.
Different  kinds  of  matter occur only on the level of compounds and as
the  result  of diverse combinations of atoms. This last point indicates
another  contrast between atoms and elements in ancient physical theory.
The  elements  are  defined,  as  we  have  seen,  by  their qualitative
differences   from   one   another;  or,  more  strictly,  according  to
combinations  of  elementary  sensible qualities—hot and cold, moist and
dry.  By  virtue  of  the  qualities peculiar to them, the four elements
stand  in  a  certain  order to one another. Water and air, according to
Plato,  are  "in  the  mean  between  fire and earth" and have "the same
proportion so far as possible; as fire is to air so is air to water, and
as  air  is to water so is water to earth." The quality which two of the
elements  have in common provides the mean. Thus fire and air are joined
by  the  common  quality  of  hot; air and water by moist; and water and
earth  by cold. When their analysis reached its greatest refinement, the
ancients  recognized  that  the  earth,  air,  fire, and water of common
experience  do not actually have the purity requisite for elements. They
are  "not simple, but blended," Aristotle writes, and while the elements
"are indeed similar in nature to them,
[they] are
not  identical  with them." The element "corresponding to fire is 'such-
as-fire,'  not fire; that which corresponds to air is 'such-as-air,' and
so  on with the rest of them." Thus the four elements are only analogous
to,  for  they are purer than, ordinary earth, air, fire, and water; yet
their  names  continued  to  be used as symbols for the true elements, a
connotation which is

[461b]
Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 403 still retained when we speak of men struggling
against  or battling with "tlic clcmcnls." "It will no doubt be a matter
of  surprise,'*  Lavoisier  writes  in  the  Preface  to his Elements of
Chemistry,  "that  in  a  treatise upon the elements of chemistry, there
should  be no chapter on the constituent and elementary parts of matter;
but  I  shall  take occasion, in this place, to remark that the fondness
for  reducing  all  the  bodies  in  nature  to  three or four elements,
proceeds  from  a  prejudice  which  has  descended to us from the Greek
philosophers.  The  notion  of  four  elements, which, by the variety of
their proportions, compose all the known substances in nature, is a mere
hypothesis,  assumed  long  before  the first principles of experimental
philosophy  or  of chemistry had any existence." This does not mean that
Lavoisier  entirely rejects the notion of elements in chemical analysis.
On  the  contrary,  he  says  that  "we must admit, as elements, all the
substances  into which we are capable, by any means, to reduce bodies by
decomposition."  His  quarrel  with  the  ancients  chiefly concerns two
points.  The  first  is  on  the number of the elements, which he thinks
experiment  has  shown  to  be  much  greater than the four of classical
theory. The second is on the simplicity of the experimentally discovered
elements.  They  can  be called atoms or simple bodies only if we do not
thereby  imply  that  we  know  them to be absolutely indivisible—either
qualitatively  or  quantitatively.  We  are not entitled "to affirm that
these  substances we consider as simple may not be compounded of two, or
even  of  a greater number of principles" merely because we have not yet
discovered  "the  means  of  separating  them."  In  modern  physics and
chemistry,  the  distinction  between  element  and  atom  seems  to  be
abolished.  The  same  unit  of  matter  is  at once both an atom and an
element.  The  table  of atomic weights is also a chart of the elements.
The  classification  of  atoms  is  both  quantitative  and qualitative—
qualitative in the sense that the atoms of different elementary kinds of
matter  differ  in  their  active  properties.  According to the ancient
meaning of the terms, the molecule would seem to be both a mixture and a
compound mixed, in that it can

[462a]
404  THE  GREAT IDEAS be broken up into other \inds of matter; compound,
in  that  it  can be divided into smaller units of matter. But in modern
theory  the  meanings of "compound" and "mixture" have also changed, the
molecule  being  classilied  as  a  compound  rather than a mixture. The
combination of the elements to form molecular compounds is determined by
the  proportion  of their weights or valences rather than by a fusion of
their qualities. The most radical change in theory is not this, however;
nor  is  it the increase in the number of the elements from four to more
than ninety-four; nor the ordering of the elements by reference to their
atomic  weights  rather  than  by the contrariety of their qualities. It
results  from  the discovery that an atom is not uncuttable and that new
elements  can be produced by atomic fission. Faraday's experimental work
in   ionization  and  in  electro-chemical  decomposition  lies  at  the
beginning  of the physical researches which have penetrated the interior
structure  of the atom and isolated smaller units of matter. Even before
atoms  were  experimentally  exploded,  analysis  had  pictured  them as
constituted  by  positive  and  negative  charges.  As the result of his
researches, Faraday, for example, conceives of atoms as "mere centres of
forces  or  powers,  not  particles  of  matter,  in  which  the  powers
themselves  reside."  The atom thus ceases to be "a little unchangeable,
impenetrable   piece  of  matter,"  and  "consists  of  the  powers"  it
exercises.  What  was  ordinarily  referred  to  "under  the term shape"
becomes  the "disposition and relative intensity of the forces" that are
observed.  With  Faraday  it  is  evident that the meaning of "atom" has
departed far from the sense in which Lucretius speaks of "units of solid
singleness"  or  Newton  of  "solid,  massy, hard, impenetrable, movable
particles . . . incomparably harder than any porous bodies compounded of
them; even so very hard as never to wear or break in pieces; no ordinary
power  being  able  to  divide  what  God  himself made one in the first
creation."  With  the  conception  of the elements as different kinds of
atoms; then, with the discovery of radio-active elements undergoing slow
disintegration;  finally,  with  the  production  of  isotopes  and  new
elements through

[462b]
atomic  change;  the meaning of "element" has moved equally far from its
original sense. Do THESE ALTERED meanings change the basic issues in the
philosophy of nature } Are these issues resolved or rendered meaningless
by experimental science ? The central point in the theory of elements is
an irreducible qualitative diversity in kinds of matter. The elements of
modern  chemistry  may  no  longer  be elementary types of matter in the
strict  sense  of  the  word;  but the kind of difference which would be
strictly  elemental may be found in the distinction of the positive, the
negative,  and the neutral with respect to the electrical charge of sub-
atomic   particles.  Similarly,  the  central  point  in  atomism  as  a
philosophy of nature is the existence of absolutely indivisible units or
quanta  of  matter; in other words, the denial that matter is infinitely
divisible,  that  any particle, no matter how small, is capable of being
broken  into  smaller  parts.  The  strict  conception  of  the atom is,
therefore,  not  invalidated  by  the  experimental  discovery  that the
particles  called  "atoms"  are  not  atomic,  that  they are themselves
complex  stmctures  of moving particles, and that they can be physically
divided. It makes no difference to the philosophical atomist whether the
particles which constitute molecules or the particles— the electrons and
protons,  the  neutrons and mesons—which constitute "atoms," are atomic.
Even if further experimental work should succeed in dividing these "sub-
atomic"  particles,  the  question  could  still  be  asked:  Is  matter
infinitely  divisible, regardless of our actual power to continue making
divisions  ad  infinitum  ?  Since  the  question, when thus formulated,
cannot  be  put  to  experimental test, the issue concerning atoms would
remain.  That issue would not refer to any particle of matter defined at
a certain stage of physical analysis or experimental discovery. It would
consist  in  the opposition of two views of the nature of matter and the
constitution of the material universe: the affirmation, on the one hand,
that  truly  atomic  particles must exist; and the denial, on the other,
that  no  particle of matter can be atomic. The affirmative arguments of
Lucretius and Newton make the con-

[463a]
CllAPTUR  21  slaiicy  of  nature  ami  ilic indestructibility of matter
depend   on  the  absolute  solidity  and  impenetrability  of  matter's
ultinuite  parts.  The  negative  arguments  of  Aristotle and Descartes
proceed   from  the  divisibility  of  whatever  is  continuous  to  the
conclusion  that  any  unit of matter must have parts. The philosophical
doctrine  of  atomism,  in  the  form  in which Lucretius adopts it from
Epicurus,  insists  upon  void  as  the  other  basic  principle  of the
universe.  "Nature,"  he  writes,  "is  founded on two things: there are
bodies  and  there  is void in which these bodies are placed and through
which they move about." Compound lx>dies are divisible because the atoms
of  which  they  are  composed  arc  not  absolutely continuous with one
another,  but are separated by void or empty space. That is why they are
not  solid  or  impenetrable,  as  are  the  atomic  particles which are
composed  of matter entirely without void. In Newton's language hardness
must  be  "reckoned  the  property  of  all uncompounded matter," for if
"compound bodies are so very hard as we find some of them to be, and yet
are  very  porous,"  how much harder must be "simple particles which are
void  of pores." The opponents of atomism tend to deny the existence not
only  of  atoms, but of the void as well. Descartes, for example, denies
that there can be "any atoms or parts of matter which are indivisible of
their  own nature. . . . For however small the parts are supposed to be,
yet  because they are necessarily extended we are always able in thought
to  divide any one of them into two or more parts." For the same reason,
he  maintains, there cannot be "a space in which there is no substance .
.  .  because  the extension of space or internal place is not different
from  that  of  body." The physical world, on this view, is conceived as
what the ancients called a plenum, continuously filled with matter. This
controversy  over void and plenum is elaborated in the chapter on Space.
Although  he  uses  the language of the atomists, Faraday seems to agree
with   Descartes   rather  than  with  Newton.  He  pictures  matter  as
"continuous  throughout," with no distinction between "its atoms and any
intervening  space." Atoms, he thinks, instead of being absolutely hard,
are "highly elastic," and they are

[463b]
ELEMKN'I' 405 all "mutually penetrable." He compares the combination and
separation  of  two  atoms  with  "the  conjunction  oi two sea waves of
different velocities into one, their perfect union lor a time, and final
separation  into the constituent waves." Such a view of the constitution
of  matter,  Faraday  writes, leads to "the conclusion that matter fills
all space, or at least all space to which gravitation extends." The very
continuity—  the  voidlessncss  or  lack of pores—which the opponents of
atomism  insist  is  the  source  of matter's infinite divisibility, the
atomists  seem  to  give  as  the  reason why the ultimate particles are
without  parts,  hence  simple,  solid,  and indivisible. On still other
poixts,  there is disagreement among the atomists themselves. Not all of
them  go  to  the  extreme  of  denying existence or reality to anything
immaterial;  nor do all insist that whatever exists is either an atom or
made  up  of  atoms  and  void. In the tradition of the great books, the
extreme  doctrine  is  found  in Lucretius alone. Though it is shared by
Hobbes, and is reflected in the Leviathan, it is not expounded there. It
is  developed  in his treatise Concerning Body. For Lucretius, the atoms
are  eternal  as  well  as indestructible. The "first beginnings" of all
other  things  are  themselves  without  beginning.  "In  time gone by,"
Lucretius  writes,  "they  moved in the same way in which now they move,
and  \\\\\  ever  hereafter  be  borne  along in like manner" through an
endless  succession  of  worlds,  each  of  which  comes to be through a
concourse  of atoms, each in turn perishing as with decay that concourse
is  dissolved.  Newton  writes  in what seems to be a contrary vein. "It
seems probable to me," he says, "that God in the beginning formed matter
in  solid,  massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles." "All material
things," he continues, "seem to have been composed of the hard and solid
particles above mentioned, variously associated in the first Creation b}
the  counsel  of  an  intelligent  Agent." Nor does Newton appeal to the
properties  and  motions of the ultimate particles except to explain the
characteristics  and  laws  of  the physical world. Unlike Lucretius and
Hobbes, he does not—and there seems to be some evidence

[464a]
406  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2. The comparison of element, principle, and cause
3^.  Element  and  atom: qualitative and quantitative indivisibility 3^.
The  enumeration  of  the  elements:  their properties and order ^c. The
mutability  of  the  elements:  their  transmutation 4. The discovery of
elements  in other arts and sciences infinite divisibility of matter 5c.
Atoms  and  the  void  as  the  ultimate constituents of reality 5^. The
atomistic account of sensation and thought: the idola tions of atoms

[464b]
in  the  Optics  that  he  would  not—  reduce  the  smells  of bodies."
Furthermore,  the  distinction soul of man to a flow of extremely mobile
which  is here implicit—between primary and atoms, or attempt to account
for  all  psychosecondary  sense  qualities—is  not  peculiar to logical
phenomena  (thought  as  well  as  senatomism. It can also be found in a
critic  of  sation  and  memory) in terms of atom buffeting atomism like
Descartes.  atom. The atomistic account of sensation is, neverThe atomic
theory  of  the  cause of sensation theless, of critical significance in
the  controls  not  limited  to  the  materialists.  Writers  like versy
concerning  this  type  of  materialism.  CritLocke, who conceive man as
having  a  spiritual ics of atomism have contended that the truth nature
as  well  as  a  body,  adopt an atomistic of atomism as a materialistic
philosophy  can  be  view  of  the  material  world. "The different mono
greater than the measure of its success in extions and figures, bulk and
number  of such parplaining sensation— the source upon which the tides,"
he  writes, "affecting the several organs atomist himself relies for his
knowledge  of naof our senses, produce in us those different senture— in
terms  of  the  properties and motions of OUTLINE OF TOPICS' PAGE 1. The
concept  of  element  407  3.  The  theory  of  the  elements in natural
philosophy, physics, and chemistry 408 3^. Combinations of the elements:
compounds  and  mixtures  409  5.  The  theory  of atomism: critiques of
atomism   410  5^.  The  conception  of  atomic  bodies:  imperceptible,
indestructible,  and  indivisible  5^.  Arguments  for  and  against the
existence  of  atoms:  the issue concerning the 5^. The number, variety,
and  properties  of  atoms:  the  production of sensible things by their
collocation 411 5g. The explanation of natural phenomena by reference to
the  properties  and mo5^. The atomistic account of the origin and decay
of the world, its evolution and order 412

[465a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy tvpc,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homur:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one column, the letters a and b refer to the upperand lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, m5S]AMEs: Psychology, 116a'119h, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the  letters  c  and  d  to  the upper and lower halvesof the right-hand
sideof  the  page.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (Z))  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the Preface. The concept of element 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455d-456a
/  Theaetetus,  544d-547c  esp  544d-545a,  547a  / Laws, bk x, 761b-d 8
Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  13  204c-206a esp [150^18-26] 205b-c /
Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b / Heavens, bk hi, ch 3
[302*io]-ch 4
[302^20] 393c-394a / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 3
[983*24]-CH
5
[986^8] 501c-504c; ch 6 [987^
I91-CH 7 [988^31] 505d-506c; ch 8 506d-508c; CH 9
[992*1-9]
510b;
[992*^18-993*10]
510b511c esp [992^18-993*10] 511a-c; bk hi, ch i
[995^27-29] 514b; ch 3
[998*20-^14] 517a-b;
bk  V, CH 3 534c-d; ch 4 [1014^27-34] 535a-b; CH 25 [1023^17-25] 545b-c;
bk vii, ch 7 555a556b; CH 10 558a-559d; ch 17
[1041^11-33]
565d-566a,c; bk x, ch i
[1052^8-14]
579a; bk XII, CH 4-5 599d-601a; bk xiv, ch 2
[1088^14-28] 620d-621a
/ Soul, bk i, ch 5
[410*12-23] 640a-b
9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252*18-24]
445b  11  NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 829a; 833a-b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr i, ch 3 79b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 16, 522a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 66, a 2 345d-347b; q 91, a i,
ans and rep 3 484a-485b

[465b]
Chapter  21: ELEMENT 407 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q
74,  A  I,  rep  3  925c-926c;  q  91, a 5, ans and rep 4 1024a-1025b 31
Descartes:  Rules, viii, 14b-c; xii, 22b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, lOOc-d;
103a;  105b-106a;  137a-140c  45 Lavoisier: Elements ofChemistry , pref,
3b-4a esp 3d-4a 53 James: Psychology, 327a-331b passim 2. The comparison
of  element,  principle,  and  cause 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455d 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i 259a-b; ch 4-9 262a-268d passim / Generation and
Corruption, bk ii, ch i [329*24-^2] 429a-b / Metaphysics, BK I, ch 6
[987^19-23]
505d;
[988*7-16]
506a-b;  bk  hi, ch 3 [998*20-^13] 517a-b; bk V, CH 1-3 533a-534d; ch 24
545a-b; bk vii, ch 16 [1040^16-23] 564d; ch 17 [1041^11-33] 565d-566a,c;
bk viii, ch 3 [1043^5-14] 567d568a; bk x, ch i [1052^8-14] 579a; bk xii,
ch I 598a-c; ch 4-5 599d-601a esp ch 4
[1070^
22-35] 600b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3, 79c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 33, a I, REP I 180d-181c 45 Lavoisier: Elements
ofChemistry, pref, 3d-4a

[466a]
3.  The  theory  of  the  elements  in  natural philosophy, physics, and
chemistry  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240d-242b/  Timaeus,  448h-d; 455c-462b /
Philebus,  618c-619a / Laws, bk x, 760a-761d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i,
ch i [i84^io]-ch 2
[184^24] 259a-c; ch 4-9 262a-268d / Heavens,
BK  iii-iv  389b,d-405a,c / Generation and Corruption 409a-441a,c esp bk
ii,  ch  1-3  428b,d431a  /  Meteorology  445a-494d  10  Galf.n: Natural
Faculties,  bk i, ch 2-3 167b169a; ch 6 169c-170c; bk n, ch 4, 186d-187b
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i [635-920] 8d-12b 17 Plotinus:
Second En?tead, tr i, ch i, 35a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  49,  A  4, ANS 5a-6a; part hi suppl, q 74 925b935ax passim; q 91, a 4
1022d-1023d;  a  5, AN\s and REP 4 1024a-1025b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk
hi,  60c-d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry la-159d passim 45 Faraday
:  Researches  in Electricity, 383b-386c 53 James: Psychology, 876a 3<?.
Element   and   atom:  qualitative  and  quantitative  indivisibility  8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 2
[184^15-22]
259b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 4
[303'*3]-ch 5
[304^23]
394b-396a; ch 7
[305^27-306*^2]
397a-d; bk iv, ch 2
[308^29-310^13] 400b401c
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4
[985''3-i9]
503c-d; bk v, ch 3
[1014^3-6] 534d; ch 25
545b-c / Soul, bk i, ch 2 [403*^28-404^5] 633a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [599-920] 8b-12b esp [705-920] 9c-12b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 3 79b-c 30 Bacon: Novum Organufn, bk i, aph 45 110b;
aph 66, 114d-115a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 161d-163a 45 Lavoisier: Elements
of  Chemistry,  pref,  3b4a;  PART  III,  87c-d;  103b-c;  105d  3b. The
enumeration  of  the  elements:  their  properties  and  order  7 Plato:
Cratylus,  98d  /  Phaedo,  247b'248c  /  Timaeus,  448b-d;  458b-460b /
Philebus,  618c619a  /  Laws, bk x, 760a- 761 d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
hi, ch 5 [204*^10-205^ 6] 282c-283a; bk iv, ch i
[208*^8-22] 287b /
Heavens, bk i, ch 1-8 359a-369a; cii 9
[278*^
22-35]  370a;  bk  ii,  ch  3 377c-378a; bk hi, ch I 389b,d-391c; ch 3-5
393c-396a; bk hi, ch 7 i3o6''i]-BK ly, ch 6 [3i3''24] 397b-405a,c esp BK
IV,  CH 3-5 401c-404d / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch i 409a-410c;
bk  ii, ch 1-3 428b.d-431a / Meteorology, bk i, ch 2-3 445b-447d; bk iv,
ch i
[378^10-26] 482b,d483a
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch ^
[98:5'*24]-ch 5
[986*^8]
501c-504c; ch 7
[988"! 7-31]
506b-c; ch 8 506d-508c; bk v, ch 4
[1014*^27-35]
535a-b / Soul, bk i, ch 2
[404*^7-31] 633d-

[466b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 3 to 3c 'I 634a; ch 5
[409*^18-411^7] 639c-641a; bk hi,
CH  I  [424*'2o-425'*i3]  656b,d-657a  / Sense and the Setisible, ch 2-5
674a-683b passim 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[646'''i2-*'2o]
170a-d; ch 2
[648^2o]-ch
3
[649*^22] 172c-174b
/ Generation of Animals, bk III, CH II
[761*^7-24] 302c-d
10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2-3, 167d169a; ch 6 169c-170c; bk
ii,  ch  4,  186d-187a;  ch 8, 193b-d 11 NicoMACHus: Arithmeti-c, bk ii,
829a  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [705-715] 9d; [763-788] lOb-c
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 13, 188d189a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk
vi  [724-731]  230b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 3 36b-d; CH 6-7
37d-39c  / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 2 192a-b / Sixth Etinead, tr hi, ch
9,  285d286a; tr vii, ch ii 326d-327d 18 Augustine: Citv of God, bk vih,
ch  2 265b266a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 66, A I, CONTRARY
and  rep to contrary 343d345c; A 2 345d-347b; q 71, a i, rep 2 367a368b;
q  91,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 3 484a-485b; Q 115, A 3, REP 2 588c-589c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 74 925b-935a,c passim, esp a
5  929d-931b;  Q  79,  A  I,  REP  4  951b-953b; q 91, a 4 1022d1023d 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  13b-d;  bk  hi, 60c-d 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  491a-b;  496a-c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 45 110b;
APH 66, 114d-115a; bk ii, aph 40, 171a-173a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi  [708-721]  150b151a 45 Lavoisier: Elements ofChemistry, pref, 3b-4a;
part  I, 29d-33b; part ii, 53a-55a; 57c-65a,c 45 Faraday : Researches in
Electricity,  383b-386c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 248d-249a 3c.
The  mutability  of  the elements: their transmutation 7 Plato: Timaeus,
456b-c; 458d-460b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3 360d-362a; BK III, CH
I
[298*^24-299*1] 389b,d-390b; ch
2
[301*^33-302^9] 393b; CH
6
[304*'23]-ch
8
[306*^29] 396a-398a / Generation and Corruption, BK
I, CH I 409a-410c; ch 6
[322*^1-21]
420b-d;  bk  ii, ch 4-6 431b-435a / Meteorology, BK I, ch 3 [339*36-*'3]
445d  /  Metaphysics,  BK  I,  CH 8 [989*18-29] 507b-c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167d168b;  BK II, ch 3, 185c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-829]  8d-lla;  BK V [235-305 j 64a-65a;
[380-415]  66a-c  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; BK IV,
sect  46  267c;  bk v, sect 13 271b; bk vii, sect 18 281a; sect 23 281b;
sect 25 281c; sect 50 283a; bk x, sect 7 297b-c

[467a]
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i,  q  66, A 2, ANs 345d-347b 20
Aquinas:  Sumnia  Thculogica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q  74, AA 1-6 925c-932b
passim;  q  91,  a 5, ans and RKP 4 1024a 1025b 21 Dantk: Diiine Comedy,
paradisi.,  vii  (121148]  116b-c  22 Chaucer: Canon's Yeoman s Prologue
471b474a  /  Canon  s Yeoman s 7 rf/c 474b-487a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  14b-c  34  Newton:  Optics, bk hi, 531a40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 148a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299d-300a 44 BoswELh: Johnson,
262c  45  Lavoisier: Elements ofChemistry, PARTi,41b-c 3</. Combinations
of  the  elements:  compounds  and  mixtures  7 Plato: Timaeiis, 448b-d;
449c-450a; 452d454a; 460b-462c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 14
[i5r''2o-32]
206a  / Physics, bk hi, ch 5 [204^10-22] 282c-d; BK VII, ch 3 [246^2 19]
329c-330a / Heavens, BK I, CH 2
[268^27-269*30]
360a-c; ch 5
[271^18-23! 362d-363a; bk hi, ch 3
[302'*io]-
CH 4
[302^28] 393c-394a; ch
8
[306^22-29]
398a; bk iv, ch 4
[311*30-^14] 402d-403a /
Generation  ajid  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  i  [314*25-  ^2]  409c;  ch 2
[315*28-33] 410d; ch 10 426c428d; bk it, ch 6-8 433d-436d / Meteorology,
bk hi, ch 6
[378*i3]-bk
iv, ch 12
[390^21]
482c-494d / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 17 [1041^ 12-33] 565d-566a,c / Soul,
bk i, ch 2 [404^729] 633d-634a;
[405'^8-3i] 634d-635a; ch
5
[409^18-411*7]
639c-641a; bk hi, ch 13
[435*11-^4]
668a-c  / Sense and the Sensible^ CH 2-3 674a-678b 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640^5-18]
163a-b; bk ii, ch i
[646*i2-'^2o]
170a-d  10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 15 5c-d 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties, bk i, ch 2-3 167b169a; ch 6 169c-170c; bk ii, ch 8, 193b-d 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-920]  8d-12b  12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  hi, ch 13, 189a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk x, sect 7,
297b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 929b-930a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
i,  ch  6-8 37d39d; tr vii, ch 1-2 62d-64b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
vih,  ch  2  265b266a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Thcologica, part i, q 71, a I
367a-368b;  q  76, a 4, rep 4 393a-394c; Q 91, A I 484a-485b 20 Aquinas:
Sumfna Theohgica, part hi, q 2, A I, ANS 710a-711c; part hi suppl, q 74,
a  i, rep 3 925c-926c; a 4, ans 928d-929d; a 5 929d-931b; q 79, a i, rep
4  951b-953b; q 80, A 3, rep 3 958b-959c; q 82, a i, ans 968a970c; q 91,
A 5 1024a-1025b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c

[467b]
28 Gilbert: Loadstone, r.K i, 13b 14d; hk ii, 29c 30a 28 1 1 \R\ F.v: On
Animal  Generation,  495c-496d  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 66
114d115c; BK 11, APH 7 139c 140a; aph 40, 171a173a; aph 48, 181a 184a 33
Pascal:  Vacuum,  367a b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 65 425d-426a
45  Lanoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry, part i, 22c52a,c; part ii, 54b,d
55d; 57c 86a, c; part in, 87c-d; 103b-c; 105d; 117a 128c csp 117a118a 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  309a-312a;  312c-313d;  314a  b;
315a-b;  327'a  422a,c passim; 541b,d-584a,c passim 51 ToLSTf)Y: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  248d-249a  53 James: Psychology, 104a-105a; 876a 4. The
discovery  of  elements  in  other  arts and sciences 7 Plato: Cratylus,
104c-110d  esp  106a-107b  /  Republic,  bk  hi,  333c-d  / 'Theaetetus,
544c548c  /  Philcbus,  615c-617d;  618d-619b;  635b639a,c  8 Aristotle:
Categories,  ch  2  [1*17 iq] 5b / Interpretation, CH 4 [16^27-35] 26a /
Prior Analytics, BK I, CH I [24^17-22] 39c; CH 2:5
[40*^1822] 57b; [41*4-7] 57d / Posterior Analytics, bk
I, CH 4
[73*33-^2]
lOOb-c; CH 7
[75=*38-^7|
103c; CH 23
[84^19-85*1]
115c-116a;  ch  27  119b  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  4-9 144b-147b esp ch 4
[101^11-25] 144b-c; BK VI, CH i
[i39='24-:52]
192a;  ch  13  204c-206a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  CH  5 [985^22-986*21]
503d-504b; ch 6
[987*^
19-23] 505d;
[988*7-16] 506a-b; ch
9
[992''
18-993*10] 511a-c; BK HI, CH 3
[998*20-^11]
517a-b;  ch  6  [1002^11-25]  521b-c;  bk v, ch 3 534c-d; bk xii, ch 4-5
599d-601a / Sold, bk i, CH2 [404*^7-29] 633d-634a; ch 5 [409^23-411* 23]
639d-641b;  bk  hi, ch 5 [430*10-14] 662c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk ii, ch i
[646*1 o]-cH 2 [647^30] 170a-172a / Politics, bk
I, CH I [1252*18-24] 445b; bk hi, ch i
[1274^^
31-1275*2]  471b;  ch  3  [1276*34-^15]  473b-c / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 13
667b-d  /  Poetics,  ch  6  684a-685a; ch 20 692b-693a 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  6 169c170c; BK II, ch 6 188c 191a; bk hi, ch 15,
215a  b  11  EucLin:  Elements la-396b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii,
829b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 1 [823-829] 11a; bkh [688-699]
23d  16 Kepler: Harmonies ofthe World, 1016b-1017a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk xix, ch 16, 522a 19 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, part i, q 119, A
I,  rep 3 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, part h-ii, q 179, a 2,
REP  2 607a-c; part hi suppl, q 80, A 3 958b-959c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and Pantagruel^ bk hi, 138a-d

[468a]
(4.  The  discovery  of elements in other arts and sciences.^ 28 Harvey:
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  316d / On Animal Generation, 429c-438c esp
432d-433b;  488d-496d  esp  490d-491c,  494a-b  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  52b-d;  76d-77c  31 Descartes: Rules, vi, 8b-9a; viii, 14b-c;
XII,  21b-24c  /  Discourse,  part  vi,  62a  /  Objections and Replies,
128a-129a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  it,  ch  ii,  SECT 1-2
127d-128b;  ch  vii,  sect  io  133a-b;  CH xii, SECT 1-2 147b-d; sect 8
148c-d;  ch  XV,  sect  9 164b-d; ch xvi, sect i 165c-d; CH xxi, sect 75
200b-d;  bk hi, ch iv, sect 15-16 263a'C 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i,  20b-23b  esp  20b-21c, 22b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  341  110c  50  Marx:  Capital,  6b-c;  19c-26d passim, esp 20b-22a,
25d-26d;  62a;  85d'88d  esp  85d, 88c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
469a-470c;   bk   xiv,  589c-590c;  epilogue  ii,  694d-695c  53  James:
Psychology,  xiiib;  18b-19b;  116b-117a;  126a;  150a 54 Freud: War and
Death,  758a  5.  The  theory  of atomism: critiques of atomism 7 Plato:
Sophist, 567a-568a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 2
[184^15-22]
259b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 7 [275^30-276^18] 367a-b; bk hi, ch 4
[303*3-^8] 394b-d;
bk IV, ch 2 [308^29-310^14] 400b-401c / Generation and Corruption, bk i,
ch 2 410d-413c; CH 8
[325^23-^11] 423d-424b
/ Metaphysics, BK I, CH 4 [985^3-19] 503c-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk i, ch 12-14 172d-179d; bk ii, ch 6 188c-191a 12 Lucretius : Nature of
Things  la-97a,c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 3, 263b-c; bk IX,
SECT  39 295a; bk x, sect 6 297a-b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch
7,  52c  / Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch 2-4 192a-193c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 115, A I,
ans  and  rep  3,5  585d-587c  25 Montaigne : Essays, 263a 28 Harvey: On
Animal Generation, 355b-d; 495c-496d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
8  140b  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule hi 270b271a / Optics, bk hi,
531b-542a  35  Locke:  Human  Understafjding,  bk  iv, ch hi, sect 25-26
321a-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  161d-163a  45  Faraday:  Researches in
Electricity,  850b,  d855a,c  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi,
341d 53 James: Psychology, 876a; 882a-884b

[468b]
410  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5  to  5c  5a.  The conception of atomic bodies:
imperceptible,  indestructible, and indivisible 8 Aristotle : Generation
and  Corruption, bk i, ch I [314^22-24] 409b-c / Metaphysics, bk vii, CH
13  [1039^2-11]  562d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c;
BK  II,  ch  6  188c-191a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [146-328]
2d-5a;  [483-634] 7a-8d 17 Plotinus : Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7, 52c 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  prop  73,  schol  133b-134a; bk m, rule hi
270b-271a  /  Optics,  BK  III,  537a-b;  541b;  543a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 25 321a-b 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,   386c-d;  850b,d-855a,c  53  James:  Psychology,  68a  5b.
Arguments  for  and against the existence of atoms: the issue concerning
the  infinite divisibility of matter 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 6-7
284b-286c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 6
[304^23-305^10]
396a-b;  bk  iv, ch 4 [311*30-^1] 402d-403a / Generation and Corruption,
bk  i,  ch  2  [315^25317*17]  411b-413a;  ch8 423b-425d / Sense and the
Sensible, ch 6 [445^4-446*^20] 683b-684c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk i [146-328] 2d-5a; [483-920] 7a-12b; bk h
[62-141] 15d16d
12  Aurelius:  Meditatio?is,  bk  x,  sect  6 297a-b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  7  52a-c / Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3 79b-c / Fourth
Ennead,  tr  ii, ch i, 139d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, A
3,  REP  3 32c-33c; a 4, ans 33d-34c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first
day,  139c141d;  147d'148b; 151d-153a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph
66, 115c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, schol 360b-361d 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi, rule hi 270b271a / Optics, bk ii, 478b-485b; bk hi,
537a541b esp 541b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XVII, SECT 12
170d;  ch  xxix,  sect  16  237b238a; bk iv, ch x, sect 10, 351c-352a 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 47 421c-422a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 131c;
137a-140c;  152d;  161d-163a 43 Federalist 45 Lavoisier: NUMBER 31, 103d
Elements  of  Chemistry,  9a-d  45  Faraday: Researches 850b,d-855a,c in
Electricity,  386c-  d;  5  c.  Atoms  and  the  void  as  the  ultimate
constituents  of  reality 7 Plato: Sophist, 567a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk i, ch 5
[188*18-23]
263c; bk iv, ch 6-9 292c-297c / Heavens, bk

[469a]
5d  to 5g I, CH 7 [275^30-276*18] 367a-b; ch 9 [279*1218] 370b-c; BK HI,
en 6
[305«i4-22] 396b c;
BK IV, CH 2 [308^29-3 lo"! 4 1 400b-401c; ch 5
[312^20-313*14] 404b-d / Generation and Corruption, BK
I, CH 8 423b-425d / Metaphysics, BK I, ch 4
[985^^-19]
503c-d; bk iv, ch 5
[1009*22-37] 528d; BK
vii,  ch  13  [1039*2-11] 562d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12,
173a;  BK  II, ch 6 188c-191a csp 189a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  i  [265-634] 4b-8d esp [418-448] 6b-c 28 Galileo: Ttvo New Sciences,
first  day, 141c-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 8 140b 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi, prop 6, corol iii-iv 281b / Optics, BK III, 528b 45
Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 850b, d855a,c 53 James: Psychology,
106a;  882a-883a  5d.  The number, variety, and properties of atoms: the
production of sensible things by their collocation 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk i, ch 2
[184^15-22]
259b-c; ch 5
[188*18-25] 263c; bk
hi, ch 4
[203*33-^2] 281b / Heavens, bk
i, ch 7 [275^ 30-276*18] 367a-b; bk hi, ch 4
[303*3-^8]
394b-d; ch 7
[305^27-306*1] 397a-b; bk
iv, CH 2 [308^29-310*14] 400b-401c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch
i [314*22-24] 409b-c; CH 2
[315*34-316*4] 410d-411c; ch
id
[327^
34-328*18] 427b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4
[985''3-i9] 503c-d
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-b; bk ii, ch 6, 189a-190a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[62-141]
15d-16d;
[184-250]
17b-18b;
[333-599]
19b22c; [730-1022] 24b'28a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3, 79b 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  495c'496a  34  Newton:  Optics, bk hi,
536b-537b;  539a-b  34  Huygens: Light, ch hi, 566b-569b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  11,  ch  XXVI, SECT 2 217b-d; bk iv, ch xx, sect 15,
393b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 104, 498c 45 I^woisi^k:
Elements   ofChemistry   ,   parti,  13a-d  45  Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  850  b,d855a,c 53 ]\^'Es: Psychology, 104a-b; 876a 5e. The
atomistic  account  of  sensation  and thought: the idola 7 Plato: Meno,
177b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [398-443] 20a-c;
[865-990]
26a-27c; bk hi
[231-395]
33a-35a;  bk iv [26-906] 44b-56a esp [26-268] 44b-47d, [722-817] 53d-54d
17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead,
tr vii, ch 6-8, 194b196c

[469b]
Chapter 21: ELEMENT 411 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, a 6,
ANs  447c-449a 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 518b-519b; 522a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk hi, ch IV, SECT 10 261b d; bk iv, ch x, sect 5 350a-b
53  James:  Psychology,  98a-117b  csp  98b  103b,  115a  5/. The atomic
constitution  of  mind and soul: its bearing on immortality 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk i, ch 2
[403*^28-404*
15] 633a-b;
[405*8-13] 634b; ch
3
[406^1526]
636a-b; ch 4
[409*io]-ch
5
[409^18]
639a-c  10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi [94-869] 31b-41a esp
[161-322] 32b-34b; bk
iv
[916961] 56b-d
17  Plotinus:  Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7, 52c; tr ix, ch 5, 68b / Third
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 2-4 192a193c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 93 431b; sect 141 441a-b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  126c-d  53  James: Psychology, 95a-118b esp 95b-98a, 103a-106b,
117a-118b  5g.  The explanation of natural phenomena by reference to the
properties and motions of atoms 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk iv, ch 2
[308^29310*14]
400b-401c; ch 4
[311*30-^1]
402d403a; ch 5
[3I2*'2o]-ch
6
[313^25]
404b405a,c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i, ch 2 410d-413c; ch 8
423b-425d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 172d173b; CH 14,
177a-178d;  bk  ii,  ch  6 188c191a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[265-328]  4b-5a;  bk  ii  [184-215]  17b-d; [333-477] 19b21a; [522-540]
21c-d; [757-771] 24c-d; bk iv
[524-614] 51a-52b; bk vi 80a-97a,c
17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 115, A I, ANS and REP 3,5 585d-587c 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  ii,  34c-35a  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, first day,
139c141d;  151d-153a  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 355b-d; 495c-496d
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 45b-c 34 Newton: Principles, lb-2a /
Optics,  bk  hi, 531b-542a 34 Huygens: Light, ch hi, 566b-569b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  SECT  25-26  321a-c 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  850b,d855a,c  53  James:  Pj:;'<r/^o/o^;',
882a-884b

[470a]
(5.  The  theory  of  atomism:  critiques of atomism.) 5h. The atomistic
account of the origin and decay of the world, its evolution and order 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[ioo81037] 13c-d; BK
II  [1023-1174]  28a-30a,c;  bk V [55-508] 61d-67c CROSS-REFERENCES Soul
3d;  World  ib,  4c.  I.  Augustine.  De  Genesi ad Litteram Aquinas. De
Mixtione  Elementorum  Descartes.  The Principles ofPhilosophy, part 11,
20;  part  III,  48-102;  PART  IV, 1-19, 31-48, 61-132, 201-203 Hobbes.
Concerning  Body  Kant. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, DIV
II  Marx.  Uber  die  Differenz  der  demokritischen und epif{tireischen
Naturphilosophie  II.  Epicurus.  Letter  to Herodotus Sextus Empiricus.
Against  the Physicists Maimonides. The Guidefor the Perplexed, part ii,
CH   10   John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursits  Philosophicus  Thomisticus,
Philosophia  Naturalis,  part  hi,  q  10  Boyle.  The Sceptical Chymist
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning Human Understanding, appendix, ch 3 .
Monadology,  par  1-9  Voltaire. "Atoms," in A Philosophical Dictiofiary
Dalton.  a  New System of Chemical Philosophy Whewell. The Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences, vol I, bk VI

[470b]
412  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5h 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 10 274b-c
17  Plotinus  :  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  47,  a I, ANs 256a-257b; a 3, ans 258c-259a 34
Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  541b  53  James  :  Psychology,  95b For: The
discussion of the ideas most closely associated with element, see Cause;
Principle.  Matters  relevant  to the conception of elements or atoms as
simple  parts  of  a  whole,  see  One  and  Many 2b-2c; and for another
discussion of the distinction between elements or atoms and compounds or
mixtures,  see  Change 9a; Matter 2. The problem of the transmutation of
the  elements,  see Change loa. The issue concerning the divisibility of
matter and the existence of a void, see Infinity 4b; One and Many 3a(3);
Space 2b(i)-2b(3); and for the question of the number of the elements or
of  the  atoms,  see  Infinity 5-5b; Quantity 7. Other considerations of
atomistic  materialism,  see  Matter  3a,  6;  Mechanics  4c;  Mind  2e;
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas. Maxwell. Scientific Papers, lxxiii Herschel. Familiar
Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects^ XI Lange. The History of Materialism
Mendeleyev.  The  Principles  of  Chemistry Clifford. "Atoms," in vol i,
Lectures  and Essays Stallo. Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics^ CH
7-8,  13  Whitehead.  An  Eftquiry  Concerning the Principles of Natural
Knowledge, ch 5 Planck. The Origin and Development of the Quantum Theory
Eddington.  Stars  and  Atoms  B. Russell. The Aiialysis of Matter, ch 3
Bohr.  The Theory ofSpectra and Atomic Constitution . On the Application
of  the  Quantum  Theory  to  Atomic  Structure  . Atomic Theory and the
Description  of Nature Jeans. The Universe Around Us, ch 2 C. G. Darwin.
The  New  Conceptions  of  Matter  Soddy.  The Interpretation ofthe Atom
Stranathan.  The ''Particles'' of Modern Physics Smyth. Atomic Energyfor
Military Purposes Gamow. Atomic Energy in Cosmic and Human Life Andrade.
The Atom and Its Energy IIecht. Explaining the Atom G. Thomson. The Atom

[471a]
Chapter  ir EMOTION INTRODUCTION THE emotions claim our attention in two
ways. We experience them, sometimes in a manner which overwhelms us; and
we analyze them by defining and classifying the several passions, and by
studying  their  role  in  human  life and society. We seldom do both at
once, for analysis requires emotional detachment, and moments of passion
do not permit study or reflection. With regard to the emotions the great
books  are similarly divided into two sorts— those which are theoretical
discussions   and  those  which  concretely  describe  the  passions  of
particular  men,  exhibit  their  vigor,  and  induce  in us a vicarious
experience.  Books  of  the first sort are scientific, philosophical, or
theological  treatises.  Books of the second sort are the great epic and
dramatic  poems,  the  novels and plays, the literature of biography and
history.  We  customarily  think  of  the  emotions  as belonging to the
subject  matter of psychology —proper to the science of animal and human
behavior.  It  is  worth  noting therefore that this is largely a recent
development,  which appears in the works of Darwin, James, and Freud. In
earlier  centuries,  the  analysis  of  the  passions  occurs  in  other
contexts:  in  treatments  of rhetoric, as in certain dialogues of Plato
and in Aristotle's Rhetoric; in the Greek discussions of virtue and vice
; in the moral theology of Aquinas and in Spinoza's Elhics; and in books
of political theory, such as Machiavelli's Prince and Hobbes' Leviathan.
Descartes'  treatise  on  The Passions ofthe Soul is probably one of the
first  discourses  on  the  subject  to  be separated from the practical
considerations  of  oratory,  morals, and politics. Only subsequently do
the   emotions   become  an  object  of  purely  theoretic  interest  in
psychology. But even then the interest of the psychiatrist or

[471b]
psychoanalyst—  to  the  extent that it is medical or therapeutic— has a
strong  practical  bent.  In  the  great  works of poetry and history no
similar  shift  takes place as one goes from Homer and Virgil to Tolstoy
and  Dostoevsky,  from Greek to Shakespearean tragedy, from Plutarch and
Tacitus  to  Gibbon.  What Wordsworth said of the lyric poem— that it is
"emotion recollected in tranquillity"—may not apply to the narratives in
an  identical  sense.  Yet  they  too re-enact the passions in all their
vitality.  Their  pages  are filled with the emotions of men in conflict
with  one  another  or  suffering conflict within themselves. This is no
less true of historical narrative than of fiction. The memorable actions
of men on the stage of history did not occur in calm and quiet. We would
certainly not remember them as well if the historian failed to re-create
for  us  the turbulence of crisis and catastrophe, or the biographer the
storm  and  stress  which  accompanies  the  inward resolution of heroic
lives. It is impossible, of course, to cite all the relevant passages of
poetry  and  history.  In many instances, nothing less than a whole book
would  suffice.  The  particular references given in this chapter, which
are far from exhaustive, have been selected for their peculiar exemplary
significance  in relation to a particular topic; but for the whole range
of  topics  connected  with  emotion,  the  reader should certainly seek
further in the realms of history and poetr}' for the raw materials which
the scientists and philosophers have tried to analyze and understand. To
the  student of the emotions, Bacon recommends "the poets and writers of
histories"  as  "the  best  doctors of this knowledge; where we may find
painted  forth  with great life, how affections are kindled and incited;
and  how  pacified  and  refrained; and how again contained from act and
further degree; how they

[472a]
414  THE  GREAT IDEAS disclose themselves; how they work; how they vary;
how  they gather and fortify; how they are enwrapped one within another;
and  how  they  do  fight and encounter one with another; and other like
particularities."  Four  words—"passion,"  "affection"  or "affect," and
"emotion"—have   been   traditionally   used   to   designate  the  same
psychological fact. Of these, "affection" and "affect" have ceased to be
generally  current,  although we do find them in Freud; and "passion" is
now  usually restricted to mean one of the emotions, or the more violent
aspect of any emotional experience. But if we are to connect discussions
collected  from  widely  separated centuries, we must be able to use all
these  words  interchangeably.  The psychological fact to which they all
refer  is  one  every  human  being  has experienced in moments of great
excitement,  especially  during  intense seizure by rage or fear. In his
treatise  On the Circulation ofthe Blood, Harvey calls attention to "the
fact  that  in almost every affection, appetite, hope, or fear, our body
suffers, the countenance changes, and the blood appears to course hither
and  thither.  In anger the eyes are fiery and the pupils contracted; in
modesty the cheeks are suffused with blushes; in fear, and under a sense
of  infamy  and  of shame, the face is pale" and "in lust how quickly is
the member distended with blood and erected!" Emotional experience seems
to  involve  an awareness of widespread bodily commotion, which includes
changes  in the tension of the blood vessels and the muscles, changes in
heartbeat  and breathing, changes in the condition of the skin and other
tissues.  Though  some  degree of bodily disturbance would seem to be an
essential  ingredient  in  all  emotional  experience, the intensity and
extent  of  the physiological reverberation, or bodily commotion, is not
the  same  or  equal  in  all  the emotions. Some emotions are much more
violent  than  others.  This  leads William James to distinguish what he
calls  the  "coarser emotions ... in which every one recognizes a strong
organic reverberation" from the "subtler emotions" in which the "organic
reverberation  is  less obvious and strong." This fact is sometimes used
to draw the line between what are truly emotions and what are

[472b]
only  mild  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  or  enduring  sentiments.
Nevertheless,  sentiments  may  be  emotional  residues—stable attitudes
which  pervade  a  life  even during moments of emotional detachment and
calm—and  pleasure  and  pain  may color all the emotions. "Pleasure and
pain," Locke suggests, are "the hinges on which our passions turn." Even
though  they may not be passions in the strict sense, they are obviously
closely connected with them. That the emotions are organic disturbances,
upsetting  the  normal  course  of  the body's functioning, is sometimes
thought  to be a modern discovery, connected with the James-Lange theory
that  the  emotional experience is nothing but the "feeling of . . . the
bodily  changes"  which  "follow directly the perception of the exciting
fact."  On  this  view,  the explanation of emotion seems to be the very
opposite of "common sense," which says, "we meet a bear, are frightened,
and run." According to James, "this order of sequence is incorrect," and
"the  more  rational  statement  is that we feel . . . afraid because we
tremble."  In other words, we do not run away because we are afraid, but
are  afraid  because we run away. This fact about the emotions was known
to  antiquity  and  the  Middle Ages. Aristotle, for example, holds that
mere  awareness of an object does not induce flight unless "the heart is
moved," and Aquinas declares that "passion is properly to be found where
there  is  corporeal  transmutation."  He  describes  at some length the
bodily  changes  which take place in anger and fear. Only very recently,
however,  have  apparatus and techniques been devised for recording and,
in   some   cases,  measuring  the  physiological  changes  accompanying
experimentally  produced emotions—in both animals and men. Modern theory
also  tries to throw some fight on these organic changes by pointing out
their  adaptive  utility  in  the  struggle  for existence. This type of
explanation  is  advanced by Darwin in The Expression of Emotions in Man
and Animals, and is adopted by other evolutionists. "The snarl or sneer,
the  one-sided  uncovering  of  the  upper  teeth,"  James  writes,  "is
accounted  for  by Darwin as a survival from the time when our ancestors
had large canines, and unfleshed them (as dogs now do) for attack. . . .

[473a]
The  distention of the nostrils in anger is interpreted by Spencer as an
echo  of  the  way  in  which  our ancestors had to breathe when, during
combat,  their  'mouth  was filled up by a part of the antagonist's body
that  had  been seized' . . . The redding of the face and neck is called
by Wundt a compensatory arrangement for relieving the brain of the blood
-pressure which the simultaneous excitement of the heart brings with it.
The  effusion of tears is explained both by this author and by Darwin to
be  a  blood-withdrawing agency of a similar sort." Reviewing statements
of  this  sort,  James  is  willing  to  concede that "some movements of
expression  can  be  accounted  for as weakened repetitions of movements
which  formerly  (when  they  were  stronger)  were  of  utility  to the
subject'';  but  though  we may thus "see the reason for a few emotional
reactions,"  he  thinks "others remain for which no plausible reason can
even  be conceived." The latter, James suggests, "may be reactions which
are  purely  mechanical  results of the way in which our nervous centres
are framed, reactions which, although permanent in us now, may be called
accidental  as  far as their origin goes." Whether or not all the bodily
changes  which occur in such emotions as anger or fear serve the purpose
of  increasing  the  animal's  efficiency  in  combat  or flight—as, for
example,  the  increase  of sugar in the blood and the greater supply of
blood  to  arms  and  legs  seem to do— the basic emotions are generally
thought  to  be  connected with the instinctively determined patterns of
behavior  by  which  animals  struggle  to survive. "The actions we call
instinctive,"  James  writes,  "are expressions or manifestations of the
emotions";  or, as other writers suggest, an emotion, whether in outward
expression  or  in inner experience, is the central phase of an instinct
in operation. The observation of the close relation between instinct and
emotion  does  not  belong  exclusively  to  modern,  or post-Darwinian,
thought.  The  ancients  also  recognize  it, though in different terms.
Following   Aristotle's  analysis  of  the  various  "interior  senses,"
Aquinas,  for example, speaks of the "estimative power" by which animals
seem  to  be innately prepared to react to things useful or harmful. "If
an animal were moved by pleasing and

[473b]
Chapter 22: EMOTION 415 disagreeable things only as affecting the sense"
—  that  is,  the  exterior senses— "there would be no need to suppose,"
Aquinas  writes, "that an animal has a power besides the apprehension of
those  forms  which  the  senses perceive, and in which the animal takes
pleasure,  or  from  which  it shrinks with horror." But animals need to
seek  or  avoid  certain  things  on  account  of  their  advantages  or
disadvantages,  and  such  emotional  reactions of approach or avoidance
require,  in his opinion, a sense of the useful and the dangerous, which
is innate rather than learned. The estimative power thus seems to play a
role which later writers assign to instinct. The relation of instinct to
the  emotions and to fundamental biological needs is further considered,
from  other  points  of  view, in the chapters on Desire and Habit. Like
desire,   emotion   is  neither  knowledge  nor  action,  but  something
intermediate  between  the  one  and the other. The various passions are
usually  aroused by objects perceived, imagined, or remembered, and once
aroused  they  in  turn  originate  impulses to act in certain ways. For
example, fear arises with the perception of a threatening danger or with
the  imagination  of  some  fancied  peril.  The thing feared is somehow
recognized  as  capable  of  inflicting injury with consequent pain. The
thing feared is also something from which one naturally tends to flee in
order to avoid harm. Once the danger is known and until it is avoided by
flight or in some other way, the characteristic feeling of fear pervades
the whole experience. It is partly a result of what is known and what is
done,  and  partly  the  cause  of  how things seem and how one behaves.
Analytically  isolated  from  its causes and effects, the emotion itself
seems  to be the feeling rather than the knowing or the doing. But it is
not  simply an awareness of a certain bodily condition. It also involves
the  felt impulse to do something about the object of the passion. Those
writers  who,  like  Aquinas, identify emotion with the impulse by which
"the  soul  is  drawn  to  a  thing,"  define  the  several  passions as
specifically different acts of appetite or desire—specific tendencies to
action. Aquinas, for instance, adopts the definition given by Damascene:
"Passion is a movement of the sensi-

[474a]
416  THE  GREAT IDEAS tive appetite when we imagine good or evil." Other
writers  who,  like  Spinoza,  find  that  "the order of the actions and
passions  of  our  body  is  coincident  in nature with the order of the
actions  and passions of the mind," stress the cognitive rather than the
impulsive  aspect  of  emotion.  They accordingly define the passions in
terms  of  the  characteristic  feefings, pleasant and unpleasant, which
flow  from  the  estimation of certain objects as beneficial or harmful.
Spinoza  goes furthest in this direction when he says that "an affect or
passion  of  the mind is a confused idea . . . by which the mind affirms
of  its  body,  or  any part of ity a greater or less power of existence
than  before^  There  seems  to be no serious issue here, for writers of
both sorts acknowledge, though with different emphasis, the two sides of
an  emotion  —  the cognitive and the impulsive, that which faces toward
the  object  and that which leads into action. On either view, the human
passions  are  regarded  as part of man's animal nature. It is generally
admitted  that disembodied spirits, if such exist, cannot have emotions.
The  angels,  Augustine  writes,  "feel no anger while they punish those
whom  the  eternal  law of God consigns to punishment, no fellow-feeling
with  misery  while  they  relieve the miserable, no fear while they aid
those who are in danger." When we do ascribe emotions to spirits, it is,
Augustine claims, because, "though they have none of our weakness, their
acts  resemble  the  actions  to  which  these  em.otions  move  us." In
connection   with   the   objects  ^^•hich  arouse  them,  the  emotions
necessarily  depend  upon  the  senses  and  the  imagination; and their
perturbations and impulses require bodily organs for expression. That is
why,  as  indicated  in the chapter on Desire, some writers separate the
passions  from acts of the will, as belonging to the sensitive or animal
appetite  rather  than  to  the rational or specifically human appetite.
Even  those  writers who do not place so high an estimate on the role of
reason, refer the emotions to the animal aspect of human behavior, or to
what is sometimes called "man's lower nature." When this phrase is used,
it  usually  signifies  the  passions  as opposed to the reason, not the
purely  vegetati\"e  functions  which  man shares with plants as well as
animals. There seems to be no doubt that emotions

[474b]
are  common to men and animals and that they are more closely related to
instinct  than to reason or intelligence. Darwin presents many instances
which,  he  claims,  prove  that "the senses and intuitions, the various
emotions  and  faculties,  such  as  love, memory, attention, curiosity,
imitation,  reason,  etc.,  of  which  man  boasts,  may  be found in an
incipient, or even sometimes in a well-developed, condition in the lower
animals."  Where  Darwin  remarks  upon "the fewness and the comparative
simplicity of the instincts in the higher animals . . . in contrast with
those  of  the lower animals," James takes the position that man "is the
animal  richest in instinctive impulses." However that issue is decided,
the  emotions  seem  to  be  more  elaborately  de\'eloped in the higher
animals,  and man's emotional life would seem to be the most complex and
varied  of all. The question then arises whether particular passions are
identical—or are only analogous —when they occur in men and animals. For
example,  is  human anger, no matter how closely it resembles brute rage
in  its physiology and .f* Do men alone experience righteous indignation
beimpulses,  nevertheless  peculiarly  human  cause of some admixture in
them  of  reason and passion? When similar questions are asked about the
sexual  passions of men and animals, the answers will determine the view
one  takes  of the characteristically human aspects of love and hate. It
may even be asked whether hate, as men suffer it, is ever experienced by
brutes, or whether certain passions, such as hope and despair, are known
to  brutes at all? Ix THE TR-\DiTioxAL theory of the emotions, the chief
problem,  after  the  definition  of  emotion,  is the classification or
grouping  of  the passions, and the ordering of particular passions. The
vocabulary  of  common  speech in all ages and cultures includes a large
number  of  words  for  namine  emotions,  and  it  has been the task of
analysts  to  decide  which of these words designate distinct affects or
affections. The precise character of the object and the direction of the
impulse  have  been,  for  the most part, the criteria of definition. As
previously  noted, it is but recently that the experimental observ-ation
of  bodily  changes  has  contributed to the differentiation of emotions
from one another.

[475a]
Chapter 22: Spinoza offers the longest listing of the passions. For him,
the  emotions,  which  arc all "compounded of the three primary afTects,
desire,   joy,   and   sorrow,"   develop   into  the  following  forms:
astonishment,  contempt,  love, hatred, inclination, aversion, devotion,
derision,   hope,   fear,   confidence,   despair,   gladness,  remorse,
commiseration,  favor,  indignation,  overestimation,  envy, compassion,
self-satisfaction,     humihty,    repentance,    pride,    despondency,
selfexaltation, shame, regret, emulation, gratitude, benevolence, anger,
vengeance,   ferocity,   audacity,  consternation,  courtesy,  ambition,
luxuriousness,  drunkenness,  avarice,  lust. Many of the foregoing are,
for  Hobbes,  derived  from ^^•hat he calls "the simple passions," which
include  "appetite, desire, love, aversion, hate, joy, and grief." There
are  more  emotions  in Spinoza's list than either Aristotle or Locke or
James  mentions,  but  none  which  they include is omitted. Some of the
items  in  Spinoza's enumeration are treated by other writers as virtues
and  vices rather than as passions. The passions have been classified by
reference  to  various  criteria.  As  we have seen, James distinguishes
emotions as "coarse" or "subtle" in terms of the violence or mildness of
the  accompanying  physiological changes; and Spinoza distinguishes them
according  as  "the  mind  passes to a greater perfection" or "to a less
perfection."  Spinoza's  division would also seem to imply a distinction
between  the beneficial and the harmful in the objects causing these two
types  of  emotion,  or  at  least to involve the opposite components of
pleasure  and  pain, for in his view the emotions which correspond to "a
greater  or less power of existence than before" are attended in the one
case by "pleasurable excitement" and in the other by "pain." Hobbes uses
another  principle  of division. The passions differ basically according
to  the  direction  of  their impulses—according as each is "a motion or
endeavor  ...  to or from the object moving." Aquinas adds still another
criterion— "the difficulty or struggle ... in acquiring certain goods or
in  avoiding  certain  evils" which, in contrast to those we "can easily
acquire  or  avoid,"  makes them, therefore, "of an arduous or difficult
nature."   In  these  terms,  he  divides  all  the  passions  into  the
"concupiscible," which regard "good or evil

[475b]
RMOTION  417  simply" {i.e., love, hate, desire, aversion, jov, sorrow),
and  the  "irascible,"  which  "regard  gocxl or evil as arduous through
Ix^ing  difficult  to  obtain  or  avoid"  {i.e.,  fear,  daring, hojx',
despair,  anger).  Within  each of these groups, Aquinas pans particular
passions  as  oppositcs,  such  as  jov and sorrow, or hope and despair,
either  according  to the "contrariety of object, i.e., of good and evil
... or according to approach and withdrawal." Anger seems to be the only
passion  for  which no opposite can be given, other than that "cessation
from  its  movement"  which Aristotle calls "calmness" and which Aquinas
says  is  an  opposite  not  by  way  of "contrarietv but of negation or
privation."  Using  these distinctions, Aquinas also describes the order
in  which one passion leads to or generates another, beginning with love
and  hate, passing through hope, desire, and fear, with their opposites,
and,  after anger, ending in joy or despair. On one point, all observers
and  theorists  from Plato to Freud seem to agree, namely, that love and
hate  lie  at  the  root  of all the other passions and generate hope or
despair, fear and anger, according as the aspirations of love prosper or
fail.  Nor  is  the  insight that even hate derives from love peculiarlv
modern,  though  Freud's  theor\'  of what he calls the "ambivalence" of
love  and  hate  toward  the  same  object,  seems to be part of his own
special  contribution  to our understanding of the passions. The role of
the  emotions  or  passions  in  human  behavior  has  always raised two
questions,  one  concerning  the  effect  of  conflict  between  diverse
emotions, the other concerning the conflict between the passions and the
reason  or  w  ill.  It  is  the  latter  question which has been of the
greatest interest to moralists and statesmen. Even though human emotions
may  have instinctive origin and be innately determined, man's emotional
responses  seem to be subject to voluntary control, so that men are able
to  form  or  change  their emotional habits. If this were not so, there
could  be  no  moral problem of the regulation of the passions; nor, for
that  matter,  could there be a medical problem of therapy for emotional
disorders. The psychoanalvtic treatment of neuroses seems, more-

[476a]
418  THE  GREAT IDEAS over, to assume the possibility of a voluntary, or
even  a  rational, resolution of emotional conflicts—not perhaps without
the aid of therapeutic efforts to uncover the sources of conflict and to
remove the barriers between repressed emotion and rational decision. The
relation  of  the  passions to the will, especially their antagonism, is
relevant  to  the  question whether the actions of men always conform to
their  judgments  of  good  and  evil,  or  right and wrong. As Socrates
discusses  the  problem of knowledge and virtue, it would seem to be his
view that a man who knows what is good for him will act accordingly. Men
may  "desire  things which they imagine to be good," he says, "but which
in  reality  are evil." Hence their misconduct will be due to a mistaken
judgment,  not  to a discrepancy between action and thought. Eliminating
the case of erroneous judgment, Socrates gets Meno to admit that "no man
wills  or  chooses  anything  evil."  Aristotle  criticizes the Socratic
position which he summarizes in the statement that "no one . . . when he
judges  acts against what he judges best—people act badly only by reason
of  ignorance."  According  to Aristotle, "this view plainly contradicts
the  observed  facts."  Yet  he  admits that whatever a man does must at
least  seem  good to him at the moment', and to that extent the judgment
that   something   is  good  or  bad  would  seem  to  determine  action
accordingly. In his analysis of incontinence, Aristotle tries to explain
how  a  man  may act against what is his better judgment and yet, at the
moment  of  action,  seek what he holds to be good. Action may be caused
either by a rational judgment concerning what is good or by an emotional
estimate  of  the desirable. If these two factors are independent of one
another  more than that, if they can tend in opposite directions— then a
man  may  act  under  emotional  persuasion  at  one  moment in a manner
contrary  to  his  rational  predilection at another. That a man may act
either em.otionally or rationally, Aristotle thinks, explains how, under
strong  emotional influences, a man can do the very opposite of what his
reason  would  tell  him  is right or good. The point is that, while the
emotions dominate his mind and action, he does not listen to reason.

[476b]
These matters are further discussed in the chapter on Temperance. But it
should  be  noted  here that the passions and the reason, or the "lower"
and  the  "higher" natures of man, are not always in conflict. Sometimes
emotions  or  emotional  attitudes  serve reason by supporting voluntary
decisions.  They  reinforce  and  make effective moral resolutions which
might  otherwise  be  too  difficult  to  execute.  The ancients did not
underestimate  the force of the passions, nor were they too confident of
the strength of reason in its struggle to control them, or to be free of
them.  They  were acquainted with the violence of emotional excess which
they  called "madness" or "frenzy." So, too, were the theologians of the
Middle  Ages  and  modern  philosophers like Spinoza and Hobbes. But not
until Freud—and perhaps also William James, though to a lesser extent do
we  find  in the tradition of the great books insight into the pathology
of  the  passions,  the  origin  of emotional disorders, and the general
theory  of  the  neuroses  and  neurotic character as the consequence of
emotional  repression.  For  Freud, the primary fact is not the conflict
between reason and emotion, or, in his language, between the ego and the
id. It is rather the repression which results from such conflict. On the
one  side  is  the ego, which "stands for reason and circumspection" and
has  "the  task  of representing the external world," or expressing what
Freud  calls  "the  reaUtyprinciple."  Associated  with  the  ego is the
superego—  "the  vehicle  of  the  ego-ideal,  by which the ego measures
itself,  towards which it strives, and whose demands for ever-increasing
perfection  it  is always striving to fulfill." On the other side is the
id,  which  "stands  for  the  untamed  passions"  and  is the source of
instinctual  life. The ego, according to Freud, is constantly attempting
"to  mediate  between the id and reality" and to measure up to the ideal
set  by  the  super-ego, so as to dethrone "the pleasureprinciple, which
exerts  undisputed sway over the processes in the id, and substitute for
it  the  reality-principle,  which promises greater security and greater
success."  But  sometimes  it  fails  in  this  task. Sometimes, when no
socially acceptable channels of behavior are available

[477a]
for  expressing  emotional  drives in action, ilic (go, supported by the
super-ego,  represses  the  emotional  or instinctual impulses, that is,
prevents  them from expressing themselves overtly. Freud's great insight
is  that  emotions  repressed  do  not  atrophy  and  disappear.  On the
contrary,  their  dammed-up  energies  accumulate and, like a sore, they
fester  inwardly. Together with related ideas, memories, and wishes, the
repressed  emotions form what Freud calls a "complex," which is not only
the active nucleus of emotional disorder, but also the cause of neurotic
symptoms and behavior— phobias and anxieties, obsessions or compulsions,
and the various physical manifestations of hysteria, such as a blindness
or  a paralysis that has no organic basis. The line between the neurotic
and  the  normal  is  shadowy,  for  repressed  emotional complexes are,
according   to   Freud,  also  responsible  for  the  hidden  or  latent
psychological  significance  of slips of speech, forgetting, the content
of  dreams, occupational or marital choices, and a wide variety of other
phenomena usually regarded as accidental or as rationally determined. In
fact,  Freud  sometimes  goes  to  the  extreme  of  insisting  that all
apparently   rational   processes—  both  of  thought  and  decision—are
themselves  emotionally  determined; and that most, or all, reasoning is
nothing  but  the  rationalization  of  emotionally  fixed prejudices or
beliefs.  "The  ego,"  he writes, "is after all only a part of the id, a
part  purposively  modified by its proximity to the dangers of reality."
The  ancient  distinction  between  knowledge and opinion seems to be in
essential  agreement  with  the  insight  that  emotions can control the
course  of thinking. But at the same time it denies that all thinking is
necessarily  dominated  by  the  passions. The sort of thinking which is
free  from  emotional  bias  or  domination  may result in knowledge, if
reason  itself  is  not  defective  in  its  processes.  But the sort of
thinking which is directed and determined by the passions must result in
opinion.   The   former  is  reasoning;  the  latter  what  Freud  calls
"rationalization"  or  sometimes "wishful thinking." Because they can be
ordered when they get out of order, the emotions raise problems for both
medicine and morals. Whether or not

[477b]
Chapter  22:  EMOTION 419 there is a lundanicntal opposition between the
medical  and the moral approaclies to the problem, whether psychotherapy
is  needed  only  uhen  morality lias failed, whether morality is itself
partly  responsible for the disorders which psychotherapy must cure, the
difference  between  the  medical  and  the  moral  approaches is clear.
Medically,  emotional disorders call for diagnosis and therapy. Morally,
they  call  for  criticism  and  correction. Human bondage, according to
Spinoza,  consists  in  "the  impotence of man to govern or restrain the
affects ... for a man who is under their control is not his own master."
A  free  man he describes as one "who lives according to the dictates of
reason  alone," and he tries to show "how much reason itself can control
the  affects" to achieve what he calls "freedom of mind or blessedness."
While  moralists  tend to agree on this point, they do not all offer the
same  prescription  for  establishing  the  right relation between man's
higher  and lower natures. The issue which arises here is also discussed
in  the  chapters  on Desire and Duty. It exists between those who think
that  the passions are intrinsically evil, the natural enemies of a good
will,  lawless  elements always in rebellion against duty; and those who
think  that  the  passions  represent a natural desire for certain goods
which belong to the happy life, or a natural aversion for certain evils.
Those  who,  like  the  Stoics  and  Kant, tend to adopt the former view
recommend a policy of attrition toward the passions. Their force must be
attenuated  in  order  to  emancipate reason from their influence and to
protect  the  will  from their seductions. Nothing is lost, according to
this  theory,  if the passions atrophy and die. But if, according to the
opposite  doctrine, the passions have a natural place in the moral life,
then  the  aim  should  be, not to dispossess them entirely, but to keep
them  in  their  place.  Aristotle  therefore  recommends  a  policy  of
moderation.  The  passions  can  be  made  to serve reason's purposes by
restraining  them  from excesses and by directing their energies to ends
which  reason  approves.  As  Aristotle  conceives  them, certain of the
virtues—especially   temperance   and   courage   are  stable  emotional
attitudes, or habits of emotional response, which conform to reason and

[478a]
420  THE  GREAT IDEAS carry out its rule. The moral virtues require more
than  a  momentary control or moderation of the passions; they require a
discipline  of  them  which  has  become  habitual. What Aristotle calls
continence,  as  opposed to virtue, consists in reason's effort to check
emotions  which  are  still  unruly  because  they  have  not yet become
habituated  to  reason's  rule.  The  fact  ol individual differences in
temperament  is  of the utmost importance to the moralist who is willing
to recognize that universal moral rules apply to individuals differently
according  CO  their temperaments. Both psychologists and moralists have
classified men into temperamental types by reference to the dominance or
deficiency  of  certain  emotional  predispositions  in  their inherited
makeup.   These   temperamental  differences  also  have  a  medical  or
physiological  aspect insofar as certain elements in human physique— the
four   bodily   humors  of  the  ancients  or  the  hormones  of  modern
endocrinology—seem  to  be  correlated with types of personality. One of
the  great  issues in political theory concerns the role of the passions
in  human  association.  Have men banded together to form states because
they  feared  the  insecurity  and  the  hazards  of natural anarchy and
universal  war, or because they sought the benefits which only political
life  could  provide ? In the political community, once it is formed, do
love  and  friendship  or  distrust  and  fear determine the relation of
fellow  citizens,  or  of  rulers  and ruled ? Should the prince, or any
other  man  who  wishes  to get and hold political power, try to inspire
love or to instill fear in those whom he seeks to dominate ? Or are each
of  these  emotions  useful  for  different pohtical purposes and in the
handling of different kinds of men ? Considering whether for the success
of  the  prince  it  is  "better  to be loved than feared or feared than
loved,"  MachiaveUi  says that "one should wish to be both, but, because
it  is  difficult  to  unite  them in one person, it is much safer to be
feared  than loved, when, of the two, either must be dispensed with. . .
. Nevertheless," he continues, "a prince ought to inspire fear in such a
way  that,  if  he  does  not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can
endure  very  well  being  feared  whilst he is not hated." According to
Hobbes, when men enter into a

[478b]
; common\^ ealth so that they can live peacefully with one another, they
are  moved  partly by reason and partly by their passions. "The passions
that  incline  men  to  peace," he writes, "are fear of death; desire of
such  things  as are necessary to commodious living; and a hope by their
industry  to  obtain  them."  But once a commonwealth is formed, the one
passion which seems to be the mainspring of all political activity is "a
perpetual and restless desire of power after power, that ceaseth only in
death"  for a man "cannot assure the power and means to live well, which
he  has  present,  without  the  acquisition of more." Not all political
thinkers agree with the answers which MachiaveUi and Hobbes give on such
matters;  nor  do  all make such questions the pivots of their political
theory.  But there is general agreement that the passions are a force to
be reckoned with in the government of men; that the ruler, whether he is
despotic  prince  or  constitutional oflBceholder, must move men through
their  emotions  as  well  as  by  appeals  to reason. The two political
instruments  through  which  an influence over the emotions is exercised
are  oratory  (now sometimes called "propaganda") and law. Both may work
persuasively.  Laws, like other discourses, according to Plato, may have
preludes  or  preambles, intended by the legislator "to create good-will
in the persons whom he addresses, in order that, by reason of this good-
will,  they  will  more  intelligently receive his command." But the law
also  carries  with  it  the  threat  of  coercive  force. The threat of
punishment  for  disobedience addresses itself entirely to fear, whereas
the  devices of the orator—or even of the legislator in his preamble are
not  so  restricted.  The  orator  can  play upon the whole scale of the
emotions  to  obtain the actions or decisions at which he aims. Finally,
there  is  the problem of whether the statesman should exercise pohtical
control  over  other  influences  which  affect  the emotional life of a
people,  especially  the  arts  and  public  spectacles. The earhest and
perhaps  the classic statement of this problem is to be found in Plato's
Republic  3ind  in  his Laws. Considerations relevant to the question he
raises,  and  the  implications of diverse solutions of the problem, are
discussed in the chapters on Art, Liberty, and Poetry.

[479a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 1. The nature and causes of the emotions or passions
422   i/».   Bodily   changes   during   emotional   excitement  2.  The
classilication  and  enumeration  of  the  emotions  2cJ. Definitions oi
particular  passions  2c.  The  opposition of particular emotions to one
another  3.  The  disorder  or patholog\- ol the passions 3^. Madness or
frenzy  due  to  emotional  excess: excessively emotional or emotionally
over-determined    behavior    3^.   Particular   emotional   disorders:
psychoneuroses  due  to  repression  (2)  Obsessions and compulsions (3)
Phobias  and  anxieties  (4)  Traumas  and  traumatic  neuroses  3^. The
alleviation  and  cure of emotional disorders 4. The moral consideration
of  the passions 428 4^. The conflict between reason and emotion ^b. The
treatment  of the emotions by or for the sake of reason 5. The political
consideration  of  the  passions  5^.  The  acquisition and retention of
power:  love  or fear i^d. The devices of oratory : emotional persuasion
5^. The regulation of art for the sake of training the passions

[479b]
Chapter 22: F.MOTION 42! PAG I

[480a]
422 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1* The nature and
causes  of the emotions or passions 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 350c-353d;
bk   ix,  416b-c;  421a-b  /  Timaeus,  466b-d  /  Philebus,  621c-622b;
627c-628a; 628d-630c / Laws, bk IX, 748a 8 Aristotle : Soul, bk i, ch i
[403*2-^3]
632a-c;  ch  4  [408^34-^31]  638b-d; bk hi, ch 3 [427^21-24] 660a; ch 9
[432^26-433*2] 665c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch ii
[692*22-27]
224b-c / Ethics, bk ii, ch 5
[1105^19-1106*6] 351b-c /
Politics,  bk vii, ch 7 [1327^40-1328*18] 532a-c / Rhetoric, bk ii, CH I
[i378*2o]-cH  II  [1388^30] 623b-636a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
hi  [136-160]  31d-32a;  [231-322]  33a-34b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk vi
[724-734]  230b  17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch i la-b; ch 5 2d-3c;
CH  9-1 1 4c-5c / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 3-4 108a-109b / Fourth Ennead,
tr  iv,  ch  18  166d-167b;  ch  20-21 167d-168c; ch 28 172a173b / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 19-22 262a-264c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch
4-5  287a289a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81, AA 2-3
429c-431d; part i-ii, qq 22-48 720b,d826a,c

[480b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53 Jam es : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand side of thepage. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  arc given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 20
Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 82, a i, ans 968a-970c; q
86, a 3, ans and rep 3-4 994d-996a,c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, intro, 47c-d;
part  i,  61a-65b  esp  61a-c;  68b-c;  77b-c;  part  ii, 162c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  ofLearning, 55b-c 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 82d-83a 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 3 373d; PART III 395a-422a,c esp 395a-d,
def  1-3  395d-396a,  prop  i 396a-c, prop 3 398b-c, PROP 56 414a-d, THE
AFFECTS  416b-422a,c; PART IV, DEF 7 424b; PROP 1-4 424c-425d; PROP 9-13
426d-428a;  appendix,  i-ii 447a-b; PART V, axiom 2 452c; prop 34 460c-d
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx 176b-178a esp sect 3 176d;
ch  xxxiii, sect 5-15 248d-250c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338c-d 42 Kant:
Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 378b-c / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals, 385a-d; 386b-d / Judgement, 483d-484b; 508d
[fn
i]  43  Federalist:  number  17, 69c 53 James: Psychology, 49b-50a; 87b;
209a-b; 327b-328a; 738a-766a esp 738a-b, 742a-746a, 758a-759a, 761a-765b
54   Freud:   Origin   and   Development   of  PsychoAnalysis,  4d-5a  /
Interpretation of Dreams, 363c-d / Repression, 424d-425b / Uncon-

[481a]
la  to  \b  Chapter 22: EMOTION 42J scious, 432c-433d esp 433b / General
Introduction,  608d;  623  b-c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and Anxiety,
720c-721b; 736d-741c / Netv Introductory Lectures, 837b-d \a. Emotion in
relation  to  feelings  of pleasure and pain 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120b-c /
Phaedo, 220b221a / Republic, bk iv, 352d / Timaeus, 463d464b / Philebus,
628d-630c / Laws, bk ix, 748a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[i25''28-34]
175a;  ch  6  [127^26-32]  177b  /  Soul, bk ii, ch 2 [413^17-24] 643d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[1104^291105*16] 350b-c; CH 5 [1105^19-28] 351b; bk
VII,  CH 6 [1149^20-24] 400b / Politics, bk v, CH 10 [1312^24-33] 515b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1370*28-1372*1] 613c-615c passim; bk
ii, ch I
[i378*2o]-cH
II
[1388^30]
623b-636a passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10731085] 58a-b
14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  184a-c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
18-20  166d-168b;  ch 28 172a-173b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
2-4  13c14b;  bk  viii,  par 7-8 54c-55a; bk x, par 39 81b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, A 6, ANS and rep 2 619d-620d; q 22, a
i,  ANS  720d-721c;  q  23  723c-727a;  qq  31-39  752b-792d;  q 48, a i
822d-823b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 61a-62c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi,  prop  4-57  398d415b  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx
176b-178a  passim,  esp  sect  3  176d;  ch  xxi,  sect  40 187d-188b 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect i 413a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338c-d
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason, 298d-300a; 341c342a / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  385a386h  /  Judgement, 477b-478a 53 James: Psychology, 197a-b;
391b-392a;  739b740a;  754b-758a passim; 808a-812b passim, esp 808b-809a
54  Freud:  Interpretation  ofDreams,  378b-d / Instincts, 418d-420b esp
420a   /   Repression   422a427a,c   esp  422a-d,  424d-425c  /  General
Introduction,  608d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  639a-641a esp
640b-d;  641d-643c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 720a-721c;
736d737b; 739b-c; 752c-754a,c passim lb. Bodily changes during emotional
excitement 7 Plato: Ion, 145a-b / Symposium, 155c-157a / Timaeus, 466c-d
/ Philebus, 628c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[9^9-34]
14c15a / Soul, bk i, ch i [403*3-^3] 632a-c; ch 4

[481b]
[4o8"34
''^^i] 638b-d; bk hi, ch 9
[432^2643V'il 665c / Memory and Reminisceiice, ch 2
(45 V' 5^3 J 1 695b-d / Dreams, en 2
[460*32-
*'i8| 704b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch i
[524^17-19] 50c; BK V, ch 18 [550*29-31] 77b;
BK  VI,  ch  18 [572*8 >28] 97d-98c; bk ix, ch 37 [621^28-622*10] 147c /
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  II, CH 4 [650^18-651*15] 175c-176a; bk iv, ch 5
[679*5-31]  209a-c;  ch  ii [692*22-27] 224b-c / Motion of Animals, ch 7
[7oi^3]-ch 8 [702* 21] 236d-237c; ch 11 239a- d / Ethics, bk iv, ch 9
[1128^10-14] 375d-376a;
bk vii, ch 3
[1147*14-17] 397b
10  Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 158a; 159d160a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk iv
[10371057] 57d
14  Plutarch:  Demetrius, 740d-741a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch
3,  108a-b  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 23 153d-154b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 75, A 3, REP 3 380c-381b; part i-ii, q 17, a 7,
REP  2  690d-692a;  q 22 720b,d-723b passim, esp A 2, REP 3 721c-722c; q
35,  a  8, ans 779c780c; q 37, a 2, ANS 784c-785b; a 4 785d786d; q 41, a
i,  ans 798b-d; q 44, a i 807a808b; A 3 809a-c; q 48, a 2 823b-824c; a 4
825b-826a,c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 70, A 2, REP
2,5 896a-897d 24 Rabelais: Gaigantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 15a-b; bk hi,
192b-193a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 345b-c; 405b-d 28 Harvey: Motion of the
Heart,  271a-b; 288b; 292d-293a; 296d / Circulation of the Blood, 322c-d
/  On  Animal  Generation,  431d-432a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
49b-c  31  Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99d-100a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi,  def  3-postulate i 395d-396a; prop 2, demonst and schol, 396d; PART
IV,  prop 7-8 426a-c; part v, PREF 451a-452c; prop 34, demonst 460c-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx,  sect 17 177d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  234a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 234a-b; 253d 42 Kk^i::
Judgement,  509c-d 44 BoswEhi.: Johnson, 169d-170b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  274a; 546b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 48c; bk iv, 178d-179a;
bk  vi,  247d-248a;  256b-c;  264c-d;  BK  VIII,  334a; bk ix, 350d-354a
passim,  esp  351d-352a, 353b-d; bk xiii, 567d-568c; bk XV, 616a-618b 53
James:  Psychology,  198a; 327b-328a; 694a699a; 738a-766a esp 738b-745b,
754b-759a  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  59c / Interpretation of Dreams, 323b /
Unconscious, 433d
[fn
2]  /  General  Introduction,  608d-609a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and
Anxiety, 736d-738a esp 737a-b

[482a]
424  (1.  The  nature  and  causes  of  passions.)  the  emotions or \c.
Instinctive emotional reactions in animals and men 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  hi,  llld-112c  esp 112c; BK VII, 236c 7 Plato: Symposium, 157b-159b
esp 158a-159a; 165b-166b / Republic, bk ii, 320b-c / Laws, BK VI. 712b 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 27
[70^6-39] 92c-93a,c
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch i
[524^17-19] 50c; bk v, ch 8 [542^17-^4] 68d69a; ch 18 [550^29-31] 77b; bk vi, ch i8-bk
VII,  CH  2  97b-108c  passim,  esp  bk  vi, ch 18 97b'99c, BK VII, CH I
106b,d-108a; bk ix, ch I [608^21-^^20] 133b,d-134a; ch 37 [621^28622*10]
147c / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 5
[679*5-32] 209a-c; ch ii [692*22-27] 224b-c /
Ge?ieration  of Animals, bk hi, ch 2 [753'*6-i7] 294a-b / Ethics, bk hi,
ch  8  [iii6''24-i 117*3] 363a-b; bk vh, ch 6 [1149^24-1150*8] 400b-c 10
Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk i, ch 23 128c-d: BK HI, ch 7, 183c-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ix,
sect  9  292b-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 78, A 4, ANS
411d-413d;  q  82,  aa  2-3  429c-431c; Q 96, A I, REP 2 510b-511b; part
i-ii, q 17, a 2, REP 3 687d-688b; q 40, aa 2-3 793d-795a; Q 41, a I, REP
3 798b-d; q 46, a 4, rep 2 815b-d; a 5, rep i 815d-816d 21 Dante: Divine
Co?nedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-75] 80a-c
22 Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,282-287]
457b / Ma?iciple's Tale [17,104-144] 490a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 184a-b
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  346a-347d;  349a-350a;  361b-362a;
381b-c;  402a-d;  405c406a;  476c-477a  31  Descartes:  Meditations, vi,
99d'100a;  102b103a / Objections and Replies, 156a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  hi,  prop  57, schol 415b 35 Hume: Hutnan Understanding, sect vih,
div   80   486c-d   38   Rousseau:   Inequality,   343d-346d   43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  469c-d 44 Bosw ^i.i.: Johnson, 124b; 174b; 347a-c; 386a
48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 144a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 287d-291a esp
289a-291a; 304b-313a esp 305c-309a, 312b,d
[fn27];371c-372c
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  499c-500c 53 James: Psychology,
49b-51a;  198a-199a; 204b211a passim, esp 206a, 208a-209b; 700a-738b esp
717a-731b, 734b-735a, 738a-b 54 Freud: Getieral Introduction, 591d-592c;
607d-609b   esp   608d-609b;  613a;  615b-616c;  623b-c  /  Inhibitions,
Symptoms, and Anxiety,

[482b]
THE GREAT IDEAS \cto la 721a-b; 737c-739c: 752a-c / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  782a-b,d  [fn  i];  787a-b;  789b791d  esp 789c-790b / New
Introductorv  Lectures,  840a-853b  esp 840b-c, 846b-849b, 851a-c 2. The
classification  and  enumeration  of  the  emotions  7  Plato: Philebus,
628d-630c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 5 351b-c / RJietoric, bk I, CH
II,  [1378*20-30]  623b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, A 2
429c-430c;  part  i-ii,  q 23 723c-727a; q 24, A 4 729c-730a; q 30, a 2,
ans  and  rep  i  749d-750d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part 1, 62c-64a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  the  affects  416b422a,c  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, SECT 1-3 176b-d; sect 18 178a 53 James:
Psvchologv, 127b; 656a; 742a- 743a; 745b-746a; 766a ' 2a, Definitions of
particular  passions  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  103 b-d / Phaedrus, 120a-c /
Symposium  i49a-173a,c  esp  161d-168a / Euthyphro, 193d-194b / Apology,
202a  /  Philebus,  628d-630c  /  Laws,  bk i, 650a; 651a-c 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk ii, ch 7
[113*33-^3]
158d-159a; bk iv, ch 5 [125^28-34} 175a; ch 6
[127^26-32] 177b; ch
13
[151*14-19] 205d206a; bk vih, ch
i  [156*26-^3] 212b-c / Soul, bk I, CH I [403*25-33] 632b-c 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch ii
[692*22-27]
224b-c / Ethics, bk hi, ch 6
[1115*7-14]
361a-b; ch 8
[1116^24-1117*3]
363a-b;  bk  iv,  ch 9 [1128^10-14] 375d-376a; bk vih, ch 6 [1158*10-14]
409d-410a; bk ix, CH 10
[1171*11-13] 424d; ch
12
[1171^29-33]
425d / Politics, bk v, ch 10
[1312^24-33]
515b / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch i [i378*2o]-ch ii
[1388*^30] 623b-636a
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  28  172a173b  18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii, par 13 lld12a; BK HI, par 2 13c-d; bk iv, par 7-14
20d23a  esp  par 11 21d-22a 19 Xqvis.ks: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq
26-48  733d-826a,c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-65b esp 61a-62c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  5a-6c;  25c-26d;  344a347c;  409d-434d  passim, esp
424d-425a 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act hi, sc hi
[165192] 223d-224a;
[322-357] 225c-226a; sc
iv
[155-162] 229a
31   Spinoza:   Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  11-59  399d416b;  the  affects
416b-422a,c;  part  iv, appendix, xxi-xxv 449a-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 262
221a 35 Locke: Human Understafiding, bk ii, ch xx, SECT 3-18 176d-178a

[483a]
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 453a-456a; 502a b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
198d  199a:  237b  c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 345c 346d 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphvsic  of  Morals,  259a;  259d-260b  [tn  2]  / Judgem'ent,
502d-503d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308d-309a; 312b,d
[fn27];313a-b
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 561b 53 James: Psychology, 717a-736b
passim,   esp  717a-721a,  733b-735a;  738b-741b  54  Freud:  Instincts,
418c-421a,c / General Introduction, 558d; 607d-609c; 612c-614b; 623b-c /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  641b-c / Group Psychology, 673b-674a;
681c-683a;  693a694d  passim  /  Inhibitions,  Sy?nptoms,  and  Anxiety,
736d-739c;   751a-754a,c   esp   753d754a,c   /   Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  783c;  795d-796b; 798a 2b. The order and connection of the
passions 7 Plato: Philebus, 628d-630c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii, ch 7
[i 13^*33-^3]
158d-159a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 2-4 13c14b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 81, a 2 429c-430c; part i-ii, q 25 730b-
733d;  q  27, a 4 739c-740a; q 29, a 2 745c-746b; q 30, a 2 749d-750c; q
32,  aa 3-4 760d-762a; q 33, a 2 766a-767a; q 36, a 2 781c-782b; q 40^ a
7  797a-c;  q  43,  a  i  805d-806b;  q  45,  a 2 810d811b; Q 46, AA 1-2
813b-814d;  q 48, a i 822d823b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-65b esp
61a62c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  105c-107a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
395a-422a,c  esp prop 11-59 399d-416b, the affects 416b422a, c; part iv,
def  5  424b; prop 7 426a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 262 221a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xx, SECT 3-18 176d-178a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
237b-c 53 James: Psychology, 742a-b 54 Freud: Instincts, 415d-421a,c esp
420c421a,c  /  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 659b-c / Group Psychology,
677c-678c  /  Ego  and Id, 709d-710c / War and Death, 758a-b; 766a-b 2c.
The opposition of particular emotions to one another 7 Plato: Symposium,
153b-157a  / Phaedo, 220b-221a / Republic, bk iv, 350d-353d 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk hi, ch 7
[431^8-16]
663c-d; [431^2-916643 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch i
[i378^2o]-ch
II
[1388^^30] 623b-636a passim
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10731085] 58a-b
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk iv, par 7-11 20d-22a esp par 11 21d-22a;
bk x, par 39 81b-c

[483b]
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 23, aa 2-4 724c-727a; q 25, a
4  733a-d:  o  29,  AA  2-7,  745c  747a; q 32, a 4 761c-762a; o 35, A 6
777b-778c;  q  46,  a  r,  rep 2 813b-814a 23II0BBES: Leviathan, part i,
61b-d;  62b c; 63b-d; conclision, 279a-c passim 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi,  prop  17  401d-402a;  PROP 51 411c-412a; part iv, def 5 424b; axiom
424c;  prop i, schol-prop 7 424d426b; PROP 9-18 426d-429d esp prop 15-18
428a  429d;  prop 60 442d 443a; appendix, xxi-xxv 449a-c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  cii xx, sect 3-18 176d-178a passim 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  127b-c 38 jMontesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk v, 19a 49 Darwin:
Descent of Man, 312b,d
[in 27]
53  James:  Psychology, 197b-198a; 708a-709a; 720b; 729a-b; 734b-735a 54
Freud:  Instincts,  415d-421a,c  passim,  esp  419d-421a,c  / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  659b-c / Group Psychology, 677c-678c / Ego and Id,
709c-  710c  / War and Death, 758a-b 3. The disorder or pathology of the
passions  3^.  Madness  or  frenzy  due to emotional excess: excessively
emotional  or  emotionally over-determined behavior 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-445]   3a-7c;   bk   ix  [189429]  59a-61c  5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe
[1010-1063] 80a-c 5 Sophocles: Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[282-332]
145c-146a / Electra 156a-169a,c 5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c / Electra
327a339a,c / Bacchantes
[1024-1297] 348c-351a
/  Heracles  Mad  [815-1015]  371d-373d  / Orestes 394a-410d esp [1-424]
394a-39Sb  6 Herodotus: ///V/ory, bk hi, 95d-98a; 103b-d; bk VII, 222c-d
7  Plato:  Charmides,  2b-c  /  Lysis,  14b-15d  / Protagoras, 59b-61c /
Phaedrus,  120a-129d / Ion, 145a-c / Symposium, 168c / Phaedo, 220d221a;
232d-233c  /  Timaeus,  474b-c  8  Aristotle: Dreams, ch 2 [46o'^32-^i8]
704b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[1147^*14-17]
397b  /  Politics,  bk  vih,  ch  7  [1341^33-1342^  18] 547c-548a,c esp
[1342*6-12]  547d  /  Poetics,  ch  17  [1455*^29-36] 690c 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi
[^1-93]
30b-31b;
[1045-1075]
43c-d; bk iv
[10731120] 58a-d
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[296-303]
175a;
[450-477] 179b-180b; bk vh
[323-474] 245a249a;
bk xii
[1-80]
354a-356a;
[593-611]
370a  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk i, 206b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 10, A 3, ans and rep 2 664d-665c; q 28, a 3, ans 742a-d; q
37, a 2, ans and rep 3 784c-785b; A 4, rep 3 785d-786d

[484a]
(3. The disorder or pathology of the passions, "ba. Madness orfrenzy due
to emotional excess: excessively emotional or emotionally overdetermined
behavior.)  22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida la-155a esp BK IV, STANZA
32-49  92b-95a,  bk v, stanza 33-39 124b-125b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i, 63b; 68b- 71a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 192b-d 25
Montaigne: Essays, 5a-6c; lOb-llb; 25c26d; 166a-167a; 275c-d; 289b-290a;
344a347c; 418c-d; 420d-421d 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[104-195] 87b-88a; act v, sc vi [61-93] 103d104a
/  Richard III 105a-148a,c / Romeo and Juliet 285a-319a,c esp act hi, sc
hi
[1-115]
304d-306a / Merchant of Venice, act iv, sc i
[40-62] 426a
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet  29a-72a,c  esp  act IV, sc V 59c-62a / Othello
205a-243a,c  esp act IV, sc I 229d-233a / King Lear 244a283a,c esp act i
244a-254c,  act ii, sc iv [274289] 261c-d, ACT III, sc IV 264a-266b, act
iv, sc VI
[80-207] 274b-275c / Macbeth, act v,
sc  I 306b-307a; sc hi [37-46] 308a / Antony and Cleopatra, act ii, sc v
322a-323d  /  Timon  of  Athens,  act iv, sc ih-act v, sc iv 410c420d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, 83a-c; 88c-89a 35 Locke: Toleration,
7d-8c  /  Human Understanding, BK II, ch XXI, SECT 12 180d-181a; SECT 69
196d-197a  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 231c-232b; 234a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  216a-c;  509d-510c  esp  509d  44 BoswELi.: Johnson, 481d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part iv, 323a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3374-3413] 82b-83a;
[4405-4612] 110a-114b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{  esp  135a-136b,  148b150a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk i, 51d; bk hi, 119a-120c; 159b-162b esp 160d; bk iv, 178b179a;
bk v, 207b-208a; 233b-234a; bk vi, 238a-c; 245d-246a; 266c-d; 271b-273c;
bk VII, 277a-278a; 292b-296a; bk vhi, 305b307d; BK IX, 350d-354a; bk xi,
505a-511b;  531a-532a,c;  bk  xh,  549d-551c;  bk xih, 567d-568c; bk xv,
616a-617a;  642d-643b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 4a-d; BK
II,  17b-21b;  21d-22b;  41c-45d;  bk  hi  46a82a,c esp 50c-62a; bk vhi,
200c-201c;  206a207d;  228d-235d;  bk  ix,  259c-265a; bk xh, 395a-396a;
397c-398d  53  James:  Psychology, 204b; 653a-b; 716b; 718a719a; 750a-b;
75'4a;  797a-b  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  27a-c / Interpretation of Dreams,
2iOc-d; 328a-b / General Introduc-

[484b]
426  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3^  to  3c  tion,  547b-549d / Group Psychology,
670d671c:  675b-676b  /  Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 743b-744a /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787a-b  3^. Rationalization or the
emotional  determination  of  thought 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
hi, 427d-428a; bk iv, 474a-c; bk v, 506b; 507a-c 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 118d
9  Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 16 [1287^20-^5] 485c-486a / RJietoric,
bk  i,  ch 2 [1356^11-18] 595c; BK n, ch i [1377^28-1378^5] 622d-623a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11411191] 59a-d
23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 52d-53a; 58a; 68c; 78a-b; part ii, 154a 24
Rabelais:   Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  148d-150d;  154a-156c;
159d-163c;   166a-168a   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  210b-212a;  273b-276a;
447c-448c;  490d-491d  28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 306a-c; 309d
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38d-39a; 66c-d / Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  49  Ilia  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi, prop 39, schol 408b-d 33
Pascal:   PensSes,  82-87  186b-189a;  99-100  191a-192b  /  Geometrical
Demonstration,  439b442a 35 Locke: Toleration, 2d-3a / Civil Government,
ch  II,  SECT 13 28a-b / Human Understanding, BK II, CH XXXIII, SECT 1-9
248b-249d;  bk  iv,  » CH XX, SECT 12 392c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  i,  div  6,  453c  43  Federalist:  number  i, 29c-30b; number 31,
103c-104a;  number 50, 162a-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 270a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk ii, 82d-83a; bk HI, 134a-c; bk iv, 170d-171c; bk v, 233b-234a;
BK VI, 238a-b; bk x, 426b; bk xi, 497c-499c; 505a-511b esp 509c-510d; bk
xih,  585b, epilogue II, 686c-687a 53 James: Psychology, 371b; 374a-377a
passim,  esp  376b-377a; 439a; 643a-646a; 652a-657b 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  13d-14a  /  Interpretation  of Dreams,
210c-d;  379a-380d  /  General  Introduction,  486b'488b esp 487d-488a /
Group  Psychology,  682b-c / War and Death, 760d-761a / New Introductory
Lectures,  874a-879b  esp  874a-d,  878b-879b  3c.  Particular emotional
disorders:  psychoneuroses  due  to  repression  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  347c-d  53 James: Psychology, 244b-253b esp 248a; 645b646a;
746b-748a;  749a-750b;  753b-754b;  759b-760a;  799b-807a;  838a-839b 54
Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis la-20d esp 4d-5a, 7a-9a,
14b-i9a /

[485a]
Hysteria   25a-118a,c  esp  35bc  37d-38d,  52c53c,  65a  72b,  81c-87a,
lllb-115a   /  buerprctathn  of  Dreams,  320b  c;  328c;  380d  382a  /
Narcissism, 402c-404d / Repression 422a427a,c / Unconscious, 432d-436b /
General  Introduction,  545a-638a,c csp 557b 569c, 585b 600d, 604c 606a,
611a-615a,   632b635d   /  Group  Psycho  logv,  690a-691c  csp  690c-d:
695b-696a,c  / Ego and Id, 712c715c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
718a-754a,c csp 720a-'723d, 728b-731d, 741d
[fn
i], 745d-747b, 750a-d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 792b- 799a esp
797a-  b,  798d799a  /  New Introductory Lectures, 840a-846a; 851d-852d;
859c-860c  3c(l)  Hysterias  10  Hippocrates: Regimen in Acute Diseases,
appendix,  par  35  43d  53 James: Psychology, 131b-137b esp 135a, 137a;
248a-252a; 747b
[£113];
768b-770a esp 770b
[fn 3]; 789b-790b [fn 2]; 802b-803a
54  Freud:  Origin  and Development of PsychoAnalysis, la-5d esp 4c-5d /
Hysteria,  25a-62b  esp  35b-c, 37d-38d, 53b-c; 72d-73b; 76c-d; 81d-83c;
97b-99c;  lllb-118a,c  /  Interpretation of Dreams, 200a-d / Repression,
426b-c  /  Unconscious,  434c-436a esp 435d-436a / General Introduction,
572a-b;   586d-587b;   610d-612b  passim  /  Ego  and  Id,  713d-714a  /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  718c-719c; 728b-729a; 741c-742a;
747c-748a; 750b 3c(2) Obsessions and compulsions 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[59-93]
30d-31b;  [1053-1075]  43c-d  27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  v,  so  i
306b307a;  sc  iii [37-46] 308a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 2b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 44, schol 437d-438a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
139  196b-199a;  142-143  199b-200a  44 BoswEi.!.: Johnson, 138c-139a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{  esp  135a-136b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
513d-515a  53  ]AMES  -.Psychology,  733b  [fn  i];  801a-805b 54 Freud:
Hysteria,   83d-86a;   90a-b;   99c-102a  /  Repression,  426d-427a,c  /
Unconscious,  436b  /  General  Introduction,  550d-557b  esp  551b552c;
561c-562c;  568a-569a;  572b-c;  587b-c;  600d;  612a-b  /  Ego  and Id,
713c-715c passim / Inhibitions, Sympto?ns, and Anxiety, 718b719b passim;
721c;  723c-d;  729a-733c;  735c-d;  747c-d;  750b-d  / New Introductory
Lectures,  841  b-c  3c(3) Phobias and anxieties 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [102-158] 2b-3a; bk hi [59-93] 30d-31b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 35, A 8, ans 779c-780c

[485b]
23  HoiJBEs: leviathan, part i, 68d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk n,
ch  XXXIII,  sect 10 249d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 210b 211a; BK
XV,  618a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk ix, 260d 262a; bk xi,
318a  348d;  bk  xii, 376b-d 53 James: Psychology, 722a-725a passim, csp
723a, 724b; 733b (fn ij 54 I'REun: Hysteria, 83d-86a passim, csp 84d85a;
87a-97b  /  Interpretation  of Dreams, 205a-c; 235b-d; 276c; 370b-373a /
Repression,  425d-426b  / Unconscious, 434c-435d / General Introduction,
607h-6l5h  esp 610d-612d;623b-c / Ego and Id, 715d-717a,c / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 720a-754a esp 724a-728b, 733c-742a, 744b-748b /
New   Introductory  Lectures,  840a-846a  3c(4)  Traumas  and  traumatic
neuroses  54  Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 3a-5a esp
4b-c;   14d-15a   /   Hysteria,  25a-30a  esp  26a-c,  27c-d  /  General
Introduction,  558a-d;  603a-b  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 641a-d;
648d-650c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  735d-736c; 741a-b;
744b-745d;  749b-c;  751b-752b  /  New Introductory Lectures, 817c-818b;
845b-846a  3>d.  The  alleviation  and  cure  of  emotional disorders 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[31-93]
30b-31b esp
[87-93]
31b; bk vi
[1-42]
80a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  38 786d-789d 25
Montaigne: Essays, 37c-39a; 401b-406a 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act v, sc
i  306b307a;  sc hi [37-46] 308a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h, ch
xxxiii,  SECT  13  250a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 13b-c; 127a-b; 284c-d;
297d-298a  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 357b-358b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk vi, 271b-c; BK xii, 551c-554a; bk xv, 614a-d; 616a-618b esp 617a-b 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk h, 21d23c 53 James: Psychology, 132b;
135a-b 54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, la-4d; 6c-7a;
10c-13d;  14d-15a;'^18a20d  /  Hysteria,  25a-81c  passim,  esp 30d-31a,
59d-60a,   62c-72d,   75d-81c;   106c-lllb   /   PsychoAnalytic  Therapy
123a-127a,c  / " Wild'' PsychoAnalysis 128a-130d / General Introduction,
546b-c;  550a-c;  560b-561b; 603b-604c; 623c638a,c / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,  643d644d;  651c-d  /  Ego  and  Id, 712c-713a / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  748b-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  840a;
851d-852d; 864a-873d esp 871a-873d

[486a]
428  4.  The  moral  consideration  of  the  passions  7 Plato: Gorgias,
275d-277c  /  Republic, bk iv, 350c-353d; bk x, 433d QAristotle: Ethics,
bk  ii,  ch  i-bk  hi,  ch i 348b,d-357b passim; bk hi, ch 6-bk iv, ch 9
361a-376a,c; bk v, ch 8
[1135^17-1136^9]
383c-384a; bk vh 395a-406a,c; bk x, ch 8
[1178^8-21] 432d
/ Politics, bk vh, ch 15
[1334^8-28] 539b-d / Rhetoric, bk
ii,  ch  12-14 636a-638a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [288-322]
33d-34b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses 105a-245a,c passim, esp bk I, CH 3-5
lOSb-llOc, ch 22 127c-128c, CH 25, 129d'130a, bk ii, ch 5, 142c-143b, ch
13  152c-153d,  ch  17-18 158d-162b, bk hi, ch 15, 190c-d, BK IV, ch 4-6
225a-232c,  ch  9 237d-238d 12 AuRELius: Meditations 253a-310d passim 18
Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch 4-6 287a289b; BK XIV, ch 3-9 378a-385b
/   Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  24  630c-631a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 24 727a-730a;Q34 768c-772b 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 56, A 4 32b-33c; q 58, a 2, ans 42a-43a; a 3,
rep  2 43b-44a; q 59 45d-49d; q 60, a 2 50d-51b; AA 4-5 52b-54d; q 62, a
2,  rep  1,3 60d-61b; q 63, A 4, ans 65d-66c; q 64, a i 66d-67c; q 66, A
3, ans and rep 2 77c-78b; q 67, a i 81c-82c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, parti,
61d-62a;  79a-80a;  85d;  95d-96b;  part ii, 138d-139a; part iv, 272c 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learnif2g, 26a-27c; 78a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv, appendix, i-iii 447a-b; xxxii 450c-d; part v, prop 1-4 452d-453d esp
prop  4,  schol  453b-d  33 Pascal: Pensees, 203 211a; 262 221a; 412-413
242a;  423  243b;  502  260b-261a  38  RovssEAu:  Inequality, 330d-331a;
343b-346d;  362a-d  /  Political Economy, 375d-376b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   of   Morals,   253a-279d  esp  256a-c,  259b-c,  264d-265b,
266d-267d,  268d-271d;  284d'285a  /  Practical  Reason,  297a-307d  esp
298a-300a,  304a-307d;  321b-329a  esp  321b-324b; 341c-342a; 356a360d /
Intro.   Metaphysic   ofMorals,  385c-386d;  389a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty,
295b-297b  /  Utilitarianism,  457c-461c; 464d-465c; 469b-471b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 150 56c-57a / Philosophy of History,
part i, 251b-c; part iv, 321b d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-3i9a esp
311a-d,  313d-314b,  318d-319a; 592b-593b 53 James: Psychology, 81b-83a;
202a-203a; 798b808a esp 807a-808a; 816a-818a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  386c-387a  /  General  Introduction,  501d-504b  esp  503d504b;
624d-625b / War and Death, 757d-761c

[486b]
THE  GREAT  IDE.XS 4 to Aa 4a. The conflict between reason and emotion 5
Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[655-663]
120b-c   7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c;  128a-129c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,
350c-355a;  bk  ix, 416a-c 9 Aristotle: Motion ofAnimals, ch ii 239a-d /
Ethics, bk I, CH 13 [1102^13-1103^10] 348a-d; bk hi, ch I
[1111*35-^4] 357b; bk vii 395a406a,c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 15
[1286*17-20]
484b-c;  [1286*33-37]  484d  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi
[307-322]  34a-b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 5 257b-c; sect 10
257d-258a;  sect  16-17 259a-d; bk HI, SECT 4 260b-261a; sect 12 262b-c;
bk  v,  sect 8-9 269d-270c; bk vh, sect 55 283b-c; sect 68-69 284c-d; bk
vih,  sect  39 288c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv 167a-186b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 81, A 3, ANS and rep 2 430c-431d; q 95, a 2, ans
and  REP  I  507c-508a; q hi, a 2, ans 569c570b; PART I-II, Q 9, A 2 esp
rep  3  658d-659c;  q  10,  A  3,  ANS  and  rep  2 664d-665c; q 17, A 7
690d-692a;  Q  33,  a  3  767a-d;  q 34, a i, rep i 768c-769d; Q 48, a 3
824c-825b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 61, A 3, ANS
56b-57a; q 77 144d-152a esp a 2 145d-147c, A 4 148b-149a, a 7 150d-151c;
Q  80,  A 2 160d-161c; q 91, A 6 212c-213c; q 93, A 6 219d-220d; q 94, a
6,  ans  225d-226b;  part  ii-ii,  q  186, A 4, ANS 655c-656b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a; 58c-d; PART II, 105d-106a; 141a-b; 151b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a;  159a-167a  esp 161a-c, 165c-166a;'l84b-d;
200d'205b; 273b276a; 486b-495a 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
ii, sc II 113c-115d; act hi, sc ii [74-81] 121a / Othello, ACT I, sc III
[306-337] 212b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 55b-d; 66c-d; 67a-b;
78a-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  1-18 424c429d; prop 59-73
442b-447a;  appendix,  iIII  447a-b;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v, prop 1-20
452d-458a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vih
[500-643]
243a-246a;  bk xii [80-110] 321a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 104 193a; 412-413
242a; 423 243b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 13 28a- b / Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 54 192b-c; bk iv, ch xx, sect 12 392c
35  Hume:  Hum.an  Understaiiding,  sect  i,  div 3 451d 42 Kant: Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c386b  / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Federalist:
number  15, 65b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 312d-313a 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[3217-3373] 79a-82a
esp [3217-3250] 79a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 411a-4l2a

[487a]
r  49  Darwin: Descent ofMdn, 3I8d 319a 53 Jami:s: Psychology, 799a-808a
csp  799a-b,  807a-b; 8l'6a-819a csp 816a-817a 54 l*'Ria;o: Unconscious,
433b-c  /  General  Introdtiction,  501d-504b csp 503b c. 504b; 589c593b
passim  /  Ego  ami Id, 702c-d; 704a-c; 708b-c; 715a 716c / Inhibitions,
Symptoms, and .inxiety, 721d-722c / New Introductory Lectures, 837b-839b
csp  838a-d:  843d-846'a  csp  845b  4^(1) The force of the passions Old
TESTAMnNr: Genesis, 4:1-16; 25:29-34; 34; 39:7-20 / Exodus, 32:15-20 / /
Samuel,  18:612; 19:8-10— (D) i Kings, 18:6-12; 19:8-10 / // Samuel, 11;
13—  (D)  //  Kings,  11;  13  /  Job,  5:2  / Proverbs, 15:13; 27:4 New
Testament:  Romans, 1:18-32 / // Corinthians, 7:8-16 / / Timothy, 6:9-10
/  I John, 2:15-17; 3:14-16 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xii [153-200] 251d-252b
5 Euripides: Medea [627-641] 217c / Hippolytus 225a-236d 5 Aristophanes:
Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, lOOb-lOlb; bk VII,
218c;  222c-d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  438a7  Plato:
Charmides,  2b-c / Protagoras, 59b61c / Phaedrus, 120a-122a / Symposium,
168a  /  Phaedo,  232d-234c / Republic, bk i, 296b-c; bk ix, 416a-418c /
Timaeus,  474b-d  / Laws, bk \tii, 735a-738c passim 8 Aristotle : Memory
and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453"! 5-31} 695b-d / Dreams, ch 2 [460*32-
^18] 704b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Ariimals, bk vh, ch i
[581^11-22] 107b /
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^
29-i095"i2] 340a-b; bk hi, ch i
[i 109^*301110^15]
355b,d-356b;
[1111*21-^3]
357a-b; bk IV, ch 9 [1128^15-20] 376a; bk vi, ch 5
[1140^8-19]
389b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  i-io  395a403c passim; bk vih, ch 3 [ii56*3i-*'5]
408a; bk IX, CH 8 [1168^11-28] 422a-b; bk x, ch 9
[ii79''4-i 180*24] 434b-435a
/  Politics,  bk  i,  CH 2 [1253*31-37] 446d; bk hi, ch 15 [1286* 16-20]
484b-c;
[1286*33-37]
484d; ch 16
[1287^28-32] 485d; BK
V, ch 10 [1312^25-33] 515b; CH II
[1315*25-31] 518a-b; bk vii, ch
7 [1327^40-1328*18] 532a-c / Rhetoric, bk h, CH 12 [1389*3-*' 11] 636b12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [307-322]  34a-b  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  h, sect 10 257d258a; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk iv 167a-186b; bk xii
[i-8o]354a-356a; [593-61 i]370a
14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  139a-c  / Coriolanus 174b,d-193a,c / Lysander,
362b-365a  /  Pompey, 533a-c / Antony 748a- 7 79d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi, 58a; bk xiii, 137b-c / Histories, bk iv, 267d

[487b]
18  \r(;i;sTiNE: Confessions, hk iv, par 9 14 21b 23a; bk vi, par 11 1:5
38b-39c;  bk  viii, par 10 II 55c-56b / City of God, bk iv, ch 3 190a-c;
bk  xix,  ch  15 521a c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, i'\kii, o 81, A 3,
REP  1-2  430c  -431d; g iii, a 2, ans 569c570b; PARI I -II, g 6, aa 6-7
649a  650d;  g  9,  a  2  658d-659c; g 10, a 3 664d-665c; g 24, A 2, ans
727d-728c; g ^7 783c 786d 20 AguiNAs: Summa Theologica, pari i ii, g 72,
A  2  112b-113a;  g  7:}, a 5 123a-d; g 74, aa 5-10 131d-137c; g 77 144d
152a;  g 82, a 3 169c-170b; g 83, a 4 173c-174b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hull, v 7a-8b; vii
[97] -VIII
[64] 10c lie
22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale\i'/,io^-i^^]490a-b  23 Hobbes: leviathan,
part  i,  65a; 89a; part II, 104d; 105c; 138d-139a; 141a b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  5a-6c; 20d-22a; 25c26d ; 36c-41a passim, esp 39b-40a ; 109a-c ;
1 59a167a; 184a-d; 200d-205b esp 203c-205b; 232b-238d passim; 273b-276a;
346b-347c; 350d-354b; 402c-404b; 418c-d; 420d-421d; 435b-d; 491c-495a 26
Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc hi 73d-74b / Romeo and Juliet
285a-319a,c  /  Merchant  of  Venice, act i-iv 406a-430c 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus  and  Cressida  103a141a,c  /  Othello  205a-243a,c / Antony and
Cleopatra  311a-350d  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 347c-d 30 Bacon :
Advancement  ofLearning, 67a- b; 78a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
1-18 424c429d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[561-594]
244b-245a;  bk  ix [990-1066] 269a-270b; bk xii [80-110] 321a-b / Samson
Agonistes  [521576]  351a-352a  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 360 235a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 39 187c-d; sect 54 192b-c; bk
iv, ch XX, sect 12 392c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 3 451d
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 239b-243a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 109c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  329b  42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
385c386b / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Federalist: number i, 29d-30a; number
6,  40a-b;  number  50,  162a-b;  number  55,  173a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
174b-c;  176d;  214b-c;  341c-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
167c168a; part iii, 300c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1110-1117] 27b-28a;
[3217-3373] 79a-82a; part ii [6566-6569] 161a
48 Melville: Moby Dick,, 135a-136b; 411a-412a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
311d-312b  51  Tolstoy: War arid Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk hi, 122b-c; bk
vi, 251d-252d; epilogue i, 655c-656b

[488a]
430 THE GREAT IDEAS {4a. The conflict between reason and emotien. 4a (1)
Thejorce  of  the  passions.^  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
4a-d; bk ii, 39b'40a; bk hi, 50c-62a; bk vii, 177c; bk XII, 397c-398d 53
James:   Psychology,   799a-b   54   Freud:  Hysteria,  110c  /  General
Introduction,  502a-504b  esp 503d-504a / Group Psychology, 690a-c / Ego
and  Id,  701d-702d;  715d-716a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety,
745d747b  / War and Death, 760d-761a / Civilization and Its Discontents,
787b-c  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 837b-839b esp 838c-839b Aa{l) The
strength  of reason or will 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk iv [265-295] 201d-202a;
BK IX
[82-104] 230a; bk xix [203-219] 291b
7  Plato: Symposium, 168a-173a,c / Apology, 205d-206d / Crito, 214d-215d
/  Phaedo,  220b221a;  225b-226c;  232b-234c;  250b-251d  /  Laws, bk I,
649d-650b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 8
[1168^281 169^^1 1] 422b-d /
Politics, bk i, ch 5
[1254^
i§_b8] 447d-448a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[307322] 34a-b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; BK II, CH 23 170a-172d 12
AuRELius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect 39 288c; bk
ix,  sect  7  292b;  bk  xi,  sect  18  304b-305b 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
139a-140d  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vi, par 11-13 38b-39c; par 16
40a-c;  bk  viii,  par lo-ii 55c56b; par 19-27 58b-60c / City of God, bk
ix,  CH  4-5  287a-289a;  bk  xiv,  ch  8-9  381c385b  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 81, A 3 430c-431d; q hi, a 2, ans 569c-570b; part
i-ii, q 10, a 3 664d-665c; q 17, a 7 690d692a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
ii,   141a-b   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a;  36c-41a  esp  39b-40a;
159a-167a;  184a-d; 200d-205b; 273b-276a 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i,
sc hi
[322337] 212b-c
30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning,  27a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  15-17  428a-d;  PROP 59-73 442b-447a; appendix, i-hi 447a-b; xxxii
450c-d;  part  v 451a-463d 32 Milton: Comus [414-475] 42b-44a / Paradise
Lost, BK VIII [500-617] 243a-245b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 350 234a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  54  192b-c  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  344d-345c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 164a-165c; 235c-d / Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 259a-c; 264d-265b; 271c-d; '279b; 282d-283d;
284d285a / Practical Reason, 303b-304b; 314a-d;

[488b]
4«(2) to 4^(1) 315b-c; 346b,d
[fn
i] / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365b-366a / Intro. Metaphysic
of  Morals, 386b-d / Judgement, 483d484b; 586a-587a; 605d-606b [fn 2] 43
Mill:  Representative  Government, 332c-d / Utilitarianism, 463d-464c 49
Darwin:   Descent   ofMan,   312a-c;  313d-314a;  318d-319a  53  ]aiaes:
Psychology,   798b-800a;   807a-808a   54   Freud:   Hysteria,   110c  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams, 384c-385c; 386d-387a / Unconscious, 433b-c /
Group  Psychology, 690a-c / Ego and Id, 702c-d; 715c-716c / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  721d-722c;  744a  / War and Death, 760d-761a /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 800d-801a / New Introductory Lectures,
837d-839b;  845b;  880a  4b. The treatment of the emotions by or for the
sake  of  reason  4^(1)  Moderation  of  the passions by reason: virtue,
continence,  avoidance  of sin Old Testament: Exodus, 20:14,17; 23:4-5 /
Leviticus, 19:17-18 / Numbers, 15:37-41 / Deuteronomy, 5:18,21 / Psalms,
32:8-10;  37:1-8—  (D)  Psalms, 31:8-10; 36:1-8 / Proverbs, 7; 15:1; 23;
30:7-9  /  Ecclesiastes,  7:8-9—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7:9-10  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus   ,  18:30-33;  31;  38:1623—  (£))  OT,  Ecclesiasticus^
18:30-33;  31;  38:16-24  New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:21-26,43-48  /  /
Corinthians,  13:4-8  /  Ephesians,  4:31-32  /  Colossians,  3:5-15 / /
Thessalonians,  4:3-8  /  /  Timothy,  6:3-12  / Titus, 2:11-14; 3'i-7 /
James,  '^:i-j  I  I  Peter,  2:11-12 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [866-1 114]
499a-502b  7  Plato:  Charmides,  5a-b  /  Laches, 31d-37a / Protagoras,
59b-64a / Phaedrus, 120b-c / Symposium, 153b-157a; 168a-173a,c / Phaedo,
225b-226c;  233c-234c / Republic, bk hi, 325b-326b; bk iv, 346a-356a; bk
ix,  416a-c;  bk  X,  431b-434a  /  Timaeus,  466a-467a  /  Laws,  bk I,
649d'650b;  bk  vii,  713c-716a  esp  715d716a;  bk  viii,  735c-738c  8
Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[125^20-28]
174d-175a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13 347b-348d; bk II, CH i-BK HI,
CH  I  348b,d-357b;  bk  hi,  ch  6-bk  IV,  CH  9  361a-376a,c;  bk vii
395a406a,c;  bk ix, ch 8 [1168^28-1169^11] 422b-d / Politics, bk I, CH 5
[1254^18-^8] 447d-448a / Rhetoric, bk 11, ch 14 637d-638a 11 NicoMACHus:
Arithmetic, bk i, 826d-827a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[307-322} 34a-b;
[1053-1094]
43c-44a,c;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d; [1117-1135] 75d; BK VI [1-42] 80a-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch i 105a-106c; CH 3 108b-c; BK II, ch 2
140c-141c; ch ii, 151a-b; ch 18 161a-162b

[489a]
12  Ai RELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 5 257b-c; BK IV, SECT 24 265c-d;
bk  vii,  sect  55  283b c; bk viii, sect 39 288c; bk ix, sect 7 292b 14
Plutarch:  Dion,  798b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 2-4 9b-d;
bk  III,  par  I  13b-c; bk iv, par 25 25c; bk vi, par 18-26 40d-43a; bk
viii, par 1-2 52c-53b; par lo-ii 55c-56b; par 25-27 60a-c / Cit\ of God,
BK IV, CH 3 190a-c; bk ix, ch 5-6 288b289b; BK XIV, ch 6-9 380b 385b; bk
xix,  ch  15  521a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 24 630c-631a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 95, AA 2-3 507c-509b; q 98, a 2 esp
rep  3  517d519a; part i-ii, q 20, a 4, ans 714c-715b; Q 24 727a-730a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, A 4 32b-33c; q 59 45d-49d; q
60, a 4-Q 6r, a 5 52b-59d; q 64, aa 1-2 66d-68b; q 65, a i 70b-72a; part
hi, q 15, aa 4-9 790d-795b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-75] 80a-c
22  Chaucer:  Tale of Melibeus, par 4-7 401b402b / Parsons Tale, par 12,
503b-504a  23Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  93d-94a; 95d96b 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  234a-240a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
20d-22a;  89b-91b;  159a-167a;  184a-d;'  200d-205b;  232b-238d; 251a-c;
346b-347c;  353c-354b;  402c-404b;  431c-432d; 486b-495a 26 Shakespeare:
Romeo and Juliet, act ii, sc VI
[1-15] 300c / Henry V, act
i, sc i [24-69] 533b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc hi
[5-51]
34c-d;  act  hi,  sc ii [68-79] 49c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
27b-c;  67a-b;  71d-72b;  78a-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 1-18
424c429d  esp  prop  18,  schol  429a-d;  prop 59-73 442b-447a; appendix
447a-450d;  part  v  451a-463d  esp  prop  1-20  452d-458a,  prop  38-42
461d-463d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b;  bk  xi  [334-369]  306b-307a;  [527551]  310b-311a  / Samson
Agonistes  [541-576]  351b-352a  /  Areopagitica,  390a-391a  33 Pascal:
Pensees,  104  193a;  203 211a; 413 242a; 423 243b; 502-503 260b-261a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 46-54 189d-192c esp sect
54 192b-c; sect 69 196d-197a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32a-b 42 Kant:
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 256b / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  368d-369a  / Judgement, 586d-587a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 92b-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 105 133d-134a / Philosophy of
History, 312d-313a; part iv, 365d-366a part III,

[489b]
49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 310c 319a esp 313d 314b, 318d 319a; 322c d;
592b  c:  593a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, hk hi, 122b-c; BK V, 201a-c;
bk  vi, 245b c; 247d-250a; epilogue I, 655c 656b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi, 164a-167a 53 James: Psychology, 807a-808a; 816a-819a
esp  817a  818a  54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 9a;
20a-c  /  Hysteria,  110c  /  Narcissism,  407b-408a / Ego and Id, 702c;
706d707d;  715a-716a  /  War  and Death, 757d759c / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 773b-c / New Introductory Lectures, 838c-839b; 844b-c 4^(2)
Attenuation  and  atrophy  of  the  passions: the liberation of reason 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  233c-234c  /  Republic,  bk  i,  295d-296c 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 13
[1389^121390*^24] 637a-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[1-54]
61a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i 105a-106c; CH 4 108d-110a; bk
ii,  ch  2  140c-141c;  ch  17-18  158d-162b;  bk hi, ch 8 184b-c; ch 22
195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  12  242d-244a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk ii, sect 2 257a; sect 5 257b-c; sect 10 257d-258a; sect
1617  259a-d; bk hi, sect 4 260b-261a; sect 6 261a-c; sect 12 262b-c; bk
iv,  sect  39  267a;  bk  v, sect 8 269d-270b; sect 26 272c; BK VI, SECT
40-46  277d-278d; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c; sect 68-69 284c-d; bk ix, sect
7  292b  17  Plotinus  :  Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 4-5 108c109d esp ch 5,
109c-d  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a289a; bk xiv, ch
8-10  381c-385d  / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 24 630c-631a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 24, a 2 727b-728c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 152a-d; 188d-191c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 89b-91b;
99b-100a;  107a-112d;  165d-167a;  200d-205b;  232b-238d  esp 235c-236a;
251a-c; 402c-404b; 432b-d; 486b-495a esp 491d-495a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 26b-c; 71d72b 32 Milton: Comus
[414-475]
42b-44a;
[706755] 49a-50a / Areopagitica, 390a-391a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 413 242a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk v, 19a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  344d-345c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32a-b 42
Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals 256b / Practical Reason, 346b,d
[fn
i]  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378d-379a / Judgement,
586a-587a

[490a]
{4b,  The  treatment of the emotions by or for the sake of reason. 4^(2)
Attenuation  and  atrophy of the passions: the liberation of reason.) 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; BK XIV, 605b-d; bk xv,
630c-631a  53  James: Psychology, 751a-752a; 753b'754b; 760a-b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  20b-c  / Hysteria, 110c /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  745d-746c / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  773b-c  /  Netu  Introductory  Lectures, 839d-840a 4c. The
moral  significance  of  temperamental  type  or emotional disposition 7
Plato:  Charmides,  3b-d  / Republic, bk i, 296b'C; bk ii, 319C'320c; bk
hi,  338a-339a  /  Timaeus,  474b-d  / Statesman, 607a-608d 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8
[9^34-10^6]
15a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 9 [ii28'^io-2o] 375d-376a; bk vi, ch
13 [ii44''i-i7] 394b; bk vii, CH 4
[1148^18-22] 398c; ch
5  399a-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 10 [1369*5-29] 612b-c; bk II, ch 12-14
636a'638a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[288322] 33d-34b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 5 llOb-c; BK II, CH 15 155c'156b 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch
1-2  246c247b  19  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 46, A 5, ANS
and  rep i 815d-816d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A I,
ANS  12b-13c; Q 63, A I 63a-64a; q 65, a i, ANs 70b-72a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxx
[100-145] lOOb-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk hi, stanza 129 71a-b / Wife of
Bath's Prologue
[61916208] 266a
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  68b-c;  77c-78a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
200d-205b   esp   203a204a;   434d-435d;   491d-495a  csp  494d-495a  26
Shakespeare: Richard II, act hi, sc ii 335b-337d / 1st Henry IV, act hi,
sc  i  [146189]  451c-452a  /  2nd  Hcfiry IV, act iv, sc v 494b-496d 27
Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act iv, sc iv [32-66] 59a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  49b-50b;  76d-77c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv
102b,d-108d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 435b-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic ofMorals, 256a; 258b-c / Practical Reason, 356a-360d 43 Mill:
Liberty, 303d-304d / Representative Government, 346c-348c

[490b]
432  THE  GREAT IDEAS 4r/o 5 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
150  56c-57a / Philosophy of History, part iv, 323b-c; 357b-c 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  311c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 321d-322d;
336b-337d;  bk ix, 362d-363a; bk xi, 514c-d; 519a-c; 527b-528b; epilogue
i,  655c-656b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk it, 38a-40c; bk hi,
48b-50b;  53a-60a  esp  54a  b,  57b-c;  69c-71c  53  James: Psychology,
799b'808a   passim,   esp   802b-803a,   806b-807a   5.   The  political
consideration  of the passions 5 Sophocles: Afitigone [162-210] 132c-d 5
Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a-599a,c 6Thucydides: Pcloponnesiaii War, bk
hi,  436d-438b  7  Plato: Republic, bk viii-ix, 404a-418a passim, esp BK
VIII,  404d-405c,  407a-408a,  409d-411a,  bk  ix, 416a-418a / Latvs, bk
i-ii,   643c-663d  esp  bk  i,  651a-652d;  bk  hi,  665a-c;  668a-670c;
671a-672c; 674c-675c; bk IV, 681b-d; 682b; bk v, 686d-691b esp 689c690c;
BK  VI,  707c-708a;  bk vii, 718c-719d; 726d-728b; bk vhi, 732d-738c esp
735c736c, 738a-c; bk ix, 747d-748d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch i
[1121^28-30]
368c / Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [1271=^9-17] 467b; bk III, ch 15
[1286*^17-20] 484b-c; [1286*3337]
484d; CH 16
[1287*28-39]
485d;  bk  v 502a-519d passim, esp ch 2-3 503b-505b, ch lo-ii 512d-518c;
bk vii, ch 7 [1327^40-1328* 18] 532a-c 14 Plutarch: Cleomenes, 659d-660a
/  Dion,  784d-785a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk hi, 257c-d 23 Machiavelli:
Prince, 3a-37d passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d; part i, 85c-d;
90b-d;  93d-94a;  95d-96b;  part ii, 104b-d; 105c-106b; 113b; 140c-142a;
151b-c;  PART  IV,  272c;  conclusion,  279a-c  27 Shakespeare: Timon of
Athens,  act  hi,  sc  v  406d-408a  30 Bacon: Adva7icement of Learning,
20c-d;  78a-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 46 410c; part IV, PROP
35,  schol  433d-434a; appendix, viii-xvii 447d-448d 33 Pascal: Pensees,
291-338  225a-233a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch xi, sect 136-1:^7
56c-57b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28b-29a; 37a-b; PART hi, 112a-114b;
119b-121a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 6a-b; BK HI, 9a; 10a;
lOc-lla;  12b-d;  bk  v,  18d19d;  BK VII, 47c-48a; bk xhi, 96a; bk xix,
135d-139c  passim;  bk  xxviii,  259b;  bk  xxix,  269a,c  38  Rousseau:
Political Economy. 368a-b; 375d376b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4d-5a

[491a]
5a  to 5/7 CHAPTi-Ft 22: EMOTION 4ii 43 Filr>r.K\LisT: NusfRKR I 29a-31a
passim;  m  mBi;i<  5-6 37a-41c passim, csp m miu-k 0. 40a-b; NUMBi-R 10
49c-53a  csp  50a-d;  numbkr  1=;,  65b  d; number 17 69a-70d; mmhkr 27,
95c-d;  NUMBER  31,  103d 104a; number 34, llOc-d; NUMBER 46, 150b 152a;
number  49,  160b-161a; number 50, 162a-b; number 55, 173a-b; number 63,
192c-193a;   number   70,  211d-212a;  number  76,  225d-226a  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  329b-c;  336c  337a;  346c 348c 46 Hec.i.l:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  166b167c;  PART I, 24id-242a; part hi,
300c-d;   PART   IV,   323b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  201a  54  Freud:
Civilization   and  Its  Discontent  <,  780b802a,c  csp  780c-d,  781c,
783c-784b,  785d787c,  7Q2a-b,  800c-802a,c  5a. The causes of political
association:   fear  or  need  6  Herodoius:  History,  bk  i,  23b-d  6
Thucydides:  Pelopontiesian  War,  bk  ii, 402b404a 7 Plato: Protagoras,
44a-45b  /  Republic, bk ii, 311b-c: 316c-319a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
hi, ch 6 [1278^15-30] 475d-476a; ch 9 [i28o'\p-i28i'*2] 477d-478c; bk V,
CH 8 [1308^25-30] 510b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
15  Tacitus:  Afinals, bk hi, 51b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 30
147b-d 23 HoBEEs: Leviathan, part i, 77a; 77c; 84c-87b esp 86b; 90b-91b;
part  n,  99a-101a; 109b-c; 116c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop ^7,
schol  1-2  434d-436a 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch
ii,  sect  13-15  28a-c;  ch  vih,  sect  95  46c-d;  ch  ix  53c-54d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLatvs,  bk  i,  2b-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
354c-355a  /  Political  Economy,  370b; 374a-b / Social Contract, bk I,
393b-c  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 309a-c; 311b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 91b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 435c-d 43 Federalist:
number 10, 50a d; number 15, 65b-d; number 17 69a-70d passim; number 27,
95c-d; number 29, 101a; number 46, 150b-152a; number 51, 163b-c 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  424c-425b  /  L'tiiitarianisjn,  471a-b  46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 183 64a; par 261, 83c-d /
Philosophy  of History, part II, 262a; 283b-c; part hi, 289b-d; part IV,
328b-c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308a-310d; 321b-c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 133c-d passim; bk vi, 158b-159a

[491b]
54  Freud:  Group  Psychology  664a-696a,c csp 665c, 672a 676b, 687b c /
Civilization and Us Discontents, 781d 782d; 783b c; 785c 788d; 796a -b /
New  Introductory  Iwctures,  884a  5h. The acquisition and retention of
power:  love  or  fear  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 95d-96b; 103d104a;
107c-d 6
['\ivc\'i)iDEs:Peloponnesian War, bk i,368b-d;
BK  H, 402a-404a; bk hi, 425d 426d; bk vi, 519a-520d; 523c-524c; bk vih,
580b-c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  h,  311c-312b  / Laws, bk III, 671a-c;
674c-d;  bk  iv, 682b / Seventh Letter, 806d-807a 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk v, ch 2
[1302*16]-
CH3
[i302''34] 503b-504b; ch 8 [i3o8"25-34]
510b-c; ch 10 512d-515d; ch ii
[1^13*341315^11] 516a-518c
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  4, 225a226c; CH 9 237d-238d 14
Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  180d-181b  / Pyrrhus 314b,d-332d esp 319b-321a /
Lysander,  362b365a / Sulla, 384a-c / Crassus 438b,d-455a,c / Sertorius,
462a-c;  466d-467a  /  Agesilaus, 482d484a / Pompey, 517d-518a; 533a-c /
Caesar,  577d-583a  / Cleomenes, 659d-660a / Cicero, 717a-b / Demetrius,
737b-d  /  Dion, 784d785a / Artaxerxes, 856b-c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk
ii,  224d-225a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi, 9b-d; ch vh, llb-c; 12b-d;
ch  xvii  23d-24d;  ch  xix  26a30a;  CH xx, 31b-c 23 Hobbes: leviathan,
intro,  47b-d;  part  i,  76d;  PART II, lOOd; 109b-c; 156c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk hi, 132a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 51a-55d
passim 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act v, sc hi
[238-270] 146b-c / 1st Henry IV, act hi, sc
11
[39-84] 453b-d
27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act iv, sc in
[37114] 303d-304c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  40d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learnitig,  78a-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs, bk hi, 12b13c; bk iv,
15a-c;  bk  v,  26d-27d;  bk  vi,  43c-d;  bk  XII,  93d-94a; 94c-95a 38
R-oussEAu:  Inequality,  364a-b  /  Social Contract, bk HI, 412d-413a 39
Smith:  Wealth  ofNations,  bk v, 348a-349c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
263a-  b; 436a41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 549a 43 Federalist: number 6,
39a-b;  number  15,  65b-d; number 17, 69a-d; number 72, 217a-c 43 Mill:
Represetitative  Government,  354b-355b / Utilitarianism, 462d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi, 287a-d; part iv, 365d-366b 54 Freud:
Group Psychology, 669a-c; 686c-689b csp 687a-b

[492a]
434  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (5. The political consideration of the passions.)
5c. The coercive force of law: fear of punishment 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[681-710]  88b-c  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [1047-1090]  152a-b  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk vii, 233a-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396c-d;
400d-401a;   bk   hi,  426b;  426d;  427c428d  esp  427d-428a  7  Plato:
Protagoras, 45b-d / Gorgias, 293b-d / Laws, BK III, 674d-675c / Set'enth
Letter, 807a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 8
[1116^15-^3]
362b-d;  bk  x,  ch 9 [1179^12-1180^24] 434b435a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[11361160] 76a-b
14  Plutarch:  Agesilaus,  494a-c  /  Cleomenes^  659d-660a  15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk hi, 57b-58d 20 Aquinas: Sutnma Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, A
2,  ANS and rep 4 214d-215a,c; q 95, a i, Axs and rep i 226c-227c; q 99,
a  6 250a-251a; Q 100, A 7, rep 4 258c-259c; q 107, a i, rep 2 325c-327b
23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch xii, 18a; ch xvii, 24b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part i, 87c; 89a-b; 91a-b; part ii, 99a-b; 113b; llGcd; 132a; 141b; PART
IV, 273b-c 30 Bacox: Advancement of Learning, 69d-70a; 78a-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2  435b-436a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  109a;  116b-117a  /  Pensees, 297-304 227a-228a; 878 345a-b 35
Locke:  Toleration,  3a / Civil Government, ch IX, sect 125-131 54a-d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 28a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs, bk vi,
37d38b; 38d-39c; bk xxv, 212b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d; 359d-360b
/  Political Economy, 370d-373a / Social Contract, BK II, 406c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 309a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92a-b 42
Kant:  Fund,  Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  253d254b / Practical Reason,
321b-329a  esp  325d326b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-b  43
Federalist:  number  15,  65a-d;  number 16 66c-68d passim, esp 67d-68a;
number  17,  69d-70a;  number  27, 95b-96a 43 Mill: Liberty, 295d-296a /
Representative  Government,  329c-330a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv,  328b329c  49  Darwin:  Descent  ofMan,  314a-b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 30d-31a 54 Freud: War and Death, 757c

[492b]
5r  to  5e 5d. The devices of oratory: emotional persuasion 5 Euripides:
Orestes  [866-956]  402d-403d  5  Aristophanes:  Knights  '\70aA87a,c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  425c-d; 426c; bk vii, 557a-b;
559d-560b  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  74d-75a / Apology, 208c209b; 210b-d /
Gorgias, 260c-262a'; 280d283c; 291b-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354*131355^3] 593b-594a; ch
2
[1356^13-18]
595c; bk II, CH i-ii 622b,d-636a; bk hi, ch 7
[1408^23-^21] 659b-660a; ch 14 [i4I5^25]-ch
15
[1416^14]
668c-670c; ch 16
[1417*37-^7]
671c-d;  ch  19  [1419^10-27]  674c-d 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 129b-130b /
Sertorius,  462a-c;  466d-467a  /  Caesar,  577d-583a  / Caius Gracchus,
681b,d-685c  15  Tacitus:  Histories, bk i, 207d-208a 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 99, A 6, ANs 250a-251a 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  vi,  9c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67c; part ii, 105d-106b;
127d-129d; conclusion, 279a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 147b-148a; 306a-d 26
Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  hi 580b587a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 24d-25c; 66b-67c; 78a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 303c-304a
42  Kast:  Judgernent,  535b-c  43  Federalist: number i 29a-31a passim;
number  24,  87b-88c passim; number 58, 181b-c; number 62, 190b 43 Mill:
Liberty,  292b-293b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 273d274a;
279d-280b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [521-557] 15a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  570c-571b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xii, 533a-534d; BK XV,
622a-c  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 450b 5e. The regulation of art
for  the  sake  of  training  the passions 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii-iii,
320c-339a;  bk  iv,  344b-d;  bk x, 431b-434a / Laws, bk vii, 717b-721a;
726d-728b  9  Aristotle:  Politics, bk vii, ch 17 [1336^1223] 541c-d; BK
VIII, CH 5
[1339*^11-1340^19]
545a-546a;  ch  7  547b-548a,c  17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-2
lOa-d  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, 184a-187c passim 32 Milton:
Areopagitica, 384b-386b; 387b394b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv,
17b18d 44 BoswEhi.: Johnson, 308b-c

[493a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For: The general theory of instinct, see I Iabit 3-3e;
and  for  the  consideration  of instinctual drives, ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western Worlds
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into  two groups: L Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great Ideas. ^' Hegel.
The  Fhenomenology of Mind, iv, b (3) Plutarch. "Whether the Passions of
the  Soul  or Dostoevsky. Notesfrom Underground Diseases of the Body Are
Worse,"  in  Moralia  C.  R.  Darwin.  The Expression of Emotions in Man
Epictetus.  The  Manual  and  Animals Augustine. Of Continence W. James.
Collected  Essays  and Reviews, xv, xxv Aquinas. Quaestiones Disputatae,
De  Veritate, qq Freud. The Predisposition to Obsessional Neurosis 25-26
F.  Bacon.  "Of Anger," in Essays jj Descartes. The Passions of the Soul
Pascal.   Discours   sur   les   passions  de  Vamour  Cicero.  Tusculan
Disputations,  iii-iv HoBBES, The Eleme?7ts of Law, Natural and Politic,
Ben Jonson. Every Man in His Humour part I, ch 12 Burton. The Anatomy of
Melancholy  .  The Whole Art of Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 1-13 Malebranche. De
la recherche de la verite, bk v Hume. A Treatise ofHun^an Nature, bk ii,
part   hi   Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  ofMen,  Manners,  Opin-  .  A
Dissertation  on  the Passions ions. Times A. Smith. The Theory of Moral
Sentiments,  part  Hutcheson.  An  Essay on the Nature and Conduct of I,
sect  II  the  Passions  and  Affections  Sterne.  A  SentimentalJourney
Collins. The Passions

[493b]
Chapter 22: EMOTION 435' Goethe. Sorrows of Young Werther

[494a]
436  THE GREAT IDEAS Voltaire. "Passions," in A Philosophical Dictionary
T. Reid. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, III, PART II, CH
3-7  Brown.  Lectures  on  the Philosophy of the Human Mind, VOL iii, pp
26-473  D.  Stewart. Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man W.
Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL I (41-46) CoMTE. System
of  Positive  Polity,  \'ol iv, Theory of the Future of Man, ch 2 LoTZE.
Microcosmos,  bk  ii,  ch 5 Bain. The Emotions and the Will E. Hartmann.
Philosophy of the Unconscious, (b) ii-iii pRAZER. The Golden Bough, part
vi, ch 8

[494b]
WuNDT. Outlines of Psychology, (12-13) Bradley. Collected Essays, vol ii
(23) Strindberg. The Dance of Death TncHENER. Lectures on the Elementary
Psychology  of  Peeling  and  Attention C^ANNON. Bodily Changes in Pain,
Hunger,  Fear  and  Rage  Crile.  The  Origin and Nature of the Emotions
Carlson.  The  Control  of Hunger in Health and Disease Pareto. The Mind
and  Society,  vol  hi,  ch  9  Proust. Remembrance of Things Past Jung.
Psychological  Types  McTaggart.  The  Nature of Existence, ch 41, 57 B.
Russell. The Analysis of Mind, lect 3, 14 . Skeptical Essays, vi

[495a]
^ Chapter 2.3: ETERNITY INTRODUCTION THE notionof eternity, like that of
infinity, has two meanings. One meaning mav refer to something positive,
yet  both  seem to be formulated by the human mind in a negative way. We
grasp  one  meaning of eternity by saying that there is fjo beginning or
end to times process. The other sense of eternity wc conceive by denying
time  itself and, with it, change or mutability. Considering eternity as
infinite  duration,  Locke  says  that  we form this notion "by the same
means and from the same original that we come to have the idea of time .
. . viz., having got the idea of succession and duration . . . we can in
our thoughts add such lengths of duration to one another, as often as we
please, and apply them, so added, to durations past or to come. And this
we  can  continue  to  do,  without  bounds  or  limits,  and proceed in
infinitNtvy  The unimaginabilit}' of the infinite is no different in the
sphere  of  time  than in that of space or number. The ditficulty, Locke
points  out,  is  the  same  in all three cases. "The idea of so much IS
positive and clear. The idea of greater is also clear." But these do not
yet  give us the idea of the infinite. That only comes with "the idea of
so much greater as cannot be comprehended, and this is plainly negatixe,
not positive . . . What lies beyond our positive idea towards infinity,"
Locke continues, "lies in obscurity, and has the indeterminate contusion
of a negative idea, wherein I know I neither do nor can comprehend all I
would,  it  being  too  large  for  a  finite  and  narrow capacity." In
insisting  that  we  can  have  no  positive idea of infinity—whether of
space, time, or number — Locke's point seems to be that it is beyond our
finite  capacity  to form an image of an infinite object. But though our
imaginations may be limited in this way, we do seem able to construct—in
a negative manner—conceptions

[495b]
that  go  beyond  experience,  and  have  some meaning even if they lack
imaginative  content.  Locke  indicates  this other aspect of the matter
when  he  criticizes  those  who  assert dogmatically that "the world is
neither eternal nor infinite." It seems to him that the world's eternity
or the world's infinity is "at least as conceivable as the contrary." It
may  not  be  inconsistent,  therefore, to say that infinite time, while
unimaginable,  remains  quite  conceivable;  for to say that eternity is
conceivable  is simply to say that endless time is neither more nor less
possible  than time with a beginning and an end. The first conception is
as  meaningful  as  the  second. It is in fact formed from the second by
negation—  by substituting the word "without" for "with" with respect to
"a  beginning and an end." But unlike our conceptions, our images cannot
be  formed by negation. When we imagine, as when we perceive, the object
before  us  is  positive  and  definite. Wc cannot imagine, as we cannot
experience,  a  duration,  or a span of time, without a beginning and an
end.  With  regard to the other traditional meaning of "eternity," Locke
takes  a  difterent  position.  It  too  might be defended as a negative
conception,  so  far  as  human  comprehension  is  concerned,  since it
involves  the  denial  of  time itself, i.e., ol a duration comprising a
succession  of  moments. But here Locke says that there is "nothing more
inconceivable  to me than duration without succession. . . . If our weak
apprehensions,"  he  continues,  "cannot  separate  succession  from any
duration  whatsoever,  our  idea  of  eternity  can be nothing but of an
infinite  succession  of  moments  oi  duration,  wherein  anything does
exist."  Nevertheless, Locke affirms that "we can easily conceive in God
infinite duration, and

[496a]
438  THE GREAT IDEAS we cannot avoid doing so." Whether he means by this
that  God's eternity involves temporal succession, must be determined by
an  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  which he maintains that "God's
infinite duration being accompanied with infinite knowledge and infinite
power, he sees all things past and to come; and they are no more distant
from his knowledge, no farther removed from his sight, than the present;
they  all  lie  under  the  same  view." If this passage means that time
stands  still  for  God  in  a single moment in which all things are co-
present,  then  Locke  may not be as resolute as Hobbes in rejecting the
theologian's  conception of God's eternity. Criticizing the Scholastics,
Hobbes  says that "for the meaning of Eternity, they will not have it be
an  endless  succession  of  time."  Instead,  "they  will teach us that
eternity is the standing still of the present time, a Nunc-stans (as the
Schools  call  it)."  This, Hobbes thinks, "neither they nor anyone else
understands,  no  more  than  they  would  a  Hic'Stans  for an infinite
greatness  of  place."  A  theologian  like  Aquinas  tries to avoid the
difficulty  which  Hobbes  finds  in  this  conception by distinguishing
between the now of eternity and the now of time. "The now of time is the
same,"  he  writes, "as regards its subject in the whole course of time,
but  it  differs  in  aspect."  Furthermore,  "the  flow  of the now, as
altering  in aspect, is time. But eternity remains the same according to
both  subject  and aspect; and hence eternity is not the same as the now
of  time."  The  notion of the eternal as the timeless and the immutable
does  not  belong exclusively to Christian theology. In the tradition of
the  great  books  it  is  found,  for  example,  in Plato and Plotinus.
Eternity,  according to Plotinus, is "a Life changelessly motionless and
ever  holding the Universal content in actual presence; not this now and
now  that other, but always all; not existing now in one mode and now in
another, but a consummation without part or interval. All its content is
in  immediate  concentration  as  at one point; nothing in it ever knows
development:  all  remains  identical  within itself, knowing nothing of
change,  for  ever  in a Now since nothing of it has passed away or will
come into being; but what it is now, that it is ever."

[496b]
Eternity  so  conceived  is  perhaps  even  more  unimaginable  than the
eternity  which is infinite time. We may feel that we have some sense of
an  infinite  duration  when  we  talk,  as  Ivan  does  in the Brothers
Karamazov,  about  a  billion  years  or "a quadrillion of a quadrillion
raised  to  the  quadrillionth  power." Infinite time is like that, only
longer. But because all our experience is tem^poral through and through,
it  is  more difficult to get any sense of that which is both absolutely
timeless  and  endlessly  enduring.  Poets,  and  sometimes philosophers
turned poets, have struggled to give this concept imaginative content by
contrasting  "the  white  radiance  of  eternity"  with  a "many-colored
glass," or by speaking of time itself as "the moving image of eternity."
When  Dimmler  in War and Peace tells Natasha that "it is hard for us to
imagine  eternity,"  she replies that it does not seem hard to her— that
eternity  "is  now  today,  and it will be tomorrow, and always, and was
there  yesterday and the day before. ..." These and similar attempts may
not  succeed  as  much  as the insight that if we could hold the present
moment  still,  or fix the fleeting instant, we could draw an experience
of  the  eternal  from  the  heart of time. "The now that stands still,"
Aquinas writes, "is said to make eternity according to our apprehension.
For just as the apprehension of time is caused in us by the fact that we
apprehend the flow of the now, so the apprehension of eternity is caused
in  us  by  our  apprehending the now standing still." To UNDERSTAND the
opposcd  vicws that constitute the major issues with regard to eternity,
it  is  necessary  to  hold  quite separate the two meanings of the word
which  have  run  side  by side in the tradition of western thought. The
first  of these two senses, signifying interminable time, is the meaning
of "eternity" which has greatest currency in popular speech. This is the
meaning  which  appears in the chapters on Infinity and Time. It is also
the  sense  in  which philosophers and theologians debate the problem of
the eternity of the world—whether the world ever began or will ever end.
Since that which exists interminably is imperishable, the word "eternal"
is also appfied to substances which are thought to be ever-

[497a]
lasting. Thus Ptolemy, and the ancients generally, think of the heavenly
bodies  as  ''beings  which  are sensible and both moving and moved, but
eternal  and  impassible."  Aristotle calls the heavenly bodies "eternal
and  incorruptible."  For  Lucretius and the atomists, the atoms and the
atoms  alone  are  eternal.  They are, he says, "everlasting, though all
things else are dissolved." Unless they were eternal, "all things before
this  would  have  utterly returned to nothing." If the atomic particles
"were  to  wear away, or break in pieces," Newton argues, "the nature of
things  depending  on  them, would be changed. . . . And therefore, that
nature  may be lasting, the changes of corporeal things are to be placed
only  in  the  various  separations  and new associations and motions of
these  permanent  particles."  The  heavenly bodies and the atoms may be
thought  everlasting,  but  they  are not immutable in all respects, for
local  motion  is of their very essence. Imperishable in existence, they
are  also  endlessly in motion. In Aristotle's view, local motion can be
perpetual  or  eternal only if it is circular. Circular motion alone has
neither  beginning  nor end. The eternal circular motion of the heavens,
according  to  Aristotle,  in  turn  communicates  an  eternal  cyclical
movement  to  the  rest  of  reality.  "Since the sun revolves thus, the
seasons  in  consequence come-to-be in a cycle .... and since they come-
to-be  cyclically, so in their turn do the things whose coming-to-be the
seasons  initiate."  Such  an  eternal  return,  it  would seem, is also
applied  by Aristotle to human things, for he writes that "probably each
art and each science has often been developed as far as possible and has
again  perished."  Since  the  heavens and the atoms are in motion, even
though their motion is everlasting or eternal, they cannot be eternal in
the  second  meaning  of  "eternity,"  which is the very opposite of the
first,  not a variation or extension of it. In this meaning, the eternal
is  an  existence absolutely immutable—a being which neither comes to be
nor  passes  away,  nor  changes,  nor  moves in any respect whatsoever.
Aquinas  uses  the  word  in this sense when he says that "the nature of
eternity"  consists  in "the uniformity of what is absolutely outside of
movement."

[497b]
Chapter  23: ETERNITY 439 He also includes in this meaning of "eternity"
the  notion  of  interminability; for, he writes, "as whatever is wholly
immutable  can  have no succession, so it has no beginning, and no end."
Yet  Aquinas  preserves  the  sharp distinction between the two meanings
when  he  differentiates  the  sense  in which the world might be called
eternal and the sense in which he would attribute eternity to God alone.
"Even  supposing that the world always was, it would not be equal to God
in   eternity,"   he   writes;  for  "the  divine  being  is  all  being
simultaneously without succession, but with tlie world it is otherwise."
The conception of eternity as absolutely immutable existence is found in
the  ancient  pagan  writers.  Plotinus,  as we have already seen, makes
immutabiUty  the  mark of eternity. The unmoved prime mover of Aristotle
and the Platonic Ideas or Forms also possess this characteristic. But it
is  the Jewish and Christian theologians who make eternity in this sense
one  of the prime attributes of God. Augustine, for example, invokes God
as  "that everfixed Eternity" in whom "nothing passeth, but the whole is
present."  Since  time  is  for  him  inconceivable apart from change or
motion, that which exists immutably does not exist in time. Referring to
God's  eternity,  he  says,  "Compare  it with the times which are never
fixed,  and see that it cannot be compared. . . . Thy years neither come
nor go; whereas ours both come and go, that they all may come. . . . Thy
years  are one day ; and Thy day is not daily, but To-day. . . . Thy To-
day  is  Eternity." Time and eternity are here conceived as two distinct
orders  of  reality. The temporal order is the order of things in change
or motion, the eternal the realm of the fixed or permanent, the immobile
and  immutable.  "As  eternity  is the proper measure of being," Aquinas
writes, "so time is the proper measure of movement." The eternal and the
temporal  are similarly distinguished by Plato in terms of the realms of
being  and  becoming—  "the  world of immutable being" and "the world of
generation." In the one we find "the parts of time, and the past and the
future,"  which do not apply to the other. "We unconsciously but wrongly
transfer them," Plato declares, "to the eternal essence

[498a]
440  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ... but the truth is that 'is' alone is properly
attributed  to  it,  and  'was'  and  'will be' are only to be spoken of
becoming  in time, for they are motions, but that which is immovably the
same  cannot  become older or younger by time . . . nor is it subject at
all  to  any  of those states which affect moving and sensible things of
which generation is the cause." For Spinoza, the distinction consists in
two  ways of viewing the order of nature. "Things are conceived by us as
actual in two ways," he writes; "either in so far as we conceive them to
exist  with  relation  to  a  fixed  time  and place, or in so far as we
conceive  them  to be contained in God, and to follow from the necessity
of  the  divine  nature."  Only in the second way do "we conceive things
under  the  form  of  eternity."  We can view things under the aspect of
eternity  only insofar as we know God and, through knowing God, are able
to  know  all  things  according as "their ideas involve the eternal and
infinite  essence  of  God."  The  separation  of time and eternity into
distinct  spheres  of  reality, or even into distinct ways of conceiving
the  whole  of  being,  is  challenged  by thinkers who find the eternal
within  the process of time. For both Jew and Christian, the eternal God
intervenes  directly  in the temporal order. The most radical form which
this  fusion  takes  is  perhaps  exemplified  in  the  doctrine  of the
Incarnation  of  Christ,  when "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us."  Whitehead  challenges the sharpness of the separation from another
point  of  view.  He  not  only  makes "eternal objects'* ingredients in
actual  occasions  or  temporal  events;  but  since  the  events  which
constitute  the  process of change are themselves unchangeable, they are
for  him  eternal—even though they have their being within the sphere of
change.  A  similar  point  seems  to  be  made in Aristotle's theory of
change.  When  change  is conceived as consisting in a transformation of
matter,  it  is the thing composed of matter and form which changes, and
neither  the  matter  nor  the form. Matter as matter, Aristotle writes,
"does  not cease to be in its own nature, but is necessarily outside the
sphere  of  becoming  and  ceasing to be." The remark would seem to hold
true as well of the form as form.

[498b]
As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on Change, the Aristotelian analysis of
motion  finds in matter or the substratum of change, and in the contrary
iormsfrom  which  and  to  which  a  motion takes place, the elements of
permanence underlying change. When a green leaf turns red, for instance,
green  has  not changed into red; the leaf has changed from one color to
another.  The changing leaf is not eternal, but red and green are, since
they are incapable of change. This is the sense of eternity in which the
unchanging  instant is eternal, or the past is eternal, even though both
are  somehow  elements or aspects of time and the process of change. The
past  may  be eternal but it no longer exists. The passing moment may be
eternal,  but it has no duration. Lack of existence and lack of duration
together  distinguish  that  meaning  of  "eternal"  in  which it merely
signifies  the  unchanging,  from the meaning in which it signifies that
which  exists  or  endures  forever  without changing. It is only in the
second  of  these two meanings that the eternal can be conceived as that
which  exists  entirely  outside  the  realm of time. As WE HAVE ALREADY
observed,  the  basic  philosophical  and  theological issues concerning
eternity   cannot  be  intelligibly  stated  unless  these  meanings  of
"eternity"  and "the eternal" are kept distinct. The traditional problem
of  the  eternity of the w^orld asks, for example, not whether the order
of  nature  is  free from change or succession, but whether the changing
physical universe ever had a beginning or ever will end. As indicated in
the  chapters  on  Change,  Time,  and  World,  it  is a question of the
infinity  of  time;  or,  in  another  formulation,  a  question  of the
interminability  of  change or motion. Aristotle appears to answer these
questions  affirmatively,  especially  in  the  last book of his Physics
where  he claims to demonstrate the impossibility of there having been a
beginning to motion. Aquinas, on the other hand, does not think that the
eternity  of the world can be demonstrated; and of Aristotle's arguments
he says that they are not "absolutely demonstrative, but only relatively
so—viz.,  as  against the arguments of some of the ancients who asserted
that the world began to be in some actually

[499a]
impossible  ways." In support of this contention, he cites a remark made
by  Aristotle  in  the TopicSy that among "dialectical problems which we
cannot  solve demonslratixcly," one is ''whether the world is eternal.''
For  Kant the problem is typically dialectical. It occurs as part of the
first  antinomy  in  the  Transcendental  Dialectic, the thesis of which
asserts  that  *'the  world  has a beginning in time" and the antithesis
that  "the  world  has  no beginning, but is infinite in respect both to
time  and  space."  The  fact  that  apparently  cogent arguments can be
marshalled for both of these contradictory propositions shows, in Kant's
opinion,  that  the  reasoning  on either side is not demonstrative, but
only  dialectical  and, as he says, "illusory." The Jewish and Christian
doctrine of the world's creation by God might seem to require the denial
of  the  world's  eternity.  But  in  fact  the  theologians find either
alternative  com.-  patible with divine creation, which they conceive as
the  cause  of  the  world's  being,  not  necessarily of its beginning.
Augustine, for example, examines the sense in which the world is held by
some  to be co-eternal with God, even though made or created by God. "It
is  as  if  a  foot,"  he  interprets them to say, "had been always from
eternity  in  the  dust; there would always have been a print underneath
it;  and yet no one would doubt that this print was made by the pressure
of  the  foot, nor that, though the one vv^as made by the other, neither
was  prior to the other." So. he goes on, it might also be said that the
world  has  always  existed  and  yet  is  always,  throughout eternity,
created,  i.e.,  caused  to  exist,  by God. Commenting on this passage,
Aquinas adds the observation that if an "action is instantaneous and not
successive, it is not necessary for the maker to be prior in duration to
the  thing made." Hence it does not follow necessarily, he writes, "that
if  God  is the active cause of the world. He must be prior to the world
in  duration; because creation, by which He produced the world, is not a
successive  change"  —  but  an  instantaneous  act.  Writing  both as a
philosopher  and  as a theologian, Maimonides—many centuries before Kant
stated  his  antinomy—  thinks  he  is able to show that the question of
infinite time and

[499b]
Chaptlk  23:  ETP.RNITY 441 endless motion "cannot be decided by pr(K)f,
neither  in  the affirmative nor in the negative." Just as for Augustine
and Aquinas, so for him it is indilferent— from a philosophical point of
view—whether  the  created  work!  and  its  Creator  are  co-eternal or
whether,  as  Genesis says, "in the beginning God created heaven and But
both  alternatives  are  not equally acceptable to the theologian. Since
there  is  no  proof  on  either  side  "sufficient  to  convince  us,'*
Maimonides  writes,  "we  take  the text of the Bible literally, and say
that  it  teaches  us  a  truth which we cannot prove"— namely, that the
world  had  a  beginning  in time. Aquinas comes to the same conclusion.
"That  the  world  did  not  always exist," he writes, "we hold by faith
alone."  It  is  not  "an object . . . of demonstration or science." For
Christian  and Jew alike, the religious dogma that the world is not only
created  by God, in the sense of depending for its existence upon God as
cause,  but  was  also initiated by God, or caused to begin to exist and
move,  is  based on the revealed word of God in Holy Writ. Those who, on
philosophical  grounds,  deny  creation  ex nihilo also deny the world's
beginning.  Pursuant  to  his  theory  of  the  world as a necessary and
perpetual  emanation  from the One, Plotinus, for example, declares that
"the  Kosmos  has  had  no  beginning  . . . and this is warrant for its
continued existence. Why should there be in the future a change that has
not  yet occurred.?" For Spinoza likewise, "all things which follow from
the absolute nature of any attribute of God must for ever exist"; and to
this  extent  at  least,  the world is eternal and uncreated. The man of
faith, however, beUeves in a God who is free to create or not to create,
not  one  from  whom  the  world emanates as a necessary effect from its
source. When, therefore, he affirms that God freely chose to produce the
world out of nothing, he seems to meet the question, "What was God doing
before  He made heaven and earth.?" To the questioner Augustine does not
wish  to  give  "the  jesting  answer—said to have been given by one who
sought  to  e\'ade the force of the question— 'He was getting Hell ready
for  people who pry too deep.' " Instead he points out that the question
itself

[500a]
442  THE GREAT IDEAS is illicit for it assumes a time before time began.
"If  before  heaven and earth were made," he writes, "there was no time,
then  what is meant by the question 'What were You doing then V If there
was  not  any  time,  there  was not any 'then.' " In the phrase "before
creation" the word "before" has no temporal significance. It signifies a
different  kind  of priority— the sense in which eternity precedes time,
the  sense  in  which Augustine says of God that "it is not in time that
You  are  before  all  time.  .  .  . You are before all the past by the
eminence  of  Your  ever-present eternity." Turning from eternity in the
sense  of  infinite time to the eternal in the sense of the timeless and
unchanging,  the  great question is whether anything eternal exists. The
atoms of Lucretius are not eternal in this sense, nor are the supposedly
imperishable  heavenly  bodies.  Nor  is it suj9&cient to point out that
change  itself  involves  aspects  or  elements  of  permanence; for the
question,  strictly  interpreted, asks whether anything exists in and of
itself  which, having no beginning or end, also has no past, present, or
future—no  temporal phases in its continued endurance. Only such a thing
would  be  utterly  non-  temporal  or changeless. Since nothing made of
matter  is exempt from motion, it is generally supposed that no material
thing  is  eternal  in this sense. Not even God is eternal unless God is
absolutely  immutable  as  well  as  spiritual. The angels are spiritual
beings,  yet,  according  to  Christian  theology, they cannot be called
"eternal"  because,  in  the  first place, they are creatures and had an
origin;  and,  in the second place, they are subject to spiritual change
even if they are not involved in the sorts of motion to which bodies are
susceptible.  The  theologians,  therefore, use the word "aeviternal" to
signify  the  mode  of  angelic  existence in that it is "a mean between
eternity  and time." Aeviternity, Aquinas explains, has "a beginning but
no  end,"  while  "eternity has neither beginning nor end . . . and time
both  beginning and end." The question about the eternal as timeless and
immutable  existence  has  two  parts: Does an immutable God exist? Does
anything else exist which is immutable }

[500b]
To  the  first  question,  it does not suffice to reply by affirming the
existence   of   God.   Some  modern  theologians  deny  God's  absolute
immutabihty,  and  so  deny  the  eternality of His being in the precise
sense  under  consideration. With regard to the second question, we must
observe  that,  in the tradition of the great books, eternality has been
claimed  for  two  things  other  than God, namely, for truth and ideas.
Whatever  "is  produced  by reasoning aright," Hobbes says, is "general,
eternal,  and  immutable  truth."  On  somewhat  different grounds James
declares,  "there  is  no  denying the fact that the mind is filled with
necessary  and  eternal  relations which it finds between certain of its
ideal  conceptions,  and which form a determinate system, independent of
the  order  of  frequency  in  which  experience may have associated the
conception's originals in time and space." He quotes Locke to the effect
that  "truths belonging to the essences of things . . . are eternal, and
are  to  be  found out only by the contemplation of those essences." The
common phrase— "the eternal verities" —which James uses testifies to the
prevalence  of the notion that truth itself cannot change, and that when
men  speak  of a new truth or the growth of truth, the change they refer
to  is  only  a change of mind with respect to what men think is true or
false,  not  a  change in the truth itself. Whatever is true now, always
was  true  and always will be. Time and change make no difference to the
truth oi two plus two equals four. But even so it can still be asked how
the  truth  exists,  for  the  attribution  of eternity to anything also
requires  us  to  consider its mode of being. If, for example, the truth
exists only in the mind, then it exists unchangingly only in the mind of
an  absolutely  infallible  knower,  a  mind  which  neither  learns nor
forgets, nor changes in any respect with regard to what it knows. If God
is  such  a  knower, eternal truth can have existence in God's mind. The
theologians  sometimes  go  further and identify absolute truth, as they
identify  absolute goodness, with God. Aquinas writes, for example, that
"if  we  speak  of truth as it is in things, then all things are true by
one  primary  truth;  to  which each one is assimilated according to its
entity, and thus, although the es-

[501a]
sences  or  forms  of  things  are  many,  yet  the  truth ot the divine
intellect  is  one,  in  conformity  to  which all things are said to be
true."  On  this  view,  it  would appear that there are not two eternal
beings,  but  only one. William James finds immutability not only in the
truth, but also in the concepts of the human mind. "Each conception," he
writes, "eternally remains what it is, and never can become another. The
mind  may  change  its states, and its meanings, at different times; may
drop  one conception and take up another, but the dropped conception can
in  no  intelligible  sense  be said to change into its successor. . . .
Thus,  amid  the  flux  of opinions and of physical things, the world of
conceptions,  or  things  intended to be thought about, stands stiff and
immutable,  like Plato's Realm of Ideas." In the case of ideas, however,
the problem is complicated by the question whether ideas exist in and by
themselves,  outside the mind of God or man. If, according to a doctrine
attributed  to  Plato  and  the  Platonists,  the  Ideas  or Forms exist
separately,  then  they  constitute a realm of eternal beings, for their
immutability  is unquestionable. If, from an opposite point of view, the
realm  of  unchanging ideas is identical with the divine intellect, then
no  eternal  being  or beings exist apart from God. The proposition that
God  is  the  only  eternal  being,  the  only  uncreated  and immutable
existence,  is  inextricably  connected with the proposition that God is
the  only  actually  infinite  being,  the  ens  realissimum  having all
perfections.  "Eternity is the very essence of God," Spinoza writes, "in
so  far as that essence involves necessary existence." In saying this he
appeals  to  his  definition  of eternity, by which we are to understand
"existence  itself, so far as it is conceived necessarily to follow from
the  definition alone of the eternal thing." For Spinoza, as well as for
Aquinas,  the  same fact which makes God eternal—namely, the identity of
his  essence and existence—also constitutes his infinity and uniqueness.
It  is  impossible,  Spinoza  argues,  for  there  to  be  two  infinite
substances.  For the same reason, there cannot be two eternal beings. As
indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Infinity,  when  the word "infinite" is
applied to God, the

[501b]
Chapter  23:  ETERNITY  443 theologians give it a positive rather than a
negative  significance.  They  mean by it the actual infinity of perfect
being  and  absolute  power,  in  sharp  distinction  from the potential
infinity  by  which  the  mathematicians  signify the lack^oidi limit in
addition  or division. These two meanings of "infinity" seem to parallel
the  two meanings of "eternity" which we have dealt with throughout this
chapter—one  the  negative  sense  in  which  it  means  the  lack^ of a
beginning or an end to time, the other the positive sense in which God's
eternity  consists  in that fullness of being which can exist apart from
time  and  change.  Because  our intellects are finite, we may apprehend
eternal  being  in  a  negative  manner  by  calling it "timeless" or by
conceiving  it  as  infinite  duration,  but Spinoza cautions us against
supposing  that  it  can  be "explained by duration or time, even if the
duration  be  conceived without beginning or end." One other theological
discussion  raises issues which involve in a unique way the two meanings
of  eternity.  It  deals  with  the  revealed  doctrine of perdition and
salvation  as  eternal death and eternal life. Is the eternality of Hell
and  Heaven  equivalent  to  a  period  of  endless  duration or does it
mean—more  fundamentally  the unchanging sX.2itt of souls after the Last
Judgment  ?  According  to Augustine and Aquinas, the eternity of Heaven
and  Hell  means  the moral immutability of the immortal soul as well as
the  interminability  of  the  beatitude  it enjoys or the punishment it
suffers.  Only  in Purgatory does a change of moral state occur, but the
process  of  purification  which  takes place there is always limited in
period.  Purgatory  is,  therefore, not eternal in either sense. As Kant
sees  it,  however,  the after-life must not only be interminable, or of
infinite   duration,  but  it  must  also  permit  a  progressive  moral
development without end. Man is justified, according to Kant, "in hoping
for  an  endless duration of his existence" only on the ground that "the
holiness  which  the  Christian  law  requires . . . leaves the creature
nothing  but  a progress in infinitum^ From still another point of view.
Dr.  Johnson questions the traditional Christian dogma that the souls of
the  blessed  are  secure  in  a  perpetual  state of rectitude— in this
respect

[502a]
444  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  like  the good angels who are confirmed in their
goodness  from  the  first instant of creation. Boswell had "ventured to
ask  him  whether,  although the words of some texts of Scripture seemed
strong in support of the dreadful doctrine of an eternity of punishment,
we might not hope that the denunciation was figurative, and would not be
literally  executed."  To  this,  Dr.  Johnson replied: "Sir, you are to
consider  the  intention  of  punishment  in  a future state. We have no
reason to be sure that we shall then be no longer able to offend against
God.  We  do  not  know  that  even  the  angels are quite in a state of
security.  ...  It  may,  therefore,  perhaps  be necessary, in order to
preserve  both  men and angels in a state of rectitude, that they should
have  continually  before them the punishment of those who have deviated
from  it."  lb. Aeviternity as intermediate between eternity and time 4.
The  things which partake of eternity 4^. The imperishability of angels,
spiritual  substances,  souls 4^. The immutability of truth and ideas 5.
The knowledge and imagery of eternity

[502b]
On  Dr.  Johnson's theory, the moral condition of the damned seems to be
immutable.  It  is irremediable even by the punishments which, according
to  him,  may  exercise  some  deterrent effect upon the blessed who, he
seems  to think, are not as unalterably set in the path of righteousness
as  the  wicked  are  in  their iniquity. On any of these conceptions of
Heaven  and  Hell,  and  of  the state of the soul in the afterlife, the
meaning  of  "eternity" is somewhat altered; for eternal life or eternal
death  is  conceived  as  having  a  beginning,  if  not an end, for the
individual soul. As in the case of all fundamental religious dogmas, the
truth  asserted  remains  obscure  and mysterious. It is not only beyond
imagination, but also beyond any adequate rational conception, analysis,
or  demonstration. OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE tion between eternity and time
445 I a. The priority of eternity to time 446 3. The eternity of God 447
4^.  The  imperishable  in  the physical order: matter, atoms, celestial
bodies  448  4^.  The  eternity of Heaven and Hell: everlasting life and
death 449

[503a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homek : Iliad, bk ii (265-28^) 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of the page. F'or example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References : The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title ot books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the Preface. 1. Eternity as timeiessness and immutability or as
endless  and  infinite  time:  the distinction between eternity and time
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticiis,  18:10—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiastictis,  18:8 7
Plato: Timaeus, 450b-451d 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c / Physics, bk iv, ch 12 [22i*i9]-ch 13
[222^2g] 301a-302c; bk
vi, ch 2 [233*13-^16] 315a-c; ch 7
[237^23-238*19] 321a-c; ch
10
[241^11-20] 325d; BK VIII, ch 1-2 334a-337b;
CH 6 344b-346b; ch 8 348b-352a / Heavens, BK I, ch 12 372d-375d esp
[282'^22-283*2]
373d-374c,
[283^7-22]
375c-d; bk ii, ch 3
[286*8-13] 377c / Generation and Corruption,
BK II, ch 9
[335*33-^2] 436d-437a
/  Metaphysics,  BK  V,  ch  5 [1015^9-16] 536a; bk ix, CH 8 [1050^6-20]
576b-c; bk xi, ch 10 [1067* 33-38] 596a; bk xii, ch 6
[1071*^2-11] 601b;
CH  7 [1072*18-23] 602a-b; [1073*3-11] 603a-b; BK XIV, CH 2 [1088^14-28]
620d-621a  12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 15 275a-b 17 Plotinus:
First Ennead, tr v, ch 7 20a-c / Third Ennead, tr vii 119b-129a / Fourth
Ennead, tr iv, ch 6-8 161b-162d; ch 15-16 165c-166b

[503b]
OiAPTtR  23:  ETERNITY  445  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vii, par 21
49d50a;  bk  xi 89b-99b esp par 8-17 91b-93c. par 39-41 98c-99b; bk xii,
par  13-20  102a-103d;  par 40 109b-110a; bk xiii, par 44 122d / City of
God,  BK  XI, CH 5-6 324d-325d; ch 21 333a-d; bk xii, ch 12-19 349b-355a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 10, AA 1-5 40d-45c esp a 4
43b-44b;  q  14, a 9, ANs 83b-d; a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; q 42, a 2,
rep  2-4  225d-227a;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  5  253a-255a; q 79, a 8, rep 2
421c-422b 21 Dvxte: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi [106108] 69d; paradise,
xxix  [10-45]  150b-c  23 HoBBEs: leviathan, part iv, 271b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  292d-294a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii, 366d-367a 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 48, llOd 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  216d-217c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, def 8 355c; prop 20,
coROL  2  364a; part ii, prop 44, corol 2 and DEMONST 390a; part v, prop
23 458b-d; prop 29, DEMONST 459c; prop 34, SCHOL 460d 32 Milton: On Time
12a-b  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xn [553-556] 331a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 121
195a;  205-206  211a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, SECT
26-27    160c-161a;    sect    30-31    161c-162a;    CHxv,   SECT   3-8
162d-164b;sECTii-i2l65a-c;

[504a]
(  1  .  Eternity  as  timelessness  and  immutability or as endless and
infinite  time:  the  distinction  between  eternity  and time.) CH XVII
167d-174a  passim,  esp sect 5 168d169a, SECT lo 170b-c, sect 16 172a-b;
ch  XXIX, sect 15 237a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 26d; 130b-133c; 135a137a,c;
152c;  160b-161d;  185a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 206c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  295b-c;  EPILOGUE II, 681a la. The
priority  of  eternity  to time 7 Plato: Timaeus, 450c-451a 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8
[1050^
2-28]  576b-d  17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr vii, ch i 119b-c; CH 6,
122c-d;  ch  ii,  126a;  ch  13,  128c  / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 15-16
165c-166b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 21 49d50a; BK XI, par
12-16  92b-93a;  bk  xii,  par 40 109b-110a / City of God, bk xi, ch 4-6
324a325d; bk xii, ch 12 349b-350a; ch 15-17 351b-354a 19 Aquinas: Sumina
Theologica,  part i, q 22, A I, REP 2 127d-128d; q 46 250a-255d; q 61, A
2  315c-316a  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, paradise, xxix [1045] 150b-c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [577-599]  187b188a;  bk  vii  [70-108]
218b-219b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  135a-137a,c; 160b-161d esp 161d \b,
Aeviternity  as  intermediate  between  eternity  and time 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  9  lOlb-c;  par 12-15 101d-102c; par 18-22,
103b-104a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xii, ch 15 351b-352d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 10, A 2, REP 1-2 41d-42c; a 3, ans 42c-43b; aa 5-6
44b-46d 2. The issue concerning the infinity of time and the eternity of
the  world  or of motion Old Testament: Genesis, 1:1-2 / Nehemiah, 9:6 —
(D)  //  Esdras,  9:6  / Job, 38:1-13 / Psalms, 90:2; 95:4-5; 102:25-26;
104:5-6;   119:90-91;   136:5-9;  148:1-6—  (D)  Psalms,  89:2;  94:4-5;
101:26-27; 103:5-6; 118:90-91; 135 :5-9; 148:16/ Proverbs, 3:19; 8:22-29
/  i^^^^h,  45:12,18;  48:13;  65:17-25—  (Z))  Isaias, 45:12,18; 48:13;
65:17-25  /  Jeremiah,  51:15—  (D) Jeremias, 51:15 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  y:iy-iS—(D)  OT,  Bool^  of  Wisdom, 7:17-18 / Ecclesiasticus,
23:19-20; 24:9— (Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 23:28-29; 24:14 / II Maccabees,
7:23—   (D)   OT,   II   Machabees,   7   :23  New  Testament:  Matthew,
13:24-30,36-43,4950; 24:3-35 / MarJ^, 13:3-33 / Luke, 21:5-33 /

[504b]
446 THE GREAT IDEAS la to 2 John, 1:1-3 / Colossians, 1:16-17 / Hebrews,
I  :io-i2  /  II  Peter,  3  :3-i3 / Revelation, 10:5-6— (D) Apocalypse,
10:5-6  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Timaeus,  447b-c;  450b-451a  8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[104^13-18]
148a-b / Physics, bk iv, ch 13
[222^29-^8]
302b;  bk  viii,  ch  1-2  334a-337b;  ch  6  344b346b; CH 8 348b-352a /
Heavens, bk i, ch 2
[269^2-10] 360c-d; ch 3 [27o''i-26] 361c-362a;
CH 9
[279^i2}-cH
12
[283^22} 370b-375d
/  Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch io-ii 437d-441a,c / Meteorology,
bk i, ch 14 [352* 16-353*27] 458b-459a,c; bk ii, ch 3
[356^2357*4]
462b-c / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8
[1050^20-28] 576c-d; bk xi, ch 6 [1063*13-16]
591b; ch 10 [1067*33-38] 596a; bk xii, ch 6-8 601b-605a esp ch 7
[1072*19-^14]
602b-d,
[1073*5-11] 603b
9  Aristotle:  Motion  ofAnimals,  ch  4  [699^14700*6]  234d-235a; ch 6
[700^29-701*7]  236a-b  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [146-264]
2d-4b;
[483-634] 7a-8d;
[951-1051] 12d-14a;
bk  II  [89-141]  16a-d;  [294-307]  18d-19a;  [569580] 22b; [1048-1063]
28b-c; [1105-1174] 29a30a,c; bk v [1-43 i] 61a-66d esp [55-70] 61 d62a,
[235-246] 64a- b,
[351-379] 65c-66a; bk
VI  [535-607]  87c-88b  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 13 271b; BK
VI,  sect  15 275a-b; bk ix, sect 28 293d294a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
847b-848b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i 35a-39d esp CH 1-5 35a-37c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi  89b-99b esp par 12-17, 92b-93b, par 40
98d-99a  /  City  of  God,  bk  XI,  CH  4-6 324a-325d; bk xii, ch 10-20
348b-357a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 12, ANS 85d-86d;
q  46  250a-255d  esp  a  i  250a-252d;  q  61, a 2 315c-316a; q 66, a 4
348d-349d;  q  75,  a  i, rep i 378b-379c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  hi suppl, Q 91, A 2 1017c-1020c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 50a;
part  ii, 162b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48, llOd 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xiii, 27b-c / Objections and Replies, 228a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk i [6-10] 93b; bk ii
[850-1009]
129b-133a esp
[890-969]
130b132a;  bk v [577-599] 187b-188a; bk vii [70108] 218b-219b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  121  195a  34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 540a-541b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 20a;
26d; 130b-133c esp 130b-131c, 132d-133a; 135a-137a,c; 152a-d; 160b-161d;
239b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  334b335c  esp  335a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, epilogue ii, 693c694a passim

[505a]
3  to  4j Chapter 23; ETERNITY 447 3. The eternity of God Old Testament:
Exodus,  15:18  /  Deuteronomy,  32:39-40  /  Pifl/m.s  9:5-8; 29:10-11;
33:10-11;  48  esp  48:8, 48:14; 90 esp 90:1-6; 93; 102:1228; 103:14-18;
136;  145:10-13;  146:5-10—  (D)  Psalms, 9:6-9; 28:10; 32:10-11; 47 esp
47:9,  47:15;  89  esp 89:1-6; 92; 101:13-29; 102:14-18; 135; 144:10-13;
145:5-10  /  Isaiah,  40:28-29;  43:10-13;  57:15— (D) Isaias, 40:28-29;
43:1013;  57-15  /  Jeremiah, 10:10— (D) Jeremias, 10:10 / Lamentations,
5:19  /  Daniel,  6:25-27  /  Malachi, y.6—{D) Malachias, 3:6 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  39:20;  42:21—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 39:25; 42:21-22
New  Testament: Matthew, 24:35 / Colossians, 1:16-17 / / Timothy, 1:17 /
Hebrews,  1:10-12;  13:7-8  / Revelation, 1:17-18; 10:6— (D) Apocalypse,
1:17-18; 10:6 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[607-615]
120a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 6
[258^10259^31] 344b-345d
/ Heavens, bk ii, ch 3
[286*3-13] 377c
/ Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[1015^9-16]
536a; bk ix, ch 8
[1050^6-20]
576b-c; bk xii, ch i
[1069*30-^2]
598b-c;  CH 6-7 601b-603b; ch 9 605a-d esp [1075*511] 605C'd; bk xiv, ch
2  [1088^14-28]  620d621a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch 4 [415*22-^8] 645c-d 16
Kepler:  Harmonies  ofthe World, 1071b 17 Plotixus: Third Ennead, tr vn,
ch  5  121c122a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii, ch ii 348b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii, par 1-4 43b44c; par 6 44d-45a; par 16-18 48c-49b;
par 21 49d-50a; par 23-24 50b-51a; bk xi, par 12-16 92b-93a; bk xii, par
11  lOlc-d; par 18 103a-c; par 40 109b-110a; bk xiii, par 44 122d / City
of  God,  BK  XI,  CH  21 333a-d; bk xii, ch 14-17 350d-354a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  5-6  625d-626b; ch 22 629b-630a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 10 40d-46d; q 14, a 9, ans 83b-d; a 13, ans and
rep  3 86d-88c; q 18, a 3 106b-107c; q 22, a i, rep 2 127d-128d; q 42, a
2  225d-227a;  q  43,  A 2 230d-231c; q 61, a 2, ans 315c-316a 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [64-72]  115d;  XIII [52-60] 126a; xxiv
[130-141] 144a; xxix
[10-45]
150b-c; xxxiii 156b-157d esp
[124-141] 157c-d
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 293d-294a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
iv,  52b-c  /  Meditations,  III,  84a-87a esp 86a; v, 94a-95a esp 95a /
Objections  and  Replies, 228a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def i 355a;
def 3,6 355b; DEF 8 355c; prop 6-8 356b-357d; prop lo-ii 358a-359b; prop
19-20  363c-364a;  PROP  33, scHOL 2, 367d-368c: part ii, prop 44, coROL
2-PROP 47 390a-391a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[1-12]
135b;
[372-382] 143b

[505b]
34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, general schol, 370a371a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  n,  ch  xv,  SECT 3-4 162d 163b; ch xvii, sect 16-17
172a-c;  sect  20  172d-173c;  bk ir, ch x 349c354c passim, esp sect 3-5
349d-350b,  sect  8-11  351a  352a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81b-c 42
Kant:   Pure  Reason,  175d-176c;  190c;  201b  c  /  Practical  Reason,
334b-335c;  344b-c  / Judgement, 592a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  156d157b;  206c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xv, 631a-c 4. The
things  which  partake  of  eternity  4a. The imperishability of angels,
spiritual  substances, souls 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-c / Meno, 179d-183a
esp  180a  /  Phaedo,  223c-246c  esp  226c-228b, 230c-232c, 245d-246c /
Republic,  bk x, 434d436a / Timaeus, 452c-d 8 Aristotle: Interpretation,
ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk xii, ch 3 [1070*21-27] 599c; CH 8 603b-605a /
Soul, bk ii, ch 2
[413^24-29] 643d-644a; bk hi, ch 5
[430*2025] 662d
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi [417-869] 35c-41a 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  890b-891a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 6
161b-c;  tr  vii  191c-200c  esp  ch  8, 195d-196a, ch 9-15 198b-200c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  9 lOlb-c; par 12 101d-102a; par
15-16 102b-103a; par 18-22, 103b-104a; par 28, 105c / City of God, bk X,
ch  31  319b-d;  bk xii, ch 15 351b-352d; bk xiii, ch I 360a-b; ch 16-17
367a-368d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 10, A 2, rep 1-2
41d-42c; a 3, ans and rep i 42c-43b; aa 5-6 44b-46d; q 50, a 5 274b275a;
q  61,  a  2 315c-316a; q 75, a 6 383c-384c; Q 104, A I, ANS and rep 1,3
534c-536c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, vii [64-75] 115d-116a;
[121-148]  116b-c;  xiii  [52-72]  126a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
192c-193c;  part  IV,  250c-251b;  253b-254a  31 Descartes: Meditations,
73b-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  127c-d; 216d-217a; 228b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  ii  377b-c;  PART  V,  PROP 23 458b-d; prop 25
458d-459a; prop 29-33 459b-460c; prop 38-40 461d462d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk i
[i 16-159] 96a97a; bk
ii
[81-105]
113a-b; bk v
[889-892]
194b; BK VI
[296-353] 202b-204a;
[430-436]
205b; [853-855] 215a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 194-195, 206b-210b 35 Berkeley:
Hitman Knowledge, sect 141 441a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186a-b

[506a]
(4.  The  things  which  partake of eternity. 4a. The imperishability of
angels,  spiritual  substances,  souls.) 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 121a-128b
esp  124d-126c;  203d-204c  / Practical Reason, 348d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  216d-218b;  BK  VII,  295b-c;  bk  xiv,  608a-b  4b, The
imperishable  in  the  physical order: matter, atoms, celestial bodies 7
Plato: Timaeus, 450c-451a; 457a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[193*9-28]
269b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 360d-362a; bk i, CH 9 [279^i2]-bk II, CH I
[284''6] 370b-376a;
bk  II,  CH 6 379c-380c; bk hi, ch 6 396a-c / Generation and Corruption,
bk ii, ch io-ii 437d'441a,c esp ch 10
[336^25-34] 438d
/  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983^7-984*17]  501d502b;  bk  hi,  ch 2
[997*34-^12] 516a-b; ch 4
[999^1-16] 518b-c; [1000*5-1001*3] 518d-519d;
bk IX, CH 8 [1050^16-28] 576c-d; bk xi, ch 2
[1060*3-36] 588a-c; ch 6
[1063*10-16] 591b;
BK  XII,  CH  3 599a-d; ch 6-8 601b-605a / Soul, BK II, CH 4 [415*23-^8]
645c-d  9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 4 [699^^14700*6] 234d-235a 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk i [146-264] 2d-4b; [483-634] 7a-8d; bk
ii [294-307] 18d19a; BK V
[i 10-145] 62c-63a
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  13,  188d189a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect 3 257a-b; BK IV, SECT 46 267c; bk vi, sect 15
275a-b;  bk VII, sect 18 281a; sect 23 281b; sect 25 281c; sect 50 283a;
bk  x,  sect 7 297b-c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a; bk xiii, 429a-b
16  Kepler:  Epitofne,  bk  iv,  888b-889b; 929b930b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 7-8 161d-162d 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 8-9 lOla-c; par 14-16 102b-103a; par
22 104a-b; par 28, 105c; par 40 109b-110a / City of God, bk xiii, ch 17,
367d-368b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, A 2, REP 2
41d-42c;  a  3, ans 42c-43b; a 4, ans 43b-44b; a 5, ans 44b-45c; q 46, a
i,  rep  2-3  250a-252d;  q  58,  a  3,  ans 301d-302d; q 63, A I, REP 2
325c-326c;  q  65,  a i, rep i 339b340b; Q 66, A 2 345d-347b; q 75, a 6,
ans  383c-384c;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  3  440d-442a;  q  104, A I, REP 1,3
534c-536c; q 113, a i, ans 576a-d; Q 115, A 3, ans 588c-589c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, Q 77, A 2, ANS and rep i 945a-946b; q
91 1016a-1025b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, 1
[64-81]
106d-107a 28 Harvjiy: On Animal Generation, 390b-d

[506b]
448  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4^ to 4r 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48,
186b-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, prop 15, scHOL360b361d 33 Pascal:
Vacuum,   358a   34   Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  541b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  10-19 351b-354c passim 40 Gibbon:
Decline  afid Fall, 346d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  18d-19a;  74b-76c  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i,
41b-c  4c.  The  immutability  of truth and ideas Old Testament: Psalms,
100:5:  117:2;  119:160;  146:5-6—  (D)  Psalms,  99:5;  116:2; 118:160;
145:5-6  /  Proverbs, 8:22-30 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 7:24-26— (D)
OT,   Bool^ofWisdo7n,   7:24-26   /   Ecclesiasticus,   24:9—   (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus.  24:14  New  Testament:  H  John, 1-2 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
125a-b  /  Symposium, 167b-d / Meno, 184d / Phaedo, 231b-232b / Timaeus,
447b-d;  457b-458b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 8 104a-b /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 [987*29-^18] 505b-d; bk ii, ch i
[993*^19-31] 512a-b; bk
III, CH 2
[997*34-^12] 516a-b; bk
ix, ch 10
[1051^33-1052*12] 578a,c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*29-^5]
341c-d; bk vi, ch 3 [1139^18-24] 388b-c 11 NicoMACHUs: Arithmetic, bk i,
811a-812a;  813d-814a  17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr ix, cm 5-8 248a250a
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 9, 3a / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch 8-10 826c-627b; BK II, CH 38-39, 654b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 10, A 3, REP 3 42c-43b; q 14, a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; a
15 89b-90b; q 16, aa 7-8 99a'100d; q 18, A 4 107d-108c; q 22, a i, rep 2
127d128d;  Q 44, A 3 240b-241a; q 84, a i, rep 3 440d-442a; a 2, ans and
rep  3  442b-443c;  a  5 446c-447c; q 86, a 3 463b-d ^ 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 91, A I 208b-d; q 93 215b,d-220d; q 94, a 4,
ans  223d-224d;  aa  5-6  224d-226b;  part  ii-ii,  q  I,  A I, CONTRARY
380b-381a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  iv, 267b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
276b-285c  passim,  esp  279b-282a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 56
112a  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 216d217c; 228a-b; 229c-d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 8 355c; prop 8, scHOL 2 356d-357d; prop 17,
schol  362c363c;  PROP  19,  SCHOL 363d; prop 20, corol i 364a; prop 33,
schol 2 367d-369a; part ii, prop 44, corol 2-prop 47 390a-391a

[507a]
4^/0  5  CHAPTtK 23: K 1 1-RNirV 449 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, rk k (142
151]  114b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358b 35 LocKc: Human Understanding, hk iv,
cm  hi,  SECT 31 323c-d; cii xi, si.cr 14 358b c - 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
113c-118a  csp  113c-114b,  117b-118a; 173b-174a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  pref,  6a-7a; part III, p^i 270, 85c / Philosophy of History, in
iro,  156d-157b; 168b-d; part lii, 310d 53 James: Psychology, 301a; 879b
882a 4d. The eternity of Heaven and Hell: everlasting life and death Old
Testament:  Psalms,  16  esp  r6:io-ii;  73 esp 73:24-28; 145:10-13— (D)
Psalms,  15  esp  15:10-11; 72 csp 72:24-28; 144:10-13 / Daniel, 7:13-18
csp  7:18  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 1-5 csp 3-5— (D) OT, Bool{ of
Wisdom,  1-5 esp 3-5 New Testament: Matthew, 6:19-21; 18:8-9; 25:31-46 /
Mar{, 9:43-50; 10:17-31— (D) Marl^, 9:42-49; 10:17-31 / Luke, 10:25-37 /
John,  6:37-40; 8:51; 10:24-30; 11:23-27; 17:13 / Romans, 6 esp 6:23 / /
Corinthians, 15:34- 'yS / II Corinthians, 4:12-5:10 / Galatians, 6:8 / I
Peter,  1:3-7,22-25  / I John, 2:16-17; 5:11-12/ Jude, 5-8 / Revelation,
2:7-11; 3:5; 20-22 esp 20:10-15, 21:4-6, 22:1-5— (D) Apocalypse, 2:7-11;
3:5;  20-22  esp  20:9-15,  21:4-6, 22:1-5 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
xiii,  par  50-53 124c-125a,c / City of God,' bk xiii, ch 2 360b361a; ch
12  365d-366a; ch 14-20 366b-371a; BK xni, CH 22-BK XIV, ch I 371c-377a;
bk  XIV,  CM 15 388d-390a; bk xv, ch 1-3 397b, d399c; CH 6 400c-401b; bk
xix, ch 4 511a513c; ch io-ii 516c-517b; ch 27-28 529a530a,c; bk xxi-xxii
560a-618d  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 4 625b-c; ch 21 629b; ch 24,
630d;  CH 38-39 635c-636a 19 Aquinas: Sum?na Theologica, part i, q 10, A
3, ANS and rep 2 42c-43b; q 18, a 2, rep 2 105c-106b; o 23, a i, ans and
rep  3  132c-133b;  Q 66, A 3 347b-348d; q 75, a 7, rep i 384d385c; part
i-ii,  q  4,  a 7, rep 3 635b-636a; Q 5, A 4 639a-640b 20 Aquinas; Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  67 81b-87c; q 68, a 6 93c-94c; q 87, aa 3-5
187b189c:  PART  ii-ii,  q 18, AA 2-3 462d-464c; q 19, A II 472d-473d; q
26, a 13 519d-520d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i [112-129] 2bc; III
[1-18] 4a-b;
[82-129]
5a-b; iv
[13-45]
5c-d; VI
[1-57] 8b-9a; vii
[16-59] 9d-10a esp
[55-59] 10a; XII
[49-51] 16d-17a; xiv
[28-42]
19d-20a; xv [22-42] 21b-c; paradise, hi [3490] 109d-110b; vii
[64-78]
115d-116a;
[121148] 116b-c; XIV
[1-66] 126d-127c; xv
[1-12]
128b-c;  xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d  esp  xxxi  [3193]  153c-154a 22 Chaucer;
Second Nuns Tale
[15,787-800]
467a

[507b]
23 IIoHHEs: Leviathan, paki in, 191b 198a; pakt IV, 250c 251b; 253b 255b
25 M()Ntai(;ni.: lissays, 265b c 26 Shakespeare : Richard Iff, act i, sc
iv  [42-  (M,]  115a-b 29 C.ervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 366d 367a 31
Descartes:  Objections and Replies, 228b 32 Mii.Tos: Paradise Lost, bk i
[S4 191] 95b 97b;
[242 ^:5o] 98b 100b; hk
ii [85-92] 113a;
[i.\i
18S] 114b-115a; bk hi
[274-:}4:^] 141b-143a;
BK X [782 844J 291b-292b; bk xii
[5^,7
556]  331a  33  Pascal:  Pcnsces,  194-195, 206b 210b; 2^^, 214b 215a 35
Locke:  Toleration,  5b c; 15d-16a / Human Understanding, bk 11, en xxi,
sect 38 187b c; sect 62 194c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233d-234d 42
Kant: Practical Reason, 346b-347c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 363a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part iv, 315d 48 Melville: Mohy Dicl{, 347a 5.
The  knowledge  and  imagery  of  eternity  7  Plato;  Apology, 211b-c /
Timaeus, 450b-451a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[104*^13-18]
148a-b / Memory and Remitiiscence, ch i
[449^30-450^10] 690c-d
16 Kepler: Harmonies ofthe World, 1048a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr v,
ch  7  20a-c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  3  120a-d  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  13-17  92b-93c; bk xii, par 40 109b-110a; bk
xiii,  par  44 122d / City of God, bk xi, ch 5-6 324d-325d; ch 21 333a-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 10, A I 40d-41d; a 2, rep i
41d-42c; q 13, a i, rep 3 62c-63c; q 42, a 2, rep 1,4 225d-227a; q 46, A
I,  ANS  250a-252d; a 2 253a-255a; q 79, A 9, ANS and rep 3 422b-423d 21
Dante;  Divine  Comedy, purgatory, xi [100108] 69d; paradise, xxx-xxxiii
I51d-157d esp xxxi [31-93] 153c-154a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 271b
30 Bacon; Novum Organian, bk i, aph 48 llOd111a 32 Milton: On Time 12a-b
/ At a Solemn Musicl{ 13a-b / So7772ets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk xii
[537-556] 331a
35  Locke:  Human  Ufiderstanding,  bk ii, ch xiv, sect 26-27 160c-161a;
sect  30-31 161c-162a; CH XV, SECT 3-5 162d-163c; sect 11-12 165a-c; cii
xvii  167d-174a  passim,  esp  sect 5 168d-169a, sect 10 170b-c, sect 16
172a-b;  ch xxix, sect 15 237a; sect 16, 237d-238a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
185a-b  49 Darwin; Origin of Species, 154c 51 Tolstoy; War and Peace, bk
hi, 156d; bk v, 216d-218b esp 217a-c; bk vii, 295b-c; bk ix, 355d-356a

[508a]
450  THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES . On the Power of God, q 8 tionary
L (3-6)

[508b]
For:  Other  discussions of the distinction between eternity as infinite
time  and  eternity as timelessness, see Time 2; and for the relation of
eternity  to  time, see Time 2c. Another consideration of infinite time,
see Infinity 3e. The controversy concerning the infinity of time and the
eternity  of  the  world  or motion, jf^ Astronomy 8c(i), 8d; Change 13;
Time  2b;  World  4a;  and  for the relation of creation to eternity and
time, see God 7a; Time 2c; World 46(2). The notion of permanent elements
or principles of change, see Change 2. Other discussions of the eternity
of  God,  see  Change  15c;  God  4d.  The  conception  of the angels as
aeviternal,  see  Angel  3c;  Time 2a. The discussion of imperishable or
incorruptible bodies, see Astronomy 8a; Being 7b(3); Change ioc; Element
5a.  The  consideration  of  the  eternality  of truth and of ideas, see
Change 15a; Form 2b; Idea le; Immortality 6c; Truth 5. The conception of
the  eternity  of Heaven and Hell or of eternal salvation and damnation,
see  Happiness  7c;  Immortality  5e-5f;  Punishment  5e(i); Sin 6d. The
problem of the knowability of the infinite, ^d'd' Infinity 6b; Knowledge
5a(4).  ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great
BooJ^s  ofthe  Western  World,  but relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups: II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter of The Great Ideas. Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human Under-
'•• standing, bk ii, ch 14 Augustine. On the Immortality of the Soul, ch
i  .  Mofiadology, par 6 Aquinas. Summa Contra Gentiles, bk ii, ch 32-38
Voltaire.  "Eternity,"  in A Philosophical Dic- . De Aeternitate Mundi .
The  Ig?iorant Philosopher, ch 1 4, 1 6, 20 Spinoza. Correspondence, xii
Kierkegaard.  'The  Expectation  of  an  Eternal  Happiness," in vol hi.
Edifying  Discourses  ^E . Philosophical Fragments Proclus. The Elements
of  Theology,  (f)  .  Concluding  Unscie?2tific Postscript, pp 345-385,
Boethius.  The Consolation of Philosophy, bk v, 468-492, 508-513 prosA 6
Whewell.  On  the  Philosophy  of Discovery, ch 26 Anselm of Canterbury.
Monologium   Bradley.   Axppearance  and  Reality,  bk  i,  ch  4-5;  bk
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part ii, ii, ch 18, 26 CH
13-16,  18,  22-23  Royce.  The  World  and the Individual series ii (3)
Bonaventura. Breviloquium, part vii Pohle. Eschatology Duns Scotus. Opus
Oxoniense,  bk  ii,  dist  2,  Hugel. The Mystical Element of Religion .
Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  {A Tract ConA. E.Tayi^or. The Faith ofa
Moralist,  series  i  (^,6)  cerning  the  First  Principle)  Dewey. The
Questfor Certainty, ch 2 Eckhart. Sermons and Collations, xxv Whitehead.
Process   and   Reality,  part  i,  ch  2;  part  Suarez.  Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xxx  (7-9),  n, ch i; part iv, ch i (5-6); part v, ch 2 .
Adventures of Ideas, ch 11-15

[509a]
Chapter  14:  EVOLUTION INTRODUCTION THIS chapter belongs to Darwin. Not
that  his  writings,  which  are  cited under almost all headings, stand
alone  in  the various places they appear. The point is rather that many
of  the  topics are dictated by and draw their meaning from his thought,
and that he figures in all the major issues connected with the origin of
species,  the  theory of evolution, and the place of man in the order of
nature. With respect to the matters under consideration in this chapter,
the other writers in the tradition of the great books cannot escape from
being  classified as coming before or after Darvvin, or as being with or
against  him.  Darwin's  influence  on  later  writers  may be variously
estimated,  but  it  is  plainly marked by their use of his language and
their  reference  to  his  fundamental  notions.  James'  Principles  of
Psychology,  especially  in  its chapters on instinct and emotion, views
the  behavior  of  men  and animals and the phenomena of intelligence or
mind  in  evolutionary  terms.  The  writings  of  Freud  are  similarly
dominated  by  the  genetic  approach  and  by an appeal to man's animal
ancestry in order to explain the inherited constitution of his psyche in
conformity  with  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  Outside  psychology the
concept  of  evolution  is  reflected  in  theories  of progress or of a
dialectical  development in history; as, for example, in the dialectical
or  historical materialism of Marx and Engels, which is set forth in the
latter's  Dialectics  of  Nature. An even more general re-orientation of
philosophy,  which  stems from an evolutionary way of thinking, is to be
found  in  the writings of Bergson and Dewey, such as Creative Evolution
and The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy. These, along with many of the
specifically  biological works cited in the list of Additional Readings,
give some measure of the influence of Darwin not 451

[509b]
only  on philosophical thought, but also on the direction of research in
all  the  biological  sciences. With regard to Darwin's predecessors the
question  is  not  so  much  one of their influence upon him as ot their
anticipation,   in   one   way  or  another,  of  his  discoveries,  his
conceptions,   and   his  theory.  The  observation  made  in  antiquitv
concerning  a  hillside  deposit of marine fossils is sometimes taken as
implying an early recognition of the evolution of terrestrial life. More
apposite perhaps is the statement by Lucretius that "the new earth first
put  forth  grass and bushes, and next gave birth to the races of mortal
creatures  springing  up  many  in  number  in  many  ways  after divers
fashions."  Lucretius  also  speaks of strange monsters which nature did
not  permit  to  survive.  "Nature  set a ban on their increase and they
could not reach the coveted flower of age nor find food nor be united in
marriage  .  . . And many races of living things must then have died out
and  been  unable  to  beget  and  continue  their  breed."  Those which
survived,  he  adds,  had  qualities which "protected and preserved each
particular  race."  Apparently susceptible to similar interpretation are
Aristotle's  statements  that  "nature  proceeds  little  by little from
things  lifeless  to  animal  life"; that "there is observed in plants a
continuous  scale  ofascent  toward theanimal"; and that "throughout the
entire  animal  scale  there is a graduated differentiation in amount of
vitality  and  in  capacity  for  motion." Augustine's commentary on the
first  chapter  of Genesis seems even more explicitly to contemplate the
successive  appearance  of the various forms of life. Plants and animals
did  not actually exist when the \^'orld began. Though their causes were
created  by God and existed from the beginning, the actual production of
plants

[510a]
452  THE  GREAT  IDEAS and animals in their various kinds is, as Aquinas
tells   us   while   summarizing   Augustine's   view,   "the   work  of
propagation"—not  of  creation.  Like  Aristotle, both Aquinas and Locke
represent  the  world of living organisms as a graduated scale ascending
from  less  to  more  perfect  forms of life. But where Aquinas tends to
conceive  that  graduated  scale  as  a  hierarchy  involving  essential
differences,  Locke  sees  an  almost  perfect continuity involving only
ditterences in degree. "In all the visible world," he writes, "we see no
chasms  or  gaps."  To  illustrate  this,  he points out that "there are
fishes  that  have  wings, and are not strangers to the airy region; and
there  are  some birds that are inhabitants of the water, whose blood is
cold  as fishes . . . There are animals so near of kin to both birds and
beasts that they are in the middle between both: amphibious animals link
the  terrestrial and aquatic together . . . and the animal and vegetable
kingdoms  are so nearly joined, that, if you will take the lowest of one
and  the  highest of the other, there will scarce be perceived any great
difference  between  them: and so on, till we come to the lowest and the
most  inorganical  parts  of  matter,  we shall find everywhere that the
several species are linked together, and differ but in almost insensible
degrees." But for the theory of evolution the observation of a hierarchy
in  nature,  or  even  of  a  continuity  in which the species differ by
"almost  insensible  degrees,"  constitutes  only  background.  What the
theory  of evolution brings to the fore is the notion of a developmental
or genetic relation among the various forms of life. Because it seems to
contain  this  insight, the anticipation of Darwin to be found in Kant's
Critique  of Judgement is perhaps the most remarkable; even though, in a
closely  related passage in which Kant discusses epigenesis, he uses the
word  "evolution"  in a sense quite contrary to Darwin's conception. "It
is  praiseworthy,"  Kant writes, "to employ a comparative anatomy and go
through  the  vast creation of organized beings in order to see if there
is not discoverable in it some trace of a system, and indeed of a system
following a genetic principle . . . When we consider the agreement of so
many  genera  of  animals  in  a certain common schema, which apparently
underlies not only the structure of their bones,

[510b]
but also the disposition of their remaining parts, and when we find here
the  wonderful  simplicity  of the original plan, which has been able to
produce  such  an  immense  variety  of species by the shortening of one
member  and  the  lengthening of another, by the involution of this part
and  the  evolution  of  that, there gleams upon the mind a ray of hope,
however faint, that the principle of the mechanism of nature, apart from
which  there  can  be  no  natural  science at all, may yet enable us to
arrive  at some explanation in the case of organic life. This analogy of
forms,  \\'hich  in  all  their  differences  seem  to  be  produced  in
accordance  with a common type, strengthens the suspicion that they have
an  actual  kinship  due  to descent from a common parent. This we might
trace  in  the  gradual  approximation of one animal species to another,
from  that  in  which  the  principle  of ends seems best authenticated,
namely  from  man,  back to the polyp, and from this back even to mosses
and  lichens,  and  finally  to the lowest perceivable stage of nature."
Finding  anticipations of Darwin involves judgments much more subject to
controversy  than  tracing  his  influences.  It  is  questionable,  for
example,  whether  the  suggestive  passages in Lucretius and Locke bear
more  than  a superficial resemblance to Darwin's thought. The matter is
further  complicated  by  Darwin's  own sense of his divergence from and
disagreement  with  his  predecessors—  both  immediate  precursors like
Buffon  and  Linnaeus  and  earlier philosophers and theologians. Darwin
tells  us  himself  of  his  quarrel with the theologians. His followers
elaborate  on  the opposition between his conception of species and that
of  Aristotle,  an opposition which Darwin intimates by the great stress
he  lays  on  the  difference between a static taxonomy and a dynamic or
genealogical  classification  of living things. We must therefore try to
locate  the  central  points  of  Darwin's  theory  in  order  to  judge
comparable  views  for  their agreement or disagreement. As the title of
his  major  work  indicates,  it  is  not evolution as a grand scheme of
biological,  or  cosmic,  history,  but the origin oi species with which
Darwin seems to be principally con-

[511a]
cerncd.  He  is concerned with establishing the fact that new species do
originate  in  the course of time, against those who suppose the species
of  Hving  things to be fixed in number and immutable in type throughout
the ages. He is concerned with describing the circumstances under w hich
new species arise and other forms cease to ha\e the status of species or
become  extinct. He is concerned with formulating the various factors in
the  differentiation  of  species, and w'ith sho\\ing, against those who
think  a new species requires a special act of creation, that the origin
of  species,  like their extinction, is entirely a natural process which
requires  no  factors  other  than  those at work every day in the life,
death,  and  breeding  of  plants  and animals. Only as a consequence of
these  primary  considerations  does he engage in speculations about the
moving  panorama of life on earth from its beginnings to its present and
its future. Darwin looks upon the term "species" as "arbitrarily given,"
and  for  that  reason  does not attempt any strict definition of it. He
uses  it,  moreover,  like  his  predecessors  in  systematic biological
classification, to signify "a set of individuals closely resembling each
other"—   class   of   plants   or   animals   having   certain   common
characteristics.  Darwin  would probably agree with Locke's criticism of
those  who  suppose  that  our  definitions  of  species  grasp the real
essences  or  relate  to  the  substantial  forms inherent in things. As
indicated  in  the chapter on Definition', Locke insists that our notion
of a species expresses only what he calls the "nominal essence"—a set of
characteristics  we  attach to the name we give things of a sort when we
group  them and separate them in our classifications. "The boundaries of
species,  whereby  man sorts [things], are made by men," he writes; "the
essences  of the species, distinguished by different names, are . . . of
man's  making." Species is not the only term oi classification. A genus,
for  example,  is  a  more  inclusive group than a species. Groups which
differ  specifically  belong  to  the  same genus if their difference is
accompanied  by  the possession of common traits. As species differ from
one  another within a generic group, so genera are in turn subclasses of
more inclusive groupings, such as

[511b]
Chapter  24:  E\'OLUTION  453 phyla, families, and orders. But there are
also  smaller  groupings  within a species. There are races or varieties
and sub-varieties, the members of which share the characteristics of the
species  but  differ from one anotiier in other respects. Ultimately, of
course,  within  the  smallest  class the systematist bothers to define,
each individual differs from every other in the same group with whom, at
the  same  time,  it  shares  certain  characteristics  of the race, the
species,  the  genus,  and  all the larger classes to which they belong.
This  general  plan  of  botanical or zoological classification does not
seem  to  give  species  peculiar  status in the hierarchy of classes or
groupings  or  to  distinguish it from other classes except as these are
more or less inclusive than itself. Why then should attention be focused
on  the  origin  of species, rather than of varieties or of genera ? One
part  of  the answer comes from the facts of generation or reproduction.
Offspring tend to differ from their parents, as well as from each other,
but  they  also  tend to resemble one another. "A given germ," Aristotle
writes,  "does not give rise to any chance living being, nor spring from
any  chance  one; but each germ springs from a definite parent and gives
rise to a definite progeny." This is an early formulation of the insight
that  in  the  process  of  reproduction, the law of like generating hke
always  holds  for  those  characteristics which identify the species of
ancestors  and In other words, a species always breeds true; its members
always  generate  organisms  which can be classified as belonging to the
same  species,  however  much  they vary among themselves as individuals
within the group. Furthermore, the sub-groups— the races or varieties of
a species are able to breed with one another, but diverse species cannot
interbreed.   Organisms   different   in   species  either  cannot  mate
productively  at  all, or if crossbred, like the horse and the ass, they
produce  a  sterile  hybrid  like the mule. In the hierarchy of classes,
then,  species would seem to be distinguished from all smaller groupings
by  their  stability  from generation to generation. If species are thus
self-perpetuating, they in turn give stability to all the larger

[512a]
454  THE  GREAT IDEAS groupings— the genera, phyla, famihes—which remain
as  fixed  from generation to generation as the species which constitute
them.  Hence  the  question of origin appUes pecuharly to species rather
than  to varieties or to genera. On the supposition stated, no origin of
species  would  seem to be possible except by a special act of creation.
Either  all  the  existing species of organisms have always existed from
the beginning of life on earth; or, if in the course of ages new species
have  arisen,  their  appearance  cannot  be  accounted  for  by natural
generation.  By  the law of natural generation, offspring will always be
of  the same species as the parent organisms. Spontaneous generation, of
course,  remains  a possibility. A new species of organism might come to
be without being generated by other living organisms. But apart from the
question of fact {i.e., whether spontaneous generation ever does occur),
such  origin  of  a  form  of  hfe seems to lie outside the operation of
natural  causes and to imply the intervention of supernatural power. The
possibility  of  spontaneous generation was entertained in antiquity and
the  Middle  Ages,  and was even thought to be supported by observation,
such  as  that  of  maggots  emerging from putrefying matter. But modern
science  tends  to  affirm  the biogenetic law that living organisms are
generated only by living organisms. To Kant, the notion that "life could
have  sprung up from the nature of what is void of life," seems not only
contrary  to  fact, but absurd or unreasonable. Yet, while affirming the
principle  that  like produces like by insisting upon "the generation of
something  organic  from something else that is also organic," Kant does
not carry that principle to the point where it would make the generation
of  a  new  species impossible. "Within the class of organic beings," he
writes,  it  is possible for one organism to generate another "differing
specifically   from   it."  Against  the  background  of  these  various
suppositions,  Darwin  is  moved  to a new insight by the conjunction of
certain types of fact: the results of breeding under domestication which
exhibit  the  great range of variation within a species and the tendency
of inbred

[512b]
varieties  to  breed  true;  his  own  observations  of the geographical
distribution  of  species of flora and fauna, especially those separated
from  one  another  by  impassable  barriers;  the  facts of comparative
anatomy  and embryology which reveal affinities in organic structure and
development  between  organisms  distinct in species; and the geological
record which indicates the great antiquity of life upon the earth, which
gives  evidence  of the cataclysmic changes in the earth's surface (with
consequences for the survival of fife), and which above all contains the
fossil  remains  of  forms  of  life now extinct but not dissimilar from
species  alive  in  the present age. Briefly stated, Darwin's insight is
that new species arise when, among the varieties of an existing species,
certain  intermediate  forms become extinct, and the other circumstances
are such that the surviving varieties, now become more sharply separated
from  one another in type, are able to reproduce their kind, and, in the
course  of many generations of inbreeding, also tend to breed true. They
thus perpetuate their type until each in turn ceases to be a species and
becomes  a  genus  when  its  own  extreme  varieties,  separated by the
extinction  of intermediates, become new species, as they themselves did
at  an  earlier  stage  of history. For the very same reason that Darwin
says  "a  wellmarked  variety  may  be  called  an incipient species," a
species  may be called an incipient genus. The point is misunderstood if
it  is  supposed  that when new species originate from old, both the new
and the old continue to survive as species. On the contrary, when in the
course  of  thousands  of generations some of the varieties of a species
achieve the status of species, the species from which they originated by
variation  ceases  to  be  a  species  and  becomes  a  genus. "The only
distinction  between  species and well-marked varieties," Darwin writes,
"is  that  the  latter  are  known,  or believed, to be connected at the
present  day with intermediate gradations, whereas species were formerly
thus  connected  ...  It  is  quite  possible  that  forms now generally
acknowledged  to  be merely varieties may hereafter be thought worthy of
specific names; and in this case scientific and

[513a]
common  language  will  come into accordance. In short, we shall have to
treat  species  in the same manner as those naturalists treat genera who
admit   that   genera   are  merely  artificial  combinations  made  for
convenience  ,  .  . Our classifications will come to be, as far as they
can  be  so  made,  genealogies."  The origin ofspecies thus seems to be
identical  with  the  extinction ofintermediate varieties, combined with
the  survival  of one or more of the extreme varieties. These seem to be
simply  two  ways  of  looking  at  the same thing. Still another way of
seeing  the  point  may  be achieved by supposing, contrary to fact, the
survival  of  all  the  varieties  ever produced through the breeding of
organisms.   "If   my   theory  be  true,"  Darwin  writes,  "numberless
intermediate  varieties, linking closely together all the species of the
same group, must assuredly have existed; but the very process of natural
selection   constantly   tends,  as  has  been  so  often  remarked,  to
exterminate  the parent-forms and the intermediate hnks." If one were to
suppose  the  simultaneous co-existence of all intermediate varieties in
the  present  day, the groups now called "species" would be continuously
connected  by  slight  differences  among  their  members and would not,
therefore,  be  divided  into  distinct species, as they now are because
certain  links  are missing. In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant states
the  principle  of continuity in the following manner. "This principle,"
he  writes, "indicates that all differences of species limit each other,
and do not admit of transition from one to another by a saltus, but only
through  smaller  degrees  of the difference between the one species and
the  other. In one word, there are no species or sub-species which . . .
are  the  nearest  possible  to each other; intermediate species or sub-
species  being always possible, the difference of which from each of the
former  is  always  smaller than the difference existing between these."
But,  Kant  adds,  "it  is plain that this continuity of forms is a mere
idea,  to  which  no  adequate  object can be discovered in experience,"
partly  because  "the  species in nature are really divided . . . and if
the  gradual  progression  through  their  affinity were continuous, the
intermediate members lying be-

[513b]
Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION  455 tween two given species must be infinite in
number,   which   is   impossible."  The  Russian  geneticist,  Theodore
Dobzhansky,  gives  an  interpretation  of  continuity  in  nature which
differs  from  Kant's in that it follows and applies Danvin's conception
of species and their origin. According to him, if we suppose the extreme
case  of  all possible genetic variations being alive on earth together,
the  result  would  be not an infinite number of species, but no species
and  genera  at  all.  The  array of plants and animals would approach a
perfectly  continuous  series  in  which  there would only be individual
differences. There would be no specific or generic groupings of the sort
now  made  in  our  classification  of  the  forms  of life. On Darwin's
conception  of  the origin of species its causes divide into two sets of
factors:  first,  those  which  determine  the extinction or survival of
organisms  and,  with their survival, their opportunities for mating and
reproduction;   second,   those  which  determine  the  transmission  of
characteristics  from  one  generation  to  another and the variation of
offspring  from  their  ancestors  and  from each other. Without genetic
variation there would be no range of differences within a group on which
the  factors  of  selection  could  operate.  Without the inheritance of
ancestral traits there would be no perpetuation of group characteristics
in  the  organisms which manage to survive and reproduce. For Darwin the
operation of the first set of factors constitutes the process of natural
selection.  This  may  take  place  in  many  ways:  through  geological
catastrophes   which   make   certain   areas  of  the  earth's  surface
uninhabitable  for  all organisms, or for those types which cannot adapt
themselves to the radically changed environment; through the competition
among  organisms for the limited food supply available in their habitat;
through  the  struggle for existence in which organisms not only compete
for  food  but  also prey upon one another; through the sexual selection
which  operates  within  a  group  when  some organisms are prevented by
others  from mating and reproducing; and through all the obstacles which
isolate groups from interbreeding, in-

[514a]
456   THE   GREAT   IDEAS   eluding   geographical   and   physiological
inaccessibility.  The  struggle  for existence is not only a struggle to
survive,  but  also  a struggle to reproduce. Natural selection operates
with  respect  to reproduction as well as survival. Whether the survival
is  of  the  fittest  alone,  or  whether the multiplication of inferior
organisms  also  gives  evolution  another  direction, has been disputed
since  Darwin's  day;  but  according  to his theory, "natural selection
works solely by and for the good of each being; all corporeal and mental
endowments  will tend to progress toward perfection . . . Thus, from the
war  of nature, from famine and death . . . the production of the higher
animals  directly  follows." With respect to the factors of heredity and
variation,  tremendous advances since Darwin in the experimental science
of  genetics  require revisions in this part of his theory of evolution.
This  is  particularly  true  of  the researches of Mendel, Bateson, and
Morgan  concerning the ways in which genetic factors operate. But on one
major  point  in  the theory of heredity Darwin holds a view which later
investigations   have   tended   to  confirm.  Antedating  Weismann,  he
nevertheless  opposes  Lamarck's  theory  of the inheritance of acquired
characteristics.  As  William James expresses it, where Lamarck supposes
that   environmental  influences  cause  changes  in  the  structure  or
functioning of the organism which then become hereditary, Darwin regards
the  environment  merely  as  a selective agency, acting upon variations
produced  entirely  by  causes  operating in the breeding process. James
thinks  **the  evidence  for  Mr.  Darwin's view . . . [was] . . . quite
convincing,"  even  before it received the support of Weismann's theory,
according  to  which  it  is  "^  priori impossible that any peculiarity
acquired  during the lifetime by the parent should be transmitted to the
germ."  The  situation  is not the same with regard to Darwin's views on
the  mechanism  of heredity. Writing before Mendel's classic experiments
in  hybridization,  Darwin  seems  to  suppose  a blending of hereditary
factors;  whereas,  according  to  Mendel,  inheritance  is particulate.
Distinct  genetic  factors  combine  to produce a certain somatic result
without losing their

[514b]
separate identities. They can therefore be reassorted and enter into new
genetic  combinations  in  the  next  generation. Most important of all,
Darwin  thinks that new forms of life arise gradually as the result of a
continuous  accumulation  of  slight  and  imperceptible variations. The
opposite  view  is  now  taken.  Tlie discovery of abrupt mutations in a
single generation discountenances Darwin's maxim natura nonfacit saltum—
"nature  does  nothing  by  jumps."  These  advances  in  genetics since
Darwin's  day  do  not  alter  the  main  outlines  of  his  theory. The
mechanisms  of  heredity  may be much more complicated than Darwin knew,
and  involve  much  of which he was ignorant, such as mutation-rates, or
the various types, causes, and effects of hybridization. But that merely
leads  to a more elaborate or different explanation of genetic variation
in  offspring  and  the  transmission of ancestral traits. No matter how
these  are  explained,  their occurrence is all that is needed to permit
new  species  to  originate  through  natural  processes of heredity and
selection.  "If  Dar\vin  were  alive today," Julian Huxley writes, "the
title  of his book would have to be not the 'origin' but the 'Origins of
Species.' For perhaps the most salient single fact that has emerged from
recent  studies  is that species may arise in a number of quite distinct
ways."  The reader must judge for himself to what extent Darwin's theory
of  evolution  was  anticipated by those who, like Augustine, affirm the
appearance  of  new  species  of  life on earth at various stages in its
history, or even by a writer like Kant, who seems to possess the germ of
its insight. The critical test in every case is whether those who affirm
the  occurrence  of  new  species  by  natural  processes rather than by
special  creation,  think  of  them as simply added to the organic forms
already  in existence without any change in the status as species of the
pre-existing  forms.  Those  who  think in this way do not have Darwin's
idea  of  the  origin  of  species; for in conceiving an increase in the
number  of  species  as  merely  a  matter of addition, they necessarily
attribute  stabiUty  to  each species, new as well as old. By this test,
not even Kant seems to be near the center of Danvin's hy-

[515a]
r  Chaptlr  24:  FA'OLUTION 457 pothesis of the origin of species by the
exlincI tion of intermediate varieties. In comparing Danvin with certain
of  his  predecessors, notably Aristotle and Aquinas, it seems necessary
to  apply  another  kind of test. Here the problem is not so much one of
discovering  affinities  or disagreements, as one of determining whether
they are talking about the same thing and therefore, when they appear to
disagree, whether the issue between them is genuine. They do not seem to
conceive  a  species  in  the  same  way.  Certainly  they  use the word
differently.  This affects the way in which the whole problem of origins
is  understood. The controversies concerning the fixity or mutability of
species, concerning evolution and creation, and concerning the origin of
man involve genuine issues only if those who seem to disagree do not use
the  word  "species"  in  widely  different  senses. It is possible that
certain forms of life do not originate by descent from a common ancestor
and  do  not  derive  their status as quite distinct types from the mere
absence  of  intermediate  varieties—  varieties  which  once  must have
existed  but are now extinct. If such forms were to be called "species,"
the  word  would  have  a different meaning from the meaning it has when
applied  to  types  of pigeons, beetles, or rats. The first of these two
meanings may express the philosophical conception of a living species as
a  class  of  organisms  having  the same essential nature, according to
which conception there never could have been intermediate varieties. The
second  meaning  may  be  that of the scientific taxonomist in botany or
zoology  who  constructs  a  system  of  classification, genealogical or
otherwise.  On  this  meaning,  one  million  and  a  half  would  be  a
conservative estimate of the number of plant and animal types classified
by  the systematist as "species." In contrast, the number of species, in
the  philosophical sense of distinct essences, would be extremely small.
Danvin,  for  example,  says, "I cannot doubt that the theory of descent
with  modification  embraces  all the members of the same great class or
kingdom.  I believe that animals are descended from at most only four or
five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser

[515b]
number.  Analogy  would  lead me one step farther, namely, to the belief
that  all  animals and plants are descended from some one prototype. But
analogy  may  be  a  deceitful guide." It is immaterial to the theory of
evolution, he adds, whether this inference, "chiefly grounded on analogy
...  be  accepted."  The issue between Darwin and the theologians may or
may  not be genuine according to the interpretation of this passage, and
according  to the possibility of a double use of the word "species"— for
both  the small number of progenitors from which all the extant types of
plants  and  animals  have evolved, and for a very large number of those
extant  types.  If  the  theologians use the word "species" in the first
sense,  and Dar\vin in the second, they need not be in disagreement. The
"view  of  life" which Darwin attributes to certain eminent authorities,
he  himself does not flatly reject, namely, that life, "with its several
powers
[has] been
originally  breathed  by  the  Creator into a few forms or into one." Is
there  common ground here in the admitted possibility that life may have
been  originally  created  in  a small number of distinct forms and that
these  are  to  be  regarded as species in one conception, though not in
another.?  If  so,  the affirmation of a certain fixity to species would
apply  only  to  a  fewprimordial  forms.  Concerning  forms  which have
appeared  with  the  passage  of  time,  two  questions would have to be
answered. First, are they species in the philosopher's sense of distinct
and   immutable  essences,  or  species  in  the  scheme  of  systematic
biological  classification?  Second,  is  their  first  appearance at an
historical  moment  due  to  a  special  act of creation, to spontaneous
generation,  or  to  evolution  from  already  existing organic forms by
"descent with modification" .?* To join issue with Darwin, it would seem
to be necessary for the person answering these questions to use the word
"species"  in  the biologist's sense and at the same time to account for
the  historical  origin  of  the  ne\v  species  by  special creation or
spontaneous  generation.  But  in  the  tradition  of  the  great books,
theologians  like  Augustine  and  Aquinas  do  not attribute to God any
special acts of creation after the original production of the world,

[516a]
458  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  except to explain the origin of individual human
souls.  "Nothing  entirely  new  was  afterwards  made  by God," Aquinas
writes,  "but  all  things  subsequently  made  had in a sense been made
before  in  the  work  of  the  six  days . . . Some existed not only in
matter, but also in their causes, as those individual creatures that are
now  generated existed in the first of their kind. Species also that are
new, if any such appear, existed beforehand in various active powers; so
that  animals,  and perhaps even new species of animals, are produced by
putrefaction  by  the power which the stars and elements received at the
beginning.  Again,  animals  of  new  kinds  arise occasionally from the
connection of individuals belonging to different species, as the mule is
the offspring of an ass and a mare, but even these existed previously in
their  causes,  in  the  work  of  the  six  days."  Whether  or not the
theologian's  conception  of  an  historical development of the forms of
life  conforms to the evolutionist's hypothesis, even though it does not
offer  the same type of explanation, is a matter which the reader of the
texts  must  decide. But one issue, which still remains to be discussed,
can leave little doubt of a basic controversy between Darwin and some of
his predecessors, especially the theologians. It concerns the origin and
nature  of  man. It can be stated in terms of two views of human nature.
One is that man is a species in the philosophical sense, essentially and
abruptly  distinct  from brute animals; the other, that man is a species
in  the  biologist's  sense,  and  differs  from  other  animals only by
continuous  variation.  On  the  first view, either man would have to be
created,  in body as well as soul; or if the human species has an origin
which in part or whole involves the operation of natural causes, it must
be  conceived  as  emerging from a lower form of hfe. The rational soul,
Aquinas maintains, "cannot come to be except by creation." But it is not
only  man's  soul  which, according to Aquinas, "cannot be produced save
immediately  by  God."  He also insists that "the first formation of the
human body could not be by the instrumentality of any created power, but
was im-

[516b]
mediately from God." He does not reject the suggestion of Augustine that
the  human  body f ( may have preexisted in other creatures as an effect
preexists in its causes. But he adds the qualification that it preexists
in its causes only in the manner of a "passive potentiahty," so that "it
can  be  produced  out  of pre-existing matter only by God." A Christian
theologian  hke  Aquinas  might  entertain  the  hypothesis  of emergent
evolution   as  appfied  to  the  human  organism,  but  only  with  the
qualification  that  natural causes by themselves do not suffice for the
production  of  man.  On the second view, which is Darwin's, man and the
anthropoid apes have descended from a common ancestral form which is now
extinct,  as are also many of the intermediate varieties in the chain of
development—  unless, as it is sometimes thought, certain fossil remains
supply  some of the missing links. "The great break in the organic chain
between  man and his nearest allies, which cannot be bridged over by any
extinct  or living species, has often been advanced," Darwin admits, "as
a  grave  objection  to the belief that man is descended from some lower
form; but this objection," he continues, "will not appear of much weight
to  those who, from general reasons, believe in the general principle of
evolution.  Breaks  often  occur  in all parts of the series, some being
wide,  sharp  and defined, others less so in various degrees, as between
the  orang  and  its  nearest  allies— between the Tarsius and the other
Lemuridae  between  the  elephant, and in a more striking manner between
the  Ornithorhynchus  or  Echidna,  and all other mammals." Furthermore,
Darwin  insists,  no one who has read Lyell's Antiquity of Man "will lay
much  stress  ... on the absence of fossil remains"; for Lyell has shown
"that  in all the vertebrate classes the discovery of fossil remains has
been a very slow and fortuitous process. Nor should it be forgotten that
those regions which are the most likely to afford remains connecting man
with  some  extinct  ape-like creature, have not as yet been searched by
geologists."  On  either  of  these  two  conflicting views, the organic
affinities  between  man  and the most highly developed mammals would be
equally  intelligible,  though  they would be differently interpreted by
Aquinas and Darwin. But ac-

[517a]
cording  to  the  doctrine  of  man's  creation  by  God, or even on the
hypothesis  of emergent evolution, there need not be— strictly speaking,
there  cannot  be—a  missing  link between ape and man, for the emergent
species is a whole step upward in the scale of life. Man is thus not one
of   several  organic  types  which  have  become  species  through  the
extinction  of  intermediate  varieties, and hence he differs from other
animals  not  in  an accidental, but rather in an essential manner— that
is,  he  differs in kind rather than degree. This issue concerning human
nature  is discussed from other points of view in the chapters on Animal
and  Man.  Here  the  issue,  stated  in terms of man's origin, seems to
involve three possibilities: special creation, evolution by descent from
a common ancestor, and emergent evolution. But these three possibilities
apply not only to man, but to the origin of every species w^hich did not
exist  at  the  first moment of life on earth. The hypothesis of special
creation  does  not  seem to be held by the theologians, at least not in
the  tradition  of the great books. The hypothesis of emergent evolution
raises  questions  concerning  the factors—natural or supernatural—which
must  be  operative to cause the emergence of higher from lower forms of
organic  matter.  Whether  or  not  Aristotle  and Aquinas can supply an
answer  to  these questions in terms of their theory of matter's OUTLINE
OF   TOPICS   I.   The  classification  of  animals  la.  Comparison  of
genealogical   classification   with   other   types  of  taxonomy:  the
phylogenetic  series  lb.  The  criteria  for  distinguishing  races  or
varieties,  species,  genera,  and  all  higher  taxonomic  groupings 2.
Genetic  variation  in  the  course  of  generations  2a.  Comparison of
variation  under  conditions  of  natural  and  artificial  breeding 2b.
Characteristics  which  are  more  and  less variable genetically: their
bearing  on the distinction of races, species, and genera 3. The process
of heredity 3^. The inheritance of acquired characteristics: the use and
disuse of parts

[517b]
Chapter  24: EVOLUTION 459 potentiality for a variety of forms, Darwin's
theory  of  descent  with modification seems to be definitely opposed to
the  hypothesis  of  emergent  evolution. Speaking as a Darwinian, James
says that "the point which as evolutionists we are bound to hold fast to
is  that  all  llic  new  forms  of being that make their appearance are
really  nothing  more than results of ihc redistribution of the original
and unchanging materials . . . No new natures, no factors not present at
the  beginning,  are  introduced  at  any  later stage." In this dispute
between two theories of evolution, does not the solution depend in every
case  upon a prior question concerning the relation of the species under
consideration  whether  or  not it is possible for them to be or to have
been  developmentally  connected  by  intermediate  varieties?  If,  for
example,  the evidence were to prove that man and ape, as they now exist
in  the  world,  are  essentially  distinct—different  in  kind— then no
intermediate  varieties  could  ever  have  existed to account for their
descent from a common ancestor. If, on the oth&r hand, the evidence were
to  prove  that they differ only in degree, then no difficulty stands in
the  way  of the Darwinian hypothesis. The ultimate issue concerning the
origin  of  species  would  thus  seem to reduce to the problem of which
meaning of "species" applies to the organic types in quesPAGE 461 462

[518a]
460  THE  GREAT IDEAS ^c. Interbreeding and crossbreeding: hybridism and
sterility  4.  The  problem of evolution: the origin of plant and animal
species ^b. The fixity or the mutability of species 5^. The struggle for
existence:  its  causes  and  consequences  (i)  Natural  selection: the
survival of the fittest (2) The extinction of intermediate varieties 5^.
Competition  in  mating:  sexual  selection  sterility  6.  The facts of
evolution:  evidences  bearing  on  the history of life on earth 6a. The
geological  record : the significance of fossil remains existing species
organs  and  functions  ya.  The  doctrine of man's special creation: in
body, in soul historic man

[518b]
: PAGE 3^. The inheritance and variability of instincts 462 3^. Atavisms
and  reversions to ancestral type ^6z 3^. Marked and abrupt mutations in
a  single  generation  as  opposed to the continuous 4^. The question of
ultimate origins: the creation of primordial life in one or many 4c. The
origin  of  new forms of life: special creation, spontaneous generation,
or  descent  with  modification  from  older  forms 4^. The direction of
evolution:   progress   and  recession  464  5^.  The  geographical  and
physiological factors in breeding: accessibility, fertility, and 6b. The
geographical  distribution  of  the  forms  of  life  in relation to the
genealogy  of  6c.  Comparative  anatomy  and embryology: the meaning of
rudimentary  or  vestigial  7. The origin and development of man 465 jb.
The  theory of the evolutionary origin of man from lower forms of animal
life  descent  from  an  ancestor  common to man and the anthropoids (i)
Anatomical,  physiological,  and  embryological  evidences of an organic
affinity between man and other mammalian forms of life (3) Psychological
evidences:  the  human  mind  in  relation  to  animal  intelligence yc.
Biological evolution in the course of human generation: from prehistoric
to

[519a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, hk ii (265-28^] I2d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage begins in the loxver half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The classification of animals
\a.  Comparison  of  genealogical  classification  with  other  types of
taxonomy:  the phylogenetic series 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 28
546b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[486^i5]-cH 6 [491^5] 7b-12c esp ch
i [486^15487*1] 7b-d; BK V, ch i
[539^4-15] 65b; bk
VIII, CH I
[588^4]-ch 2
[590*19] 114d-116c /
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 2-4 165d-168c / Generation of Animals, bk ii,
ch i
[732*13733^17] 272c-274a; bk hi, ch
ii
[761*^14-24]
302c-d  30  Bacon:  Novum Organumy bk ii, aph 27, 158b-c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  SECT  23  274b-c  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,   31   d;   63d-64d;   207a-229a,c  esp  207a-212c,  215b-217b,
228c229a,c;  238b-239a / Descent of Man, 331a341d esp 332b-c, 337a-338c,
340d-341d  \b.  The  criteria  for  distinguishing  races  or varieties,
species,  genera,  and  all  higher  taxonomic  groupings  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 13
[14^32-15*8]
20c-d / Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[144*27-145*2]
197d 198c passim / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 28 546b-c

[519b]
Chapter 24: EVOLUTION 461 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[486*i5]-cH 6 [491*5] 7b-12c esp ch
i [486*15487*1] 7b-d; BK II, ch i [497V18] 19b,d-20a; BK IV, CH I
[523*30-^20] 48b,d
/  Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 4 [644*12-^15] 167d-168a; CH 5 [645^20-28]
169c-d / Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1290^25-36] 489d-490a
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 813a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 50, A 4, REP I 273b-274b; q 76, a 5, rep 3 394c396a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch vi 268b-283a passim, esp sect 7 270b,
sect  36-37  279a-b;  ch  x, sect 21 297a-b; ch xi, sect 19-20 304b-d 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 193a-200c esp 195d-200c /Judgement, 579b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  183c-d  49  Darwin: Origin of Species,
12c-13a;   24a-b;  25d-29a;  30d-31d;  55c-60a  passim;  64a;  136b137a;
145c-151a  passim,  esp 146c-d, 147b149a, 150c-d; 159c-160a; 207d-229a,c
passim,  esp  207d-210b;  234d;  241d-242a  /  Descent of Man, 331b-333a
passim;  342a-350b passim, esp342a-b,346d-347d * 2. Genetic variation in
the course ofgenerations 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 403b-d 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 15 [1390^24-31] 638a-b

[520a]
(2.  Genetic  variation  in  the course of generations.^ 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk ii, APH29l59b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 79b 42 Y^\y>T:
Judgement,  579b-c  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species.  6d-7a; 9a-31d esp
9a-12a,  23c-d,  29a-31d;  53b-59d  passim;  65a79d;  99a-103c esp lOOd;
149b-150c;  182d-183a;  234a-c / Descent of Man, 266a-271a esp 266a268a;
275c-d;  284c-285d  esp 285b-c; 347d348c 53 James: Psychology, 857b-858a
2a.  Comparison  of variation under conditions of natural and artificial
breeding  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 29 159b-c / New Atlantis,
211c-212a  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 7a-b; 9a-31d esp 9a-b, 12a-c,
24a-c;  40a-42d;  53b-55a;  65a66a;  117a-c; 149b-d; 233b-d / Descent of
Man,  377a;  486d  2b.  Characteristics which are more and less variable
genetically:  their  bearing  on  the distinction of races, species, and
genera 9 Aristotle: Parts ofAnimals, bk i, ch 4 167d168c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk hi, ch vi, SECT 14-17 272d-273a; sect 23-27 274b-276a
passim 49 DARw^N: Origin of Species, 24c-25b; 71d-75b; 78c-79d; 236b-d /
Descent  of Man, 342a; 372d-375a; 486d-488b 3. The process of heredity 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch 6
[585^29-586^14] llld-112b / Parts of Animals,
bk i, ch I
[640^15-28]
162c-d;
[641^27-42]
164d-165a / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 17 [72i^6]-cH 18
[724^13] 261b-264b; bk
iv, ch 3 [767^36]-cH 4 [770^27] 308d-312c 10 Hippocil\tes: Airs, Waters,
Places,  par 14 15a-b/ Sacred Disease, 155d-156a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [159-191] 3a-c; [592-598] 8b; bk iv [1209-1232] 60a-b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 367b-368a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 386d-387b;
391c-393b;  395a-396a;  425b-d;  446b-c;  455d456a  36  Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  191b-192b  42  Ka^t: Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin of Species, 10d-12c esp lla-b, lld-12a; 69c-71a passim; 222a-224b
/    Descent    of    Man,   375a-383a;   413d   [fn   61];   429d-430c;
500a-525aesp500a-502a,  511a-b;529d-531a,c;  590c-d 54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure   Principle,   653b-c   "ia.   The   inheritance   of  acquired
characteristics:  the  use  and  disuse  of  parts 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi,
708d-709a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch 6
[585^29-37] llld-112a/ Generation ofAnimals,

[520b]
462 THE GREAT IDEAS 2a to 3c bk I, CH 17
[721^18-722^1]
261c-d; ch 18
[724-3-7] 264a
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places, par 14 15a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 81, A 2 164d-165c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 367c 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  455d-456a 42 Y^ast: Judgement, 580a 49
Darwin:  Origin of Species, Ic; 10d-12c; 66a69c esp 66a-c, 69c; 82d-85c;
103c-116d  passim, espll5d; 119c-120a; 223c; 227c-228b/Z)(fy<:^^ of Man,
258d-259a;   269b-271a;  283a-284b;  299a-c:  318a-c;  319a;  320b-321b;
358d-359a;  587d-588a  53  James:  Psychology, 52a; 691a-b; 890b-897a 54
Freud:  General  Introduction, 594d-595a / Ego and Id, 70 7 d- 708b "hb.
The  inheritance  and  variability  of instincts 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  hi  [741-753]  39c-d  42  KA^iT: Judgement, 580a 49 Darwin:
Origin of Species, Ilia; 119a-135a,c esp 121b-122d, 131c-134d; 236d-237a
/ Descent of Man, 288a-d; 292c-d; 304b,d
[fn
5];  318a-319a passim; 506d-507a 53 James: Psychology, 691a-b; 718a-720b
esp   718b;   722b-725a   passim;  851b;  890b-897a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,   591d-592b;   594d-595b;   613a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure
Principle, 651d-654a / Ego and Id, 70 7c- 708b esp 708b / War and Death,
758a-d  esp  758d  3c.  Interbreeding  and  crossbreeding: hybridism and
sterility   6   Herodotus:   History,  bk  hi,  121d-122a  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 8 [1033^ 29-1034^1] 557a 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk vi, ch ii
[566^26-30] 92c; CH 23 [577^5]-cH 24 [577^29]
103a-c;  bk  viii,  ch 28 [606^20-607*9] 132b-c; BK IX, CH I [608*31-34]
133d;  ch  32  [619*7-11] 144c / Parts ofAnimals, bk i, ch i [641^27-39]
164d-165a / Generation ofAnimals, bk ii, ch 4
[738^26-35] 279c-d; ch 7
[746*29-^20] 287c288a; ch 8 288c-290a,c
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [700-710] 23d-24a; [920-924] 26d;
bk  v  [878-924] 72c73a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 73, A I,
rep  3  370a-371a  28  Harvey: On Ani?nal Generation, 386d-387b; 392b-c;
395b-d;  425c  30  Bacon:  Aoz'ZiW  Organum,  bk ii, aph 30 159c-d / New
Atlantis,   211c-212a   42   Kant:   Judgement,   581d-582a   43   Mill:
Representative  Government,  426d-427a  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species,
14a-c;  16b-d;  23c-d;  47c-50c;  136a-151d;  230b-231b /Descent of Man,
342a-b; 344b-345c esp 345b,d
[fn i4];356a-b;482b-483b

[521a]
;  3d  to  4r  Chapter 24: EVOLUTION 463 3</. Atavisms and reversions to
ancestral type 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch 6
[585^32-34] 112a / Generation of Animals, bk
I,  CH  18  [722'*8-ii]  262a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [768''9-N]  309c-310a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[12181225] 60a
49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 12a-c; 16a-d; 73b-c; 75b-78c; 149d-150c;
236b   /   Descent  of  Man,  271c-275c;  325c;  331b;  375c'd;  557a-c;
587a;590b-c  3^.  Marked  and abrupt mutations in a single generation as
opposed  to  the  continuous  accumulation  of  slight and imperceptible
variations  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 29 159b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  of Species, 3a-b; 10c; 24b-c; 92c-d; 117a-118d; 235b-c; 2^Qd-2Ma
/  Descent ofMan, 442a-b ; 487a-488a passim ; 538b-539a 590d-591a passim
4.  The problem of evolution: the origin of plant and animal species 4a.
The question of ultimate origins: the creation of primordial life in one
or many forms; the original generation of life from inorganic matter Old
Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-12,20-28;  2:49,19-23  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of
Solomon,  1:14—  (D)  OT,  Book^ of Wisdom, 1:14 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk v, ch i
[539*i6-^i3]65b-66a; ch II [543^18-19] 70b; ch
15 [546^17-35] 73c; cH 15 [547bi2]-cH 16 [548^ 7] 74b-75b; ch 19
[550^31-551^13] 77d-78a;
[551^19-552^27]
78c-79c; ch 31
[556h25]-cH
32 [557^14] 83c-84b; bk vi, ch 15-16 95a-96a / Generation of Animals, bk
i, ch i [715^18716^1] 255b-256a; ch 16 [721^3-11] 260d-261a; bk II, ch I
[732^8-14]  272d-273a;  ch 3 [737* 1-5] 277d; BK III, CH 9 299b-300a; ch
ii  [762^  28-763^19]  303d-304b  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk v
[783-836] 71b-72a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 45 123a / City
of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  10, 348b-c; ch ii 349a-b; ch 21 357a-b; ch 23-27
357d-360a,c;  BK  XIII,  CH 24 373d-376a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 69, A 2 361c-362c; qq 71-72 367a-369d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
bk  v,  105a-b  28  Harvey  :  Motion  of  the  Heart,  299b / On Animal
Generation,  338c-d;  400d-401a;  41  2c413a; 428c-d; 449a-b; 454d-455a;
468b'469c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [131-640] 220a231a 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk  hi,  542b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  167b  42 Kant:
Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579b-580a; 582b-c

[521b]
47 Gofthe: Faust, part ii [7851-7864] 191b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
2d-4a  passim,  csp  3c d; 240c-241d; 243d 53 James: Psychology, 95b-98a
csp  95b,  98a  54  Freud:  Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 652d 4b. The
fixity   or   the   mutability   of   species  Old  Testament:  Genesis,
1:11-12,20-28; 2:49,19-23 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[715*^2-17] 255c-d; BK II, CH
i
[73 1*^24-732*1 1]
272a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[577598]
8a-b; bk ii
[700-710]
23d-24a; bk v
[916-924] 73a
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 23, A 7, ANs 138d-140a; q 98, a
i,  ans  516d517c  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 29-30 159b-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi, ch III, sect 17 258d-259b; ch vi,
sect  15-17  272d-273a;  sect 23-27 274b-276a passim; bk IV, ch IV, sect
13-16  326d-328d  passim  42  Kast:  Judgement,  579b-580b; 581b-582c 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  la-5d passim, esp la-2a, 2d-3b, 5a-b; 7d;
160d-180d  passim,  esp  160d, 165d, 167a-c; 239d-240b 4c. The origin of
new  forms of life: special creation, spontaneous generation, or descent
with   modification   from   older   forms   Old   Testament:   Genesis,
1:11-12,20-28;  2:49,19-23 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk hi, CH
II  [762^28-763*19]  303d-304b  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk v
[783-836]  71b-72a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 13, 350bc; BK
XVI,  cH  7-8 427a-428c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 69, A 2,
ANS  361c-362c;  g  71, a i, ans and rep i 367a-368b; q 72, a i, ans and
rep  5 368b369d; q 73, a i, rep 3 370a-371a; q 74, a 2, ANS 373d-375a; q
115,  a  2  587c-588c;  q 118, a 3, REP I 603b-604b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 338d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 29 159b-c 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  \v,  167b 42 Kant: Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579b580a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of Species, la-5d passim, esp la-d, 3a, 5c-d; 6d-7d esp
7d;   31d;  60d-61a;  64a;  74a-b;  78a-c;  85b-c;  92d;  182a-184d  esp
183b-184b;  198b-204d esp 198b-c, 204d; 217d-219a; 228c-229a,c esp 228c,
229c;  234d243d  esp  239b-240d,  242d-243d  / Descent of Man, 253a-c 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a esp 689d

[522a]
(4.  The problem of evolution: the origin of plant atid animal species.)
Ad.  The  direction  of  evolution:  progress  and  recession  36 Swift:
Gulliver^  part  ii,  79a-80a;  part  hi, 121a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  178a-d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, Ic; 41c-42a;
60b62a;  63b-64d;  96b-103c  esp  96b-98a,  99a-c, 102d-103c; 176b-178a;
243b-d / Descent of Man, 340d-341d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 217c
53  James:  Psychology,  95b  54  Freud:  Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
651d654c  esp  653d-654a / Civilization and Its Discontems, 768d-769a 5.
The  theory  of  evolution:  the  origin  of  new  species from a common
ancestry  49  Darwin: Origin ofSpecies, 6a-243d esp 6d-7d, 23c-d, 32a-c,
116d-118d,  228c-243d 53 James: Psychology, 95b-98a esp 95b, 98a 5a. The
struggle  for  existence:  its  causes  and  consequences  6  Herodotus:
History, bk hi, 112d-113a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ix, ch i
[6o8^i9]-CH 2 [610^20] 134a-136b
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  58a-b;  79b  38  Rousseau: Inequality,
334b,d-337d passim; 348d-349d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 33c-34a
49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 7b; 32a-64d esp 33a-b, 38b-39a,c, 63b-64d;
182d-183a;  243c-d  /  Descent  ofMan,  275d-277c;320a-328c  passim, esp
320a-321b,  328b-c;  350d-351a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 573c;
592a-b   /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  791c-d  5a(l)  Natural
selection:  the survival of the fittest 8 Aristotl^e: Physics, bk ii, ch
8
[198^16-33]
275d-276a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v [855-877] 72b-c 38
Rousseau:  /;2^^Miz///y,335a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 510a-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  2a-b;  7b-d;  32a-c;  40a-64d  esp 40a-c, 44d-47c,
63b-64d; 95d97a; 134d-135a,c; 214b-d; 233d-239c esp 233d234a, 234c, 235b
/  Descent  ofMan, 277c-286d passim, esp 277c-278a, 284c-285c; 320a-328d
esp   327c-328c;  424a-425d  passim;  430d-432c;  442d-443b;  525b-527c;
554d-555b  53 James: Psychology, 90b-93a esp 92a-b; 94a-b; 208a-209b esp
209b 5a{2) The extinction of intermediate varieties 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk  v  [837-877]  72a^  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 5a;
52c-53a; 58b60a esp 58b 59a; 63d-64d; 80b-82d; 84a-b;

[522b]
d  b  I!  464  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4^  to 6c 97a-b; 152a-153a; 168d-171a;
231d-232d  /  D^- scentofMan, 341a; 350b-356a 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its Discontents, 768d769a 5</(3) Difficulties with the theory of natural
selection:  its  limitations  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 80a-118d esp
80a-b;   131c-134c;  152a-153a;  160d-166a,c  passim,  esp  165d-166a,c;
230a-233b  / Descent of Man, 284d-285c 5b. Competition in mating: sexual
selection  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  361b-363b  28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  454a-c;  477b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 166a38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  346b-c  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 43d-44c / Descent of
Man,  359c-d;  364a-589d esp 364a-368b. 373b-375a, 381d-383a, 432c-434d,
486a-c,  529a-530c,  561a-d, 582d-585d, 588d-589d; 593d-596a;598a-600a,c
53  James  :  Psychology,  14b  5c.  The  geographical and physiological
factors   in   breeding:  accessibility,  fertility,  and  sterility  12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk ii [700-729] 23d-24b; bk v [837-854]
72a-b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 229d 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, lOa-c;
47c-52b; 68d-69c; 136a-151d esp 136a-b, 141b-142c, 143b-145c, 150d-151d;
230b-231c / Descent of Man, 344b-345c; 351c-355d; 365b-c 6. The facts of
evolution:  evidences  bearing  on  the history of life on earth 6a. The
geological   record:  the  significance  of  fossil  remains  36  Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii,  79a-b  42  Kant:  Judge?nent, 583d-584c 49 Darwin:
Origin  ofSpecies,  80c-81a; 152a-180d esp 179b-180d; 231d-233a; 237a-c;
242c-243a  6b.  The  geographical  distribution  of the forms of life in
relation  to  the  genealogy  of  existing  species 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  51a-52b  passim; 80c-82d; 181a-206a,c esp 204d-206a,c; 231b-c;
237c-238b  /  Descent  ofMan,  343c-344a  6c.  Comparative  anatomy  and
embryology: the meaning of rudimentary or vestigial organs and functions
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 9
[491^26-35] 13c; BK IV, CH 8 [532^34-533'^M]
59d-60a;  bk  vii, ch 7 112b-c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 375 b-c;
451c-453a  passim  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  7, 139c 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 334b,

[523a]
7/0 Ic 42 Kant: Judgement, 579b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 82d-94c;
177cl178a;  212a  229a,c;  238c-239a:  241b  d;  242c  /  Descent ofMan,
255c-265d;  271c  275c  passim,  esp  274a-b, 275a-c; 278c-284b; 300a-b;
333b334c;  338b-340c; 347d-348c 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
652a  7.  The  origin  and  development of man 7a. The doctrine of man's
special  creation:  in  body,  in  soul Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27;
2:7,18,21-23; 5:1-2 / Job, 10:8-12 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:4-6; 100 esp 100:3;
119:73; 139:14-16 {D) Psalms, 8 esp 8:5-7; 99 ^sp 99"3' ii873' 138:14-16
/  Isaiah,  29:15-16;  43:7;  45:12— (D) Isaias, 29:15-16; 43:7; 45:12 /
Jeremiah, 27:5— (Z)) Jeremias, 27:5 / Malachi, 2:10— (D) Malachias, 2:10
Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 1:14; 2:23; 6:7; 10:1; 15:10-11— (£)) OT,
Bool^ofWisdom,  1:14;  2:23; 6:8; 10:1; 15:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:1;
33:10—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1; 33:10 / 77 Maccabees, 7:23,28-(D)
OT,  77  Machabees, 7:23,28 New Testament: Matthew, 19:4 / MarJ^, 10:6 /
Acts,  17:24-26  /  7 Corinthians, 15:45 / Colossians,y.io 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 3 108b-c; CH 6, lilac; ch 13 120b-c 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk vii, ch 29-30, 261a-c; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; bk xii, ch
20-27 355b-360a,c; bk xiii, ch 24 373d-376a,c; bk xxn, CH I, 586d-587b /
Christian  Doctrine, BK I, CH22, 629c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  72, A I, rep 1,3-4 368b-369d; q 73, a i, rep 3 370a-371a; q 75, a
6, rep i 383c-384c; qq 90-92 480c-491d; q 118 600a-604b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvi [8590] 77d; xxv [34-78] 91d-92a; paradise, vii
[64-78]
115d-116a;
[121-148]
116b-c; xiii
[31-87] 125d-126b
22 Chaucer: Monies Tale [14,013-020] 434b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi,
176d;  part  iv, 251a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41c; 54b-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56a-b  /  Meditations, III, 87b-88b 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [650-659] 107b; BK II
[345-353] 118b-119a; bk
vii
[139-161]
22Ca-b; [499-550] 228a-229a; bk viii [452-499] 242a-243a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6,  26b;  CH VI, SECT56 36d 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  187d-188a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 228a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, epilogue ii, 689b-d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 562d

[523b]
Chaptf.k 24: EX'OLUTIGN 465 lb. The theory of the evolutionary origin of
man  from lower forms of animal life: descent from an ancestor common to
man  and  the  anthropoids  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334b,d  42 Kant:
Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579b c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[8245-8264]
201a;
[8321-8326] 202b-203a
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 253a 341 d esp 253a-254d, 255a-c, 265a-d,
285c-286d,   331a-b,   337a-338c,  340d-341d;  590a-592a;596d-597a,c  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c690a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  509d-510a;  562d  7^(1)  Anatomical,  physiological,  and
embryological  evidences  of  an  organic affinity between man and other
mammalian  forms  of life 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ii, ch 8-9
24c-25b / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[689^31-35] 221d
28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 451c-453a passim; 482b-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 334b,d 42 Kant: Judgement, 579b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
255a-265d;  271a275c; 278c-284b; 300a-b; 333b-335a; 338d340c; 563a-564a;
587b-c;   590b-591d   53   James:   Psychology,   8a-52b   passim  7^(2)
Paleontological evidences: the missing link in man's ancestry 49 Darwin:
Descent  ofMan,  336a-337a 7^(3) Psychological evidences: the human mind
in relation to animal intelligence 42 Kj^^t: Judgement, 602b,d [fn i] 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 287a-320c esp 287a-303d, 319b-d; 591d-592a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 6S9c690a 53 James: Psychology,
8a-52b  passim,  esp 41b, 49b, 51a-52b; 95b-98a Ic. Biological evolution
in  the  course of human generation: from prehistoric to historic man 12
Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk v [925-987] 73b-74a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  79b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-330Q; 334b,d337d 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man, 266a-275d passim; 323b-324d: 336c; 338d-339a; 342a-359d
esp  342b-343c, 347b-348c, 356a-359b; 578a-589d esp 586a-589a; 590c-591c
54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 782a- b
[fn
i]; 785b [fn i]

[524a]
466 THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES ic(2); Man la-ic, 4b-4c, 8-8c; Mind
3a-3b;  Soul  2c(2)-2c(3).  6; Time 8a. C. R. Darwin. Foundations of the
Origin  of  Species  .  Evolution,  Old and Netv . A Posthumous Essay on
Instinct  .  Note-BooJ^s  E. Darwin. Zoonomia Spencer. Progress: Its Law
and  Cause  Title  Essay Wallace. Contributions to the Theory of Natural
Hobhouse.  Mind  in  Evolution  Selection  Lyell.  Principles of Geology
Bergson.  Matter  and Memory . The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity
of

[524b]
For:  Other  discussions  of  the  classification of animals, see Animal
2a—2c;  Life and Death 3—3b; and for the distinction between species and
genera  in relation to definition and classification, see Definition la,
2b,  2d;  Relation 5a (4); Same and Other 33(1). Other considerations of
the  problem  of  heredity,  see Animal 10; Family 6b; Habit 3e. Matters
relevant  to  the  origin  of  life, and of the major forms of life, see
Animal  ib,  8a-8b;  Life  and  Death  2,  3a.  Another treatment of the
conflict  of  organisms  in  the  struggle for existence, see Opposition
Matters  relevant  to  the  origin of man and to his affinity with other
animals, see Animal icEvolution in relation to the idea of progress, see
Progress  2;  and  for matters bearing on social and mental evolution in
human  history, see History 4b; Man 9c; Mind 3c; Progress ib, ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in Great Boo\s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into two groups: L Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the  pubUcation of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  ofthe  Unconscious,  (c)  x  L Lewes.
Problems  of  Life  and  Mind  Augustine. De Genesi ad Litteram Romanes.
Mental Evolution in Animals Goethe. Metamorphose der Pflanzen S. Butler.
Darwin Among the Machines . The Variation of Animals and Plants Under C.
S.  Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 13-17, Domestication 287-3 ^ 7
Engels.  Dialectics  of  Nature Frazer. The Golden Bough, part ii, ch 7;
part  vii  Weismann.  Studies  in the Theory of Descent ^I . Essays upon
Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological  Linnaeus.  Systerna Naturae Problems
CuviER.  The Animal Kingdom . Evolution and Ethics Chambers. Vestiges of
the  Natural  History  of  CreaCope.  The  Primary  Factors  of  Organic
Evolution  tion  Fiske.  Essays:  Historical  and  Literary,  vol ii (9)
Tennyson.  Loc^sley  Hall  Vries.  The  Mutation  Theory . In Memoriam '
Dewey.  The  Influence  of Darwin on Philosophy, • Morals in Evolution .
Creative  Evolution  Man  Driesch.  The  Science  and  Philosophy of the
OrganMendel. Experiments in Plant Hybridization ism Bagehot. Physics and
Politics Poulton. Essays on Evolution

[525a]
Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION  467  G  ALTON.  Natural Inheritance . Essays in
Eugenics  I).  H.  Scott.  The  Evolution of Plants Bateson. Problems of
Genetics  Henderson.  The  Fitness of the Environment D. W. Thompson. On
Growth  and  Form  Shaw.  Man  and  Superman . Bac}{ to Methuselah C. L.
Morgan.  Emergent  Evolution  L.  T. More. The Dogma of Evolution Smuts.
Holism   and   Evolution  McDouGALL.  Modern  Materialism  and  Emergent
Evolution  H.  G.  Wells,  J.  Huxley,  and  G.  P. Wells. Reproduction,
Genetics  and  the Development of Sex M. R. Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk
ii, ch 3

[525b]
T.  H. Morgan. Evolution and Genetics . The Physical Basis of Heredity .
The  'Theory  of  the  Gene  . The Scientific Basis of Evolution Marett.
Head,  Heart  and  Hands in Human Evolution DoBZHANSKY. Gcnctics and the
Origin  of  Species  Adler. Probletnsfor Thomists: The Problem ofSpecies
Mayr.  Systemattcs  and  the  Origin  of  Speciesfrom the Viewpoint of a
Zoologist  J.  S.  Huxley.  Evolution,  the  Modern  Synthesis,  ch 10 .
Evolutionary  Ethics  B.  Russell.  Religion  and  Science, ch 3 . Human
Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and  Limits, part I, CH 4 Keith. A New Theory of
Human Evolution

[526a]
EXPERIENCE is regarded as a source of knowledge. It is also spoken of as
containing  what  is  known.  Sometimes  it  is  identified  with sense-
perception;  sometimes  it  involves more—memory and the activity of the
imagination.  Sometimes  it  includes thoughts, feelings, and desires as
well,  all  the  contents  of  consciousness,  every  phase of mental or
psychic  life.  The  temporal flow of experience is then identified with
the  stream  of consciousness. Experience may connote something which is
private  or  public,  subjective or objective something which no man can
share  with  another or something which is common to all men who live in
the  same  world and who are acquainted with the same objects. There are
still  other  divisions of experience intuitive or aesthetic experience,
religious  experience, and mystical experience. Experience is said to be
that  which  m.akes  a  man expert in an art or in a sphere of practical
activity.  A  man  is  better  able to do or make that which he has much
experience  in  doing  or  making.  He is also better able to judge what
should  be  undertaken or what has been accomphshed by others as well as
by  himself.  In  this  connection  experience is called practical, both
because  it  is  the  result of practice and because it is a means to be
used in directing action. But it is also praised for the opposite reason
as  som.e  thing  to  be enjoyed for its own sake, serving no end beyond
itself  unless  it  be  the  enrichment of life by the widest variety of
experiences.  These  are some of the myriad meanings of "experience"—not
all,  but  those which occur with major emphasis in the tradition of the
great  books. No author uses the word in all these senses. Some of these
senses are contra-

[526b]
: Chapter 2.y. EXPERIENCE INTRODUCTION dictory. According to the context
of  the  discussion  or the subject matter under consideration, the same
author  will  shift  from  one  meaning  to another. For example, in his
account  of  the  origin  of science, Aristotle says that "out of sense-
perception  comes  to  be  what  we  call  memory, and out of frequently
repeated memories of the same thing develops experience; for a number of
memories  constitute  a  single  experience."  The  further  product  of
experience— "the universal stabilized in its entirety within the soul" —
is  obtained  by  abstraction  and  the  related  act  of  induction  or
generaHzation.  Art or science arises, Aristotle writes, "when from many
notions  gained  by  experience, one universal judgment about a class of
objects  is  produced."  Hence  it  can  be  said,  he thinks, that from
experience  "originate  the skill of the craftsman, the knowledge of the
man  of  science, skill in the sphere of coming to be and science in the
sphere  of  being."  In  the  study  of nature, experience, according to
Aristotle, is essential for "taking a comprehensive view of the admitted
facts"  which  can come only from dwelling "in intimate association with
nature  and  its  phenomena."  In  the  context  of ethical or political
problems,  he  treats  experience  as  the basis for a prudent judgment,
which  is  not "concerned with universal only," but "must also recognize
the particulars." This fact, Aristotle writes, explains "why some who do
not  know," but who "have experience, are more practical than others who
know."  In  the  field  of poetry, as in moral matters, it is the man of
experience,  according  to Aristotle, who can best judge what is good or
bad;  he  can  "judge rightly the works produced . . . and understand by
what  means  or  how  they are achieved, and what harmonizes with what,"
whereas "the inexperienced must 468

[527a]
Chapter  25:  be content if ihcy do not fail to sec whether the work has
been  well  or ill made." Hobbes and William James also use the word for
the  possession of expertness or sound judgment in practical affairs, as
well  as  in  connection with the origin or nature of knowledge. Hobbes,
like  Aristotle,  says  that  "much memory, or memory of many things, is
called  Experienced  He connects it with prudence. It is that knowledge,
he  writes,  which  "is  not attained by reasoning, but found as well in
brute  beasts as in man; and is but a memory of successions of events in
times  past,  wherein the omission of every little circumstance altering
the  effect, frustrates the expectation of the most prudent." For James,
however,   experience   is   usually   identified  with  the  stream  of
consciousness. ^'Experience moulds us every hour," he writes, "and makes
of  our  minds  a  mirror  of  the timeand-space-connections between the
things in the world." He distinguishes it from conception, reasoning, or
thought,  and  associates  it  with  sensation  and feeling. "The way of
'experience' proper is the front door," he writes, "the door of the five
senses."  For  the  most  part,  experience is a term in I psychological
analysis,  with  implications for the development of theoretic knowledge
or  practical  wisdom.  That  is  the way it is chiefly used by Aquinas,
Bacon,  Descartes,  Spinoza,  Locke,  and  Hume,  as well as the authors
already  mentioned.  It  is  still a term in the dimension of psychology
when  it  is  used  by  Plotinus  and  by the theologians to discuss the
mystical  union  of  the soul with God. But with Hume experience also is
reaHty  or, in his phrase, the realm of "matters of fact and existence,"
as  opposed  to  "relations of ideas." He tends to identify the order of
nature with the succession of events in experience, though he also seems
to  conceive a "pre-established harmony between the course of nature and
the  succession of our ideas." Nature, he goes on to say, "has implanted
in  us an instinct, which carries forward the thought in a correspondent
course to that which she has established among external objects." Hume's
difficulty  or  indecision  with regard to the objectivity of experience
does  not appear in Kant, for whom experience ceases to be psychological
in any subjective sense of that word.

[527b]
EXPERIENCE 469 The order of nature— the object of the theoretic sciences
is  the  order  of  experience.  In  Kant's  technical sense of moglichc
crfahriingy  nature  is  the  realm  of  all  possil)le  experience. His
distinction  between judgments of perception and judgments of experience
differentiates  what  for  other writers is subjective sense-experience,
from knowledge of reality or of objects shared by many minds. Experience
is  the  domain  of  such  public  objects  precisely because its sense-
materials are formed and ordered by the structure of the mind itself— by
the  forms  of  intuition  and  the categories of the understanding in a
synthesis  which  Kant calls the "transcendental unity of apperception."
Without  this  synthesis,  experience  "would  be  merely  a rhapsody of
[Perceptions,  never fitting together into any connected text, according
to  rules of a thoroughly united (possible) consciousness, and therefore
never   subjected   to   the   transcendental  and  necessary  unity  of
apperception."  Though  it  may  not  seem  possible, William James goes
further  than  Kant in the conception of experience as a realm of being.
Kant  does not think that all possible experience circumscribes reality.
"That  which  is  not  phenomenon,"  he  writes, "cannot be an object of
experience;  it can never overstep the Hmits of sensibiHty, within which
alone  objects  are  presented  to  us."  In contrast to this phenomenal
reality  with  which  he  identifies  experience, Kant posits a noumenal
world—a  world  of intelligible or supra-sensible beings. To this realm,
Kant  writes, belong those "possible things which are not objects of our
senses,  but are cogitated by the understanding alone." Since the things
Kant  calls ding-an-sich are unconditioned, that is, not subject as they
are  in  themselves  to  the forms of intuition or the categories of the
understanding,  they  cannot  have  an empirical or sensible reaUty, but
only  an  intelligible  existWilliam James goes further in his Essays in
Radical  Empiricism, when he takes experience as equivalent to the whole
of  reality,  including  the  actual  and the possible or imaginary, the
concrete  and  the  abstract,  the  objective  and  the  subjective. All
differentiations  must  be made within experience, and experience itself
is neutral with respect to all distinctions— re-

[528a]
470  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ceptive  of  all.  There  can  be  no meaningful
distinction  between experience and some other realm of existence. It is
in  this  all-inclusive  sense that experience is said to be the central
term  in the philosophy of John Dewey when it functions as mind does for
Hegel,  substance  for  Spinoza,  or being for Aquinas and Aristotle. We
have  gone  from  one  extreme  to  another  in  passing  from  a purely
psychological to something like a metaphysical conception of experience.
These  are  opposite  in  a  way which suggests the contrast between the
practical  and  the  aesthetic values of experience— the actively useful
and   the   intrinsically   enjoyable.   At   least   the   metaphysical
identification  of  experience with all existence seems analogous to the
aesthetic  ideal  of  a life which embraces every variety of experience.
There  is  some intimation of this ideal in the lust for adventure which
motivates  Odysseus and his men. Dante, in fact, finds the secret of his
character  in the ardor of Odysseus "to become experienced of the world,
and  of  the  vices  of  men,  and of their virtue," which leads him "to
pursue  virtue  and  knowledge,"  even to the point of his "mad flight."
There  is  some  suggestion of this ideal of experience in the unbounded
vitality  of Gargantua and Pantagruel, and in the enterprise of the Wife
of  Bath,  in  Chaucer's  tale.  But the great poetic expression of this
ideal  is  written  in  Faust—in the worlds of experience Mephistopheles
opens  to the man who has wagered his soul for one ultimately satisfying
moment.  Whatever to all mankind is assured, I, in my inmost being, will
enjoy and know. Seize with my soul the highest and most deep; Men's weal
and  woe  upon  my  bosom  heap; And thus this self of mine to all their
selves  expanded,  Like  them I too at last be stranded. The basic issue
concerning the role of experience in the origin of knowledge, especially
the organized knowledge of the arts and sciences, turns on whether it is
the  source or only a source. It is rarely if ever supposed that nothing
can  be  learned  from experience, or that everything worth learning can
come  to  be  known  entirely  apart  from  experience. During the early
centuries of Christianity, devoutly religious men

[528b]
preached  that  God has revealed to man all he needs to know in order to
live   well  and  be  saved.  But  this  extreme  position  rejects  the
constructions  of  reason  as well as the materials of experience. Among
philosophers  and  scientists,  concerned with what man can learn by the
exercise  of  his  own  powers,  the controversy over experience usually
involves  a  distinction between the senses and the reason or intellect.
As  indicated  in  the  chapters  on Idea, Mind, and Sense, whether this
distinction can be validly made is itself a major issue in the tradition
of  the  great  books.  Those  who  make  it,  however,  tend  to regard
experience  as  something which results from the activity of the senses.
For  them  the  problem  is  whether  our  ideas— the general notions or
concepts  that  enter  into  our scientific judgments and reasoning—come
from sense-experience, which either is or originates from the perception
of  particulars.  The contrast between the particular and the universal,
between  percept,  sense-impression,  or concrete image on the one hand,
and  concept  or  abstract  idea, on the other, lies at the heart of the
problem.  One  possibility is that the mind, by processes of abstraction
or  induction,  somehow  draws all its concepts and generalizations from
experience.   Aquinas   is   representative  of  this  view.  He  adopts
Aristotle's notion that the intellect is "like a tablet on which nothing
is   written."  This  tabula  rasa  depends  upon  the  senses  and  the
imagination for the materials out of which concepts are formed. "For the
intellect  to  understand  actually,"  Aquinas writes, "not only when it
acquires  new  knowledge,  but  also  when  it  uses  knowledge  already
acquired,  there is need for the act of the imagination and of the other
powers."  Without experience the mind would remain empty, but experience
itself  does  not  fill  the  intellect  with ideas. The activity of the
sensitive  faculty  is  not  by  itself  the  cause  of  knowledge.  The
perceptions  and  images  furnished by sense-experience, Aquinas writes,
"need  to be made actually intelligible," and this requires the activity
of the intellect, not merely its passivity in receiving impressions from
experience.  For  this  reason,  he  concludes,  "it cannot be said that
sensitive  knowledge  is  the  total  and  perfect cause of intellectual
knowledge, but

[529a]
rather  that  it is in a way the material cause." Although experience is
the  indispensable  source  of  the  materials  on  which  the intellect
actively  works,  knowledge worthy of the name of science or of art does
not  come  from  experience  alone.  Thus  we  see  that those who, like
Aquinas,  I  affirm that there is nothing in the intellect which was not
previously  in  the  senses  do  not mean to imply that the materials of
senseexperience  reach the intellect untransformed. On the contrary, the
primary  contribution of the intellect is the translation of experienced
particulars into universal notions. Nor do those who, like Bacon, affirm
that  the  principles  of  knowledge  are  obtained  by  induction  from
experience  necessarily  imply that all knowledge is directly drawn from
experience.  To the extent that deductive reasoning is a way of learning
new  truths,  the  truths  thus  learned  derive  from  experience  only
indirectly.  Their  direct source is truths already known, which must in
turn have come from experience by induction. Harvey criticizes those who
misconceive  the  part  which  reason  should  play in relation to the I
senses.  In the field of his own inquiries, "some weak and inexperienced
persons,"   he  writes,  "vainly  seek  by  dialectics  and  far-fetched
arguments,  either  to  upset  or  establish  things that are only to be
founded on anatomical demonstration, and believed on the evidence of the
senses.  .  .  . How difficult it is," he continues, "to teach those who
have  no  experience, the things of which they have not any knowledge by
their  senses!"  As  in  geometry,  so in all the sciences, according to
Harvey,  it  is  the  business  of  reason "from things sensible to make
rational  demonstration  of  the things that are not sensible; to render
credible  or  certain  things abstruse and beyond sense from things more
manifest  and better known." Science depends upon both reason and sense;
but  sense,  not reason, is the ultimate arbiter of what can be accepted
as  true.  "To  test  whether anything has been well or ill advanced, to
ascertain  whether  some falsehood does not lurk under a proposition, it
is  imperative  on  us,"  Harvey  declares, "to bring it to the proof of
sense, and to admit or reject it on the decision of sense."

[529b]
Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE  471  The  foregoing  views are not a necessary
consequence  of  the  distinction  between  the  faculties  of sense and
reason.  The  theory  of  innate  ideas presents another possibility. As
expressed  by  Descartes,  for example, this theory holds that there are
"purely intellectual [ideas] which our understanding apprehends by means
of  a  certain inborn light." Hence it would seem that experience can be
dispensed  with,  except  for its value in dealing with particulars. But
for  most  of the writers who take this view, experience, in addition to
providing  acquaintance  with  particulars,  acts as the stimulus or the
occasion  for the development of the seeds of knowledge implanted in the
mind  at birth. Although he rests his metaphysics on the innate ideas of
self  and  God,  Descartes also appeals to experimental knowledge in the
sphere  of  natural  science. To answer such a question as, "what is the
nature  of  the  magnet?"  the  inquirer  must  "first  collect  all the
observations  with which experience can supply him about this stone, and
from  these  he  will  next  try  to  deduce its character." The extreme
position  which denies any role to experience can be taken only by those
who think that the growth of actual knowledge from innate ideas requires
no outside impetus; and perhaps also by those who make ideas the objects
of  the mind's intuitive apprehension. It is questionable whether anyone
goes  to this extreme without the qualification that, for particulars at
least, sense-experience is knowledge. The other extreme— that experience
is  the  only  source  of knowledge— is approached by those who deny the
distinction  in  faculties,  and substitute for the duality of sense and
reason,  each with its characteristic contribution to human knowledge, a
distinction between the function of perceiving and that of reworking the
received  materials.  Though in different ways. Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley,
and  Hume all appear to take this position. They represent, according to
James, "the empirical school in psychology." He tries to summarize their
view  by  saying  that  "if  a// the connections among ideas in the mind
could  be  interpreted as so many combinations of sensedata wrought into
fixity  .  . . then experience in the common and legitimate sense of the
word would be the sole fashioner of the mind." If,

[530a]
472  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  in  other  v/ords,  all  that  is  done with the
sensations, impressions, or ideas—whatever term is used for the original
data   of  experience—consists  in  their  reproduction  by  memory  and
imagination,  and  their  comparison,  combination,  and  connection  in
various  ways  to  produce  complex  ideas,  judgments,  and  trains  of
reasoning,  then the entire content of human knowledge can be reduced to
elements  derived  exclusively from experience. Whether this position is
taken  with  or without qualification depends on the disposition that is
made  of  the problem of universals or abstractions, which is more fully
discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Idea,  Sense,  and  Universal. Locke's
treatment  of abstract ideas and the special consideration given by Hume
to  the  concepts of mathematics suggest that there are kinds or aspects
ofknowledge  which  cannot  be accounted for by reduction to experience.
Both  men  introduce  a  certain  qualification  upon  their empiricism.
However  slight  that may be, it does not appear in Hobbes and Berkeley,
for  they completely deny the existence of abstract or universal notions
in the mind. If ''abstract," "universal," or ''general" applies to names
alone,  then  the  mind  or  understanding adds nothing to, and does not
radically  transform,  the  materials  of  experience.  The  controversy
concerning  experience  and knowledge can also be stated in terms of the
opposition  between  the a priori 2ind the a posteriori. These terms are
sometimes  used to signify what is possessed before and what comes after
or  from  experience,  and  sometimes they are used to indicate, without
reference  to  the  time  order,  what  is  independent  of  and what is
dependent  upon experience. The distinction between the a priori and the
a posteriori is not made in the same way with respect to propositions or
judgments  and  with  respect to reasoning or inference. The distinction
and  its  significance  for  science and philosophy are discussed in the
chapters  on  Judgment and Reasoning. It is sufficient here to point out
that  an  a  priori judgment is not determined by experience nor does it
need  empirical  verification.  It might at first be supposed that those
who agree in thinking that experience is just one

[530b]
not  the  only—source of knowledge would also agree that some judgments,
especially  the  basic  propositions  of science, are a priori. But this
does not appear to be the case. Bacon, for example, Hke Aristotle, holds
that  the  principles  of  the various sciences are derived by induction
from  experience. "There are and can exist," he writes, "but two ways of
investigating and discovering truth. The one hurries on rapidly from the
senses  and  particulars  to  the most general axioms, and from them, as
principles  and their supposed indisputable truth, derives and discovers
the  intermediate axioms. . . . The other constructs its axioms from the
senses  and particulars, by ascending continually and gradually, till it
finally  arrives  at the most general axioms." All axioms, on this view,
are  a  posteriori  propositions. Descartes and Kant, while differing in
the  terms  of  their  analysis,  think,  as we have seen, that the mind
itself  provides  the ground for certain judgments which are therefore a
priori.  It  does  not  even  seem  to  be  the case that those who make
experience  the  only  source  of knowledge regard all propositions as a
posteriori.  Hume's  treatment  of  mathematical propositions and James'
treatment  of axioms or necessary truths seem to be the exceptions here.
There  is  still  another  way  in  which  the  issue can be stated. The
question   is   whether   human  knowledge  extends  to  objects  beyond
experience,  to  things  or  beings  which  are  not  sensible and which
transcend all possible experience. Again it might be supposed that those
who  take  an  a  posteriori  view of the origin of knowledge would also
limit  apprehension  to things experienceable. But Aristotle and Aquinas
seem  to  say  that  the  origin  of  knowledge from experience does not
restrict  the  knowable  to things capable of being experienced. Aquinas
cites  Aristotle's  work  on  the  heavens  to  show that "we may have a
scientific  knowledge"  of  things  we  cannot  experience,  "by  way of
negation  and  by their relation to material things." He would hold what
is  true  of  astronomy  to  be  even  more  the case in metaphysics and
theology.  Even  though all our concepts are abstracted from experience,
we  can  by  means  of  them  reach  beyond the sensible world to purely
intelligible realities— to immaterial and non-sensible beings or aspects
of being. Locke, who may be thought

[531a]
even  more  emphatic  than Aristotle or Aquinas in his insistence on the
empirical origin of knowledge, goes as far as they do in affirming man's
knowledge  of  God and the soul. Hume, in contrast, holds that knowledge
may  go beyond experience only if it is knowledge of the relation of our
ideas,  as  exemplified in the science of mathematics. Precisely because
mathematics  is  not knowledge of matters of fact or real existence, its
propositions are, according to Hume, "discoverable by the mere operation
of  thought,  without  dependence  on  what  is anywhere existent in the
universe."  But  with  regard  to  "matters  of  fact," Hume thinks that
"experience is our only guide." Any science which claims to be knowledge
of  reality  or existence rather than of the relations between ideas, is
thus  limited  to  the realm of experienceable objects. According as the
objects   of  a  science  fall  within  experience,  so  also  must  its
conclusions  be  verified  by reference to experience. Experience is the
ultimate  test  of  what  truth  there is in the propositions of natural
science.  Only the propositions of mathematics can have a validity which
does   not  require  empirical  verification.  By  these  criteria  Hume
challenges  the  validity  of  metaphysics  or  natural  theology.  Such
disciplines  claim to be knowledge of real existences, but their objects
are  not  experienceable  and  their  conclusions  cannot be empirically
verified.  The  existence  of  God and the immortahty of the soul may be
objects  of  faith,  but they are not verifiable conclusions of science;
nor  for that matter can metaphysics give us scientific knowledge of the
ultimate  constitution  of the physical world if that involves knowledge
of  substances  and causes which lie behind the phenomena and outside of
experience. "All the philosophy in the world," Hume writes, "and all the
religion . . . will never be able to carry us beyond the usual course of
experience."  Kant, like Hume, fimits theoretic knowledge to mathematics
and  the  study  of nature. A metaphysics which pretends to know objects
outside  the phenomenal order cannot be defended. "The understanding has
no power to decide," he writes, "whether other perceptions besides those
which belong to the total of our possible experience
[exist], and consequently

[531b]
Chapter 25: EXPERIENCE 473 whether some other s])here of matter exists."
What  transcends  all  possible  experience,  in  other words, cannot be
known,  at least not in the manner of the speculative sciences; only the
moral  sciences,  proceeding  in a different fashion, have access to the
realm  of  the supra-sensible. Kant's position seems to resemble Hume's.
But  it involves a quite different conception of mathematics and natural
science,  especially  the  latter,  which  Kant  divides  into  pure and
empirical physics. Kant identifies "pure physic" with the "metaphysic of
nature"  in  distinction  from  the  "metaphysic  of  morals," the one a
theoretic,  the  other  a  practical science. For Kant the principles of
both mathematics and pure physics are a priori rather than a posteriori;
the objects of both are objects of actual or possible experience. In the
classification  of  sciences, the natural sciences are usually set apart
from   mathematics,  as  well  as  from  metaphysics,  by  being  called
"empirical"  or  "experimental."  These  names  signify  not  merely the
inductive  method  by  which  the knowledge is obtained from experience;
they  also  imply  that hypotheses, however formulated, and conclusions,
however  reached,  must  be  verified by the facts of experience. Newton
states it as a rule of reasoning "in experimental philosophy
[that] we are
to  look  upon propositions inferred by general induction from phenomena
as   accurately  or  very  nearly  true,  notwithstanding  any  contrary
hypotheses  that  may  be  imagined,  till  such time as other phenomena
occur,  by  which  they  may  either be made more accurate, or liable to
exceptions."  In  similar tenor, Lavoisier says that "we ought, in every
instance,  to  submit our reasoning to the test of experiment, and never
to  search  for  truth  but  by  the  natural  road  of  experiment  and
observation."  The  two words "empirical" and "experimental" should not,
however, be used interchangeably. No science can be experimental without
being  empirical,  but,  as  the  chapter  on  Astronomy  indicates, the
converse  does  not  appear to be true. There seem to be three different
types  of  experience  from  which  knowledge  can  be  derived: (i) the
ordinary everyday experiences which men accumulate without making any

[532a]
474 THE GREAT IDEAS special effort to investigate, explore, or test; (2)
the  special  data  of  experience  which  men  collect  by  undertaking
methodical  research and making systematic observations, with or without
apparatus; and (3) experiences artificially produced by men who exercise
control  over  the  phenomena  and  with  respect  to which the observer
himself  determines the conditions of his experience. "Those experiences
which  are used to prove a scientific truth," James writes, "are for the
most  part  artificial  experiences  of the laboratory, gained after the
truth  itself  has been conjectured." Of these three only the last is an
experimental experience. The first type of experience may be employed by
the  scientist,  but  it is seldom sufficient or reliable enough for his
purposes.  The  distinction between the empirical sciences which are and
those  which  are  not  experimental turns on the difference between the
second  and  third types. It is not always possible for the scientist to
perform  experiments, as, for example, in astronomy, where the phenomena
can  be  methodically  observed  and  exactly  recorded,  but  cannot be
manipulated or controlled. Among the great books of natural science, the
biological  writings  of  Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, and Darwin, the
astronomical  works  of Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, and Newton, and the
clinical  studies  of  Freud  are examples of scientific works which are
more or less empirical, but not experimental. In contrast, Galileo's Two
New  Sciences,  Newton's Optics, Harvey's Motion of the Heart and Blood,
Lavoisier's  Elements of Chemistry, and Faraday's ExperimentalResearches
in  Electricity  represent  empirical  science  which  has  recourse  to
experimentation  at  crucial  points.  On  the side of their production,
experiments are like inventions. They do not happen by chance or without
the  intervention  of  art.  They  are usually performed under carefully
controlled conditions and by means of apparatus artfully contrived. This
explains  the  interplay  between  technology and experim.ental science.
Progress  in  each occasions progress in the other. On the side of their
utility,  experiments  seem  to  serve  three  different  though related
purposes in scientific work. In those branches of physics

[532b]
which are both mathematical and experimental, the experiment enables the
scientist  to  make  exact  measurements  of  the  phenomena  and  so to
determine  whether  one  or  another  mathematical  formulation fits the
observable  facts  of  nature. Investigating accelerated motion, Galileo
seeks  not  only  to  demonstrate its definition and its properties, but
also  to  show  that  "experimental results . . . agree with and exactly
correspond  with  those  properties  which have been, one after another,
demonstrated  by  us."  The  experiment  of  the  inclined  plane yields
measurements  which  exempfify  those ratios between space and time that
are  determined by one rather than by another mathematical definition of
the acceleration of a freely falUng body. The experiment is thus used to
decide  between  two  competing mathematical theories, choosing that one
"best fitting natural phenomena." In those sciences, Galileo writes, "in
which mathematical demonstrations are applied to natural phenomena . . .
the  principles, once established by well-chosen experiments, become the
foundation  of the entire super-structure." Concerned with the phenomena
of  heat,  Fourier  makes  the  same  point  concerning  the relation of
mathematics  and  experiments.  "Mathematical  analysis,"  he says, "can
deduce  from  general and simple phenomena the expression of the laws of
nature;  but  the  special  application  of  these  laws to very complex
effects   demands  a  long  series  of  exact  observations"  for  which
experiments  are needed. In addition to testing hypotheses and providing
measurem.ents  whereby  mathematical  formulations  can  be  applied  to
nature,  experiments  function  as  the  source of inductions. A crucial
experiment  constitutes  a single clear case from which a generafization
can  be  drawn  that  is  applicable  to  all  cases.  Newton's  optical
experiments  are  of  this  sort.  He calls this use of experiments "the
method   of   analysis."   It   consists   in  "making  experiments  and
observations, and in drawing general conclusions from them by induction.
.  .  .  And  although  the arguing from experiments and observations by
induction be no demonstration of general conclusions, yet it is the best
way  of  arguing  which the nature of things admits of." A third use for
experiments  is  in  the  exploration  of  new  fields of phenomena, for
purposes

[533a]
of  discovery  rather than of induction or vcriExperimental exploration,
apart  from the fication. Hypotheses may result from such exdirection of
hypotheses,  seems  to  be  a  procedure  plorations,  but  in the first
instance,  the experiof trial and error. I^^xperimentation in this sense
mentation may be undertaken without the reflects what Hippocrates had in
mind  when  he  guidance of hypotheses. This employment of spoke of "the
experiment  perilous."  In  the experimental technique is illustrated by
Parawork  of Hippocrates at the very beginning of day's remark that "the
science of electricity is empirical science, recourse to experiment, far
in  that  state  in  which every part of it requires from being the most
prized  technique,  signified experimental investigation, not merely for
the  a  lack  of  scientific  knowledge.  Only the physidiscovery of new
effects, but what is just now cian who could not cure the patient by art
of  far  more  importance, the development of tiie based on science took
the  risk of experimenting means by which the old effects are produced."
—of  proceeding  by  trial  and  error.  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1. Various
conceptions  of  experience 476 2. Experience in relation to the acts of
the   mind   2b.   The  empirical  sources  of  induction,  abstraction,
generalization 2c. The transcendental or innate structure of the mind as
a  condition  of  experience  3.  Experience  in  relation  to organized
knowledge  :  art  and  science  7,a. Particular experiences and general
rules  as  conditions  of  expertness or skill: the contrast between the
empiric  and  the  artist  4. Experience as measuring the scope of human
knowledge  4^.  The knowability of that which is outside experience: the
supra-sensible,   the   noumenal   or  transcendent  5.  The  theory  of
experimentation  in scientific method 5^. Experimental verification: the
testing  of  hypotheses ^c. Experimental measurement: the application of
mathematics  6.  The  man  of  experience  in  practical affairs 482 6a.
Experience  as indispensable to sound judgment and prudence 6b. The role
of  experience  in  politics:  the  lessons  of  history  7. Mystical or
religious  experience:  experience  of  the  supernatural  8. Variety of
experience as an ideal of human life 483

[533b]
Chapter 25: EXPERIENCE 475 PAGE

[534a]
b  476  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk 11 [265-283] 12d.
tently  rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. , Various
conceptions of experience 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*3-8] 25a
/  Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 [99^34-100*9] 136b-c / Metaphysics,
bk i, ch i
[980*^25981^9] 499b-d
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 54, a 5 288a-d; q 58, a 3, rep 3
301d-302d; q 64, a I, REP 5 334a-335c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  112, A 5, ans and rep 1,5 359c-360c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i,  50d;  part ii,128c; PART IV, 267b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 516b-524a 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 334a-335a 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 22c /
Discourse,  part  I,  44a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 5 373d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 1-8 121a-123a esp sect 2
121b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30  418c  35 Hume: Human
Uiiderstanding,  sect iv, div 20-SECT viii, div 74 458a-484c passim, esp
sect  IV, Div 28-SECT V, DIV 38 460d-466c, SECT vii, DIV 58-61 476a-478a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-15c;  45d-46a;  47d48a;  53b-54b; 56d-57b;
58c-59b;  65d-66d;  72c-73a;  176d-177a;  225c-226b  / Practical Reason,
308a-

[534b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Sy7nposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions :
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  cerBible References: The references are to book, chapter, and
verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in title of books
or  in  the  numbering  of chapters or verses, the King James version is
cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a {D), follows; e.g.. Old
Testament:   Nehemiah,   7:45  {D)  II  Esdras,  J  '.^6.  Symbols:  The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 53
James:   Psychology,  185b-187b;  232b-238b  esp  235a-236a;  260a-261a;
317b-318a; 852b-858b 2. Experience in relation to the acts of the mind 7
Plato:  Meno,  179d-183a  /  Phaedo, 224a-225a; 228a-230c / Republic, bk
vii, 392c-393c / Theaetetus, 534d-536b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk  ii,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i 499a500b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [379-521] 49a-51a esp [469-521]
50b-51a  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 12-36 74b-80d esp par 14
74d-75a,  par  26 78a-b, par 31 79c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  54,  a  5  288a-d;  q  58, a 3, rep 3 301d-302d; q 64, A I, REP 5
334a-335c;  q 84, aa 5-8 446c-451b; PART i-ii, Q 40, A 5 795d-796c; a 6,
ans  and REP 3 796c-797a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 112,
A  5,  ANS  and  REP  1,5  359c-360c  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation,
332a-335c  esp  334c-d  31  Descartes: Rules, xii, 22c- 23a / Discourse,
part  III,  50b-d  /  Meditations, i 75a-77c esp 75d-76c/ Objections and
Replies, 229d-230d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40-42 387a388c

[535a]
2a  to  Ic  Chapter 25: EXPERIENCE 477 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch i, SECT 2-5 121b-122b; sect 20-25 126d-127d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
la  4a,c:  14a  c; 22a, c; 23a-24a; 34a-c; 39a-c; 42a; 45d 46a; 47c 48a;
53b-54b;  58a-59b;  61a  64a;  66a-d; 72c 85d csp 72c-74b; 89c 91 d; 93d
94b;  98c;  109d110a; 115b-c; 153a-c; 199b-c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253a  b; 282b c / Practical Reason, 308a-b; 329b-c / Judgement,
461a-462d;  472c-d;  482d 483d; 492c-d; 516b; 551a-552c; 562d-563b; 570b
572b;  603d;  604b-c  53 James: Psychology, 2b-3a; 149b-152b esp 152a-b;
299b-300a; 314a; 317b-319a; 325a; 369a; 767b-768a; 851a-897b esp 851a-b,
897a-b  2a.  Memory  and  imagination  as  factors  in  or  products  of
experience   7  Plato:  Pliaedo,  228a-230c  /  Theaetetus,  523d524b  /
Philebus, 621a-c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[99*^34-100*6] 136b-c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch i
[980*28-98 i'^i]499a-b
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 12-36 74b80d esp par 14 74d-75a,
par  26  78a-b, par 31 79c-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50d; part ii,
128c;  part  iv,  267b  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 332a-335c esp
334c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  40, schol i 387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
i,  SECT  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  2-8  121b123a; sect 20-25
126d-127d; ch xii, sect 1-2 147b-d; ch xviii, sect i 174a; sect 6 174c-d
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect i 413a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d-342a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 41c-42b; 54b-56c; 58a-b; 61a-64a; 66a-d;
76d-77a;  80c-d;  93d-94b;  173b-174a  /  Practical  Reason, 319c-320b /
Judgement, 482d-483d; 492c-d; 493c-d; 506a511a esp 509d-510a; 528d-530b;
542b-543c  53  ]maes:  Psychology, lb-3b; 282a-291a esp 285b; 327a-329a;
332b-336a;  385a-b;  424b: 433a434a; 480a-b; 520a-b; 677b-678a 54 Freud:
Interpretation   ofDreams,   363c-364b  2b.  The  empirical  sources  of
induction,  abstraction, generalization 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk
i, ch 30
[46*
18-28] 64a; bk ii, ch 23
[68*^15-29] 90b-c
/ Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[7 1*1 -8 ]9 7a; ch
18 lllb-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 2 [90*24-30] 123b-c; ch 7
[92=^34-^1]
126b; ch 19 136a137a,c / Topics, bk i, ch 12 148d; ch 18
[108^7-12] 152d; BK
II, CH 7 [113^31-33] 158d; bk VIII, CH I [155^35-156*7] 211d-212a; [156^
10-18]  212c-d  /  Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; BK VIII, CH I [252*19-^7]
335d-336b / Heavens,

[535b]
BK III, CH 7 [306*6-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14] 411c d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, en i [98o''25-9.Si"i2| 499b-c / Soul, BK I, CH I
[402''ii-403''2j 63 Id 632a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, cm 4
[1095*30
''8] 340c; BK VI, CH 8
[1142*12-19] 391b; ch
ii
[ii4 3*34-W)]392d-393a//^Ad'/onc-, bk
ii, cm 20
[1393*25-^3] 641a
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, cm 27 650a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, 79, AA 3-4 416a-418c; q 84, a 6 447c-449a; o 85, A I
451c-453c;  a  3, ans 455b 457a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
9,  A  4  766b-  767b;  o  12  776c-779d  passim  28  Harvey:  On Animal
Generation,  332a  335c  esp  334c-d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
43d-44c; 57b-d; 59c/ Novum Organum, bk i, aph 19-26 108b-d; APH 51 lllc;
aph 69-70 116a- 11 7a; APH 100-106 127c-128c; bk ii, aph 10-15 140c-149a
31  Descartes:  Rules, 11, 2d-3a; vii, lOc-llc; XII, 24a-b; xiv, 28a-b /
Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c / Objections and Replies, 167c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,   part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2  387b-388b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i,  SECT  15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch xi, sect 8-9
145b-c;  CH  xxxii,  sect 6 244b-c; bk hi, ch III, sect 6-8 255c-256a 35
Berkeley:   Human   Knowledge,   sect   107  433d-434a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect hi, div 19, 458a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b
42  Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-b; 45b-46a / Judgeme?7t, 562d-563b 45 Faraday
:  Researches  in  Electricity,  659a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  182d183c; part iv, 361a-b 53 James: Psychology, 303a; 329a-331b;
674a677a  passim; 858a-865b esp 860b-862a, 864a865a 54 Freud: Instincts,
412a  2c.  The  transcendental  or  innate  structure  of  the mind as a
condition  of  experience  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 14a-15c,
23a-33d,   41c-42b,   48d-51d,   53b-55a,   56d59b,  66d-93c,  99a-101b;
112d-113a;  115d;  128c-d;  166c-171a;  173b; 176d-177a; 192a-b; 199b-c;
207c-d;  213d-215a  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 282b-c; 283b /
Practical  Reason,  308a-b; 309d-310a; 350b-c / Judgement, 471b-c; 482d;
492c-d;  515d-516b;  520a;  552b-c;  562d-563b;  570b-572d  esp  570c-d,
572b-c; 573a-c; 603d; 604b-c; 612c-d 53 James: Psychology, 232b-238b esp
232b-233b, 235a-b; 260a-261a; 627a-635a passim, esp 629a-631a; 851a-890a
esp 851b-862a, 865a868a, 881b
[fn 3], 889a

[536a]
478  (2.  Experience  in  mind.)  relation to the acts of the 2</. The a
priori and a posteriori in judgment and reasoning 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72^25-33]
99c;  BK  II,  CH  19  136a-137a,c  /  Physics,  BK  I,  CH  i  259a-b /
Metaphysics, bk i, BK VII, CH 3
[I02933-°I2|
CH I 499a-500b 552a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
[, Q2,
REP  2  lOd-lld; A 2 lld-12c; q 3, 17c-18b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  112,  A  5> A 5, ANS and rep 1,5 359c-360c 28 Harvey: On
Animal   Generation,   332a-335c   31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3a  /
Meditations,  III  81d-89a esp 88c-d / Objections and Replies, PROP i-ii
132b-c;  215b-c;  224b,d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop ii 358b-359b;
PART II, PROP 40, scHOL 2 388a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
i, SECT 15-16 98d-99c; sect 23 101b-102a; bk IV, CH IX, sect .1 349a; ch
xi,  sect  13-14  357d-358c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div
20-SECT  V,  DIV  38 458a-466c esp sect iv, div 30, 462a; sect x, div 89
490b-c; sect xi 497b-503c passim; sect xii, div 131-132 508d-509d passim
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 14a-20c, 23a-24a, 25b-26b, 27b-28b,
29d-33d,  35b36a, 41c-42b, 46a-48d, 57d-59b, 64b-66d; 108b-d; 110a-113b;
115d-120c; 123d-124b; 134c-d; 141d-142c
[antithesis];
146a;  170d171a;  172c-173a;  174a;  177d;  179c-182b; 190c191a; 192a-b;
199a;   209b-d;   211c-218d;  224a227a;  228b-d;  230c-231c;  236d-237a;
244d245a  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 253a254d esp 253b, 254c-d;
268b-d;  283b / Practical Reason, 307d-308b; 309b-d; 329d-330c / Science
of  Right,  405b-d  /  Judgemejit,  461a475d  esp  465c-467d, 474b-475d;
570b-572b;  600d-603d  esp  603a-b  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 445d-447a
passim;  475b,d  [fn i] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 182d183c
53  James:  Psychology,  851a-890a  esp  851a-b, 859a-861b, 889a-890a 3.
Experience  in relation to organized knowledge: art and science 7 Plato:
Gorgias, 253a 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30
[46^
18-28] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Heavens, bk
hi, ch 7 [306^6-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2 ,d-.
[316*5-14] 411c-d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch i q».? 499a-500b ' 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch
9 [1180^13-1181^ 12] 435b-436a,c

[536b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2d to 3a 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par i 3b /
Aphorisms,  sect  i,  par  i  131a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[46-105]  108b-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-61a;  part  ii,
128d-129b  28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 322d-323d; la324c-d / On
Animal  Generation,  331b-335c  esp  334c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  16a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 98 126d-127b 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11,  2d-3a  /  Discourse,  part  I,  44a-c;  part  vi,  61b-d  /
Meditations,  i 75a77c esp 75d-76c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40,
schol   2   388a-b   33  Pascal:  Pensees,  396  240b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch i, SECT 1-8 121a-123a esp sect 2 121b-c; ch xi,
SECT  15  146d-147a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 30-32 418c-419a;
sect  43  420d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20-SECT V, div
38 458a-466c passim, esp sect V, DIV 36, 465a-d
[fn
i],  465c; sect vii, div 60 477a-c; sect viii, div 65 479b-480a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  14a-15c; 72c-85d 72c-74b, 82a-b / Judgement, 562d-563b 44
Bosw  EL.!.:  Johnson, 281b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [522-601] 15a-16b
54   Freud:   General   Introduction,   449c-451b  esp  2>a.  Particular
experiences  and general rules as conditions of expertness or skill: the
contrast  between the empiric and the artist 7 Plato: Charmides, 6d-7b /
Phaedrus,  136b-c  /  Gorgias,  253a;  261a-262a;  280d-282b; 287d288b /
Republic,  bk i, 303a-304a / Theaetetus, 516a / Philebus, 633a-c / Laws,
bk iv, 684c685a; bk ix, 745a-b 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk , CH 30
[46^
BK II, CH 19 BK I, CH I 18-28] 64a / Posterior Analytics,
[100^3-9]
136c / Metaphysics,
[980^25-982^1] 499b-500b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102^15-26]
347c; BK II, ch i 348b,d-349b passim; bk hi, ch 8
[1116^3-15]
362d-363a; bk vi, ch i
[1138^25-34]
387b; bk x, ch 9
[1180^131181^12] 435b-436a,c /
Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281^40-1282^6] 479d
10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1-8 la3b; par 20 7b-d / Epidemics,
bk  hi,  sect hi, par 16 59b-c / Surgery, par i 70b / Articulations, par
10,  94d  /  The  Law  144a-d  10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 9,
195c196a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk iv, ch 3 676a-d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 60c-d 25 Montaigne: £:^^^>'J, 66a-b;368a-377d passim,
esp 377a-d; 450d-451a; 523c-524a

[537a]
3>b  to  4a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of learning, 5b-6a; 48d49a; 53a-b;
56c-57b;  74b-d;  82c-d  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph O4 114b; bk 11, aph
44-52  175d-195d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61b-c 35 Hlme: Human
Understanding, sect v, div t,6, 465a-d
[fn
i];   465c;  sect  viii,  div  65,  479d480a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,
296b,d-297c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix, 361d-365c 53 James:
Psychology,  666b-667a;  673a-674b;  689b-690a 54 Freud: Psycho-Analytic
Therapy, 125a 3^. The issue concerning the role of experience in science
7  Plato:  Phaedo, 224a-225a; 228a-230c / Republic, BK VI, 383d-388a; bk
vii,  391b-398c  /  Timaeus,  455a-c  /  Theaetetus, 534d-536b / Seventh
Letter, 809c-8l0d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30
[46*
18-28] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[78^31-79*16]
108b-c;  CH 18 lllb-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Physics,
bk I, ch I 259a-b: ch 8
[i9i''24-34] 267a-b /
Heavens, bk hi, ch 7
[306*6-18]
397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*514] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch i [980^25982*1] 499b-500b; bk xi, ch 7
[1064*4-9]
592b  /5ow/,  bk I, CH I [402^11-403*2] 631d632a 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk hi, ch 2
[511^10-25] 35a-b / Parts of Animals, bk hi,
CH  4 [666*7-10] 193d / Generation of Animals, BK III, CH 10 [760^27-32]
301d-302a  /  Ethics,  BK  X,  CH  9  [1180^13-1181^12]  435b-436a,c  10
Hippocrates:  Ancient Medicine, par 1-8 la-3b / Aphorisms, sect i, par i
131a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, AA 6-8 447c-451b; q 96,
a  i,  rep  3  510b511b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 9, A 4
766b-767b;  q  12  776c-779d passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60a-d;
part  ii,  129a;  part  iv,  267a-b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  260c-261c;
285c-288a;  291b-292d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-b; bk i, 6a-7a; BK
II,  27b-c  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131a138b passim 28
Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-268d; 280c / Circulation of the
Blood,  322d-323d;  324c-d  / On Animal Generation, 331b-335c; 411c-d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 5b-c; 16a; 44c; 57b-d / Novum Orgaiium
105a-195d  esp  BK  I,  APH  64 114b, APH 95-103 126b-128a 31 Descartes:
Rules, 11, 2d-3a; vii, 10c-12a; XII, 24a-b / Discourse, part vi, 61b-62c
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol 1-2 387b-388b

[537b]
Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE  479  34  Newton: Principles, bk in. rile hi iv
270b271b / Optics, BK in, 543a b 34 Huycens: IJght, en i, 553a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii, sect 7^ 204c-d; sect 6-7 205b
206a;  SECT  28-29 211b-212a; sect :52-:57 212c-214b; BK in, CH XI, SECT
21-2^  304d  305b;  bk  iv, ch III, SECT 14 316b-d; sect i6 317a-c; sect
25-29  321a-323a  passim;  ch  vi,  sect  13  335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-1 ^
360d-362d;  ch xvi, SECT 12 370b-371a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
30 418c; SECT 58-59 424a-b; sect 104 433a-b; sect 107 433d-434a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  iv, div 20-SECT V, DIV 38 458a-466c passim;
sect vii, DIV 48, 471b-c; DIV 60 477a-c; sect viii, div 65, 479b-c; sect
xi,  div  111-113  501b-502d esp div 112 501c-502a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
5a-13d;  14a-c;  15c-16c;  31b-d;  46a-b;  58a-b; 66d-67b; 68a-69c;85ab;
86d-87b;   94b-95a;  211c-218d  /  F«;2^.  Pnn.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
253a-254d  esp 253b, 254b-c;' 263b-c: 273a-b / Practical Reason, 295b-d;
312c-d;  329d-330c;  331a-332d  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b /
Judgement,  562d-563b  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445b-447a passim; 475b,d
[fn  i]  45  Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, Ic2b; 6d-7a,c; part
hi,  87b-c  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  774d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3, lOa-lla / Philosophy of History,
intro,  156c190b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 684a 53 James:
Psychology,  385a-b; 677b; 862a-884b esp 862a-865a, 867a, 884b 54 Freud:
Narcissism, 400d-401a / Instincts, 412a-b / General Introduction, 545b-d
/  New  Introductory Lectures, 815a 4. Experience as measuring the scope
of  human  knowledge  4a.  The  knowability  of  that  which  is outside
experience:  the  supra-sensible,  the noumenal or transcendent 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  94a;  113b-114a,c  /  Republic,  bk  vi, 383d-388a / Timaeus,
447b-d / Critias, 478b-d / Parmenides, 489d-490d / Theaetetus, 534c-536b
8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [298^15-24] 390a-b / Memory and
Reminiscence, ch i
[449^30-450*10] 690c-d
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[644**
21-645*5]  168c-d  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [265-328] 4b-5a;
bk ii [308-332] 19a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 2-4, 323a324a
/ Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 7 626b-c

[538a]
d  (4.  Experience  as  measuring  the scope of human knowledge, ^a. The
knowability of that tvhich is outside experience: the suprasensible, the
noumenal or transcendent.^ 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, aa
1-2  10d-12c;  QQ  12-13  50b-75b;  q  32  175d180d;  Q  77,  a I, REP 7
399c-401b;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c;  a  6,  rep  3  447c-449a; qq 87-88
464d-473a;  q  89, a 2 475a-d; q 94, aa 1-2 501d-504a 20 Aquinas: Sumfna
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 112, A 5 359c-360c; part hi suppl, q 75, a 3,
rep  2  938a-939c  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv [28-48] Ilia 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 54b-c; 78d-79a; PART II, 163a-b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  291b-294b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 39d-40a; 41b-d;
96d-97b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b-54b / Objections and
Replies,  215b-c  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [552-587] 331a332a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 2-10 121b-123d; sect 19-24
126a-127c;  CH XII, sect 1-2 147b-d; ch xxiii, sect 2-3 204b-d; sect 6-7
205b-206a;  sect  29  211d212a;  sect  32-37  212c-214b;  bk  hi,  ch vi
268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  9-1  i  270d-271d; bk IV, CH III, SECT 14
316b-d;  sect  16 317a-c; SECT 25-29 321a-323a passim; ch xii, sect 9-12
360d-362c passim; ch xvi, sect 12 370b371a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  27  418a-b;  sect  135-142 440a-441c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  ii  455b457b; sect iv, div 20-sect v, div 38 458a466c passim; sect
vih,  div  81 487a; sect xi 497b-503c passim; sect xii, div 119, 505a-b;
DIV  127  507b-c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308c42 Kant: Pure Reason,
la-4a,c;  15c-16c;  19a;  19d-20c csp 20a; 25b-26b; 27b-33d; 49c-59b esp
53b-54b;  86c-88c;  89c-91d;  93c-99a;  101b-108a,c;  112b-d; 113c-115a;
117b-118a;   119a-209d  esp  121a-128b,  130b-145c,  153a-c,  164a-165c,
173b-192d, 200c-209d; 218d-223d; 227a-235a esp 231c-232b; 247a-b / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 260d-261b; 281c282d; 283d-287d / Practical
Reason,  291a293b  esp  292a-c;  296a-d;  307d-314d  esp 307d308b, 309b,
310d-311d;  320c-321b; 327d329a; 335c-337a,c; 337a-c; 349b-353d / Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 383c-d; 383b,d-384a,c / Judgement, 461a-c; 465a-c;
474b-475d;   500c-d;   506d-507a;   510b-c;   543a;  543d-544a;  547b-d;
551a-552c;  560c;  562a-564c;  570b572b  esp 570c-571c; 574b-577a; 579a;
581ab; 584c-d; 588d-589c; 594d
[fn
i]; 599d600d; 603a-604b; 606d-607c; 609b-610a; 611c613a,c

[538b]
b 480 THE GREAT IDEAS 4a to 5 4b. Verification by experience: experience
as  the  ultimate test of truth 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 395c-396d; bk
ix, 421a-422b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[270^1-13]
361c-d; BK III, ch 7 [306^6-18] 397b-c / Soul, bk I, CH I [402^15-403^2]
631d-632a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk hi, ch 4
[666^7-10] 193d
/ Motion of Animals, ch i
[698*10-15] 233a / Generation of Animals, bk
III,  CH  10  [760^27-35]  301d-302a  / Ethics, bk II, CH 7 [1107^27-32]
352d-353a; bk x, ch i
[1172^34-^7] 426b; CH
8
[1179^17-22] 433d434a / Politics, bk ii, ch 5 [1264*1-11] 459a-b;
BK  VII,  CH  I  [1323^33-^7]  527b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[418-426]   6b;  [693-701]  9c;  bk  iv  [469-521]  50b-51a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  hi,  165a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 260c-261c; 285c-288a;
291b-292d  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, third day, 200a-b 28 Harvey:
Motion ofthe Heart, 268d / Circulation of the Blood, 322d-323d; 324c-d /
On Animal Generation, 331b-332a; 357b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
43d-44c  /  Novum  Organum  105a-195d  esp  bk ii 137a195d 31 Descartes:
Rules,   11,   2d-3a;  xii,  22c-23a  /  Discourse,  part  vi,  66a-b  /
Meditations,  i  75a77c  /  Objections and Replies, 229d-230d 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  9 173b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule hi 270b271a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect ii, div 14 456b; SECT x 488d-497b passim, esp
div  86-91  488d-491c;  sect  xi,  div  iio 501a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
36a-37a  esp 36b-c; 77b-d; 85b-d; 86b-87c; 91d-93b; 114d-115a; 146a149d;
153a-c;  231b-c  43  Federalist: number 6, 40a-b; number 20, 78a43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  450b-c;  461c-462a; 463c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 129a 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  774d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii, 684a 53 James: Psychology, 647b-648b; 863a-865a; 879b-880b
[fn  2];  881a-b 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 819d-820a; 879c 5.
The  theory  of  experimentation  in scientific method 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk hi, ch 2 199d200a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 377a-d 28 Harvey:
Motion  of the Heart, 267b,d-268d / On Animal Generation, 331b-337a,c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning,  34b; 42a-c / Novum Organum 105a-195d /
New Atlantis, 210d-214d

[539a]
5a  to  5c Chapti-r 25: EXPERIENCE 481 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vr,
61c-62c 34 Newton: Optics, kk hi, 543a -b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5d 6c 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 22c 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat, 175b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 774d 50 Marx: Capital,
6c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  385a-b;  677b  54 Freud: New Introductory
Lectures,   879c   5a.   Experimental  exploration  and  discovery:  the
formulation of hypotheses 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, lab; bk i, 6a-7a;
BK  II,  27c-d  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 131a138b;
157b-171b passim; third day, 203d205b; 207d-208a 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe
Heart,  273c-d; 280c-d; 285c-d / On Animal Generation, 331b 333d; 336b-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a;  30d31a; 34b; 42a-c / Novum
Organum,  pref 105a106d; BK I 107a-136a,c esp aph 8 107c-d, aph 50 111b,
APH  64 114b, APH 70 116b-117a, aph 82 120d-121b, APH 99-100 127b-c, aph
121 132b-d; bk ii 137a-195d passim / New Atlantis, 214a-b 31 Descartes :
Discourse,  part  vi,  61d-62c  ;  66a-b  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 359a-365b /
Equilibrium  of  Liquids  390a-403a  passim,  esp  390a-392a  34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  iii-iv  270b271b; GENERAL scHOL, 371b-372a /
Optics,  BK  I, 379a; 386b-455a; bk ii, 457a-470a; bk ii-iii, 496a-516a;
bk  hi,  543a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, SECT 46-47
281d-282b;  bk  iv, ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
329d-330a  42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  2a-b;  part I, 10d-12d; 17a-20desp 17a;
22c-24a  esp  23c; 29d-33b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a; 172a; 175b;
184a  45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 440b, d; 607a,c; 659a; 774d
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 136b-139a passim 53 James: Psychology,
126a-127a;  348a-357b  passim;  385a-b; 677b 54 Freud: Instincts, 412a-b
5b,  Experimental  verification:  the testing of hypotheses 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk ii, 49a-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13 173d177a
passim;  bk hi, ch 2 199d-200a; ch 4 201b-202c; ch 8 205a-207b 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-105]  108b-d  28  Galileo:  Two  New
Sciences, first day, 148c149c; 166d-168a; third day, 203d-205b esp 205b;
207d-208c

[539b]
28  Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 268d-273c esp 268d, 273c; 286b 304a,c
esp  286b  c,  295d296a / Circulation of the Blood, 311c-312c; 324c-d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  34b / AVjvum Organum, bk ii, aph i^d
164a  168d  31  Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c; 66a-b 33 Pascal:
Vacuum,  368b-370a  / Great Experiment 382a-389b passim / Weight of Air,
404a405b;  425a-429a  34  Newton:  Principles,  laws  of  motion, schol,
19b-22a;  bk  ii,  general  schol  211b-219a; PROP 40, schol 239a-246b /
Optics, hk i, 392a-396b: 408a-410b; 412a-416b; 453a-455a; BK III, 543a-b
34 HuYGENs: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch xii, SECT 1:5 362c-d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2a-b;
PART  I, 32a-33a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 181b 45 Faraday: Researches
in  Electricity,  385  b-c; 440b,d; 467a-b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
12b-c;  149d-150a 53 James: Psychology, 865a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  291d-292a  / New Introductory Lectures, 815a-b 5c. Experimental
measurement:  the  application of mathematics 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii,
396c-d  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  24b-26a;  bk  ii, 38b39b; BK v,
143a-144a; 166a-167b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
bk  ii,  558b-559b;  567b;  586b-589a;  BK  IV,  705b-706a  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  iv, 85c-89c; bk v, 92a-93b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  136d-137c;  148d-149c;  164a-166c;  third day, 207d-208c 28
Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 286c-288c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
46b-c / Novum Organuniy bk ii, aph 44-47 175d179c 34 Newton: Principles,
laws  of  motion,  schol,  20a-22a;  bk  i, prop 69, schol, 131a; bk 11,
GENERAL  SCHOL 211b-219a; prop 40 and schol 237b-246b 34 HuYGENs: Light,
ch  i, 554b-557b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27 460c-d 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  14b-c; 17a-20b; 22d-24a;
30a-32d;   33b-36a:  41a-44d;  part  hi,  87d-90a;  91a-95a;96b-103b  45
Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  175b;  184b-185b  45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  277d-279a;  316b-318c;  366d-371d;  444a-451a; 465d467a,c;
768d-773d;  778b,d-793c 53 James: Psychology, 56a-66a esp 61b-64a; 126a;
265a-268b; 341a-344b; 348a-359a

[540a]
482  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 6. The man of experience in practical affairs 6a.
Experience  as  indispensable  to sound judgment and prudence Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus, 25:3-6; 34:9-11— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 25:5-8; 34:9-12
4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b  5  Sophocles: Philoctetes
[50-122]  182d-183b  6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 238b-c 6 Thucydides :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 383d 384a; bk vn, 555b 7 Plato: Republic, bk
hi, 337b-338a; bk v, 366a-c; bk vii, 400d-401c; bk ix, 421a-422b / Laws,
BK  I,  645b-652d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk i, ch 3 [1094^29-1095* 12]
340a-b; ch 4 [1095*30-^12] 340c-d; bk hi, CH 8
[1116*^3-15]
362d-363a; bk vi, ch 7
[1141^14-23] 390c-d; CH 8 [1142^12-19] 391b;
ch II 392c-393b passim; bk x, ch 9
[1180''
^12] 435b-436a,c / Rhetoric, bk ii,
[i389^3]-CH
14
[1390^11]
636b-638a 13-118 ch 12 passim 10 Hippocrates: Articulations, par 10, 94d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  8,  114a-b 14 Plutarch: Fabius-
Pericles,  154a-d  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a i,
rep  2  226c-227c  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 90-93
12b-13a / Knight's Tale
[2438-2452]
200a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53c-54a; 60c-d; 66d-67b; 67d-68a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-c;  55d-62a  esp  61a62a;  63d-75a esp 66b-69d;
176c-180b; 450d451a; 520b-522d 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
ii, sc II [163-173] 115b 29 Cervantes: Don jPw/a:o^(?, PARTii,340b-343a;
345a-348c;  352b-356d;  360d-364a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,
5b-6a; 79c80a; 86b-89b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43a; 44a-c; PART
III,  50b-d  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 30-31 418c-d 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect v, div 36, 465a-d
[fn
i];  465c; sect viii, div 65, 479d480a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 99d-100a;
274c 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 305d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387b
43 Federalist: number 2, 32b-d; number 72, 217d 43 Mill: Liberty, 287b-c
/  Utilitarianism,  448d;  450a-c;456a-d 44 Bosw¥.i.j^: Johnson, 106d 49
Darwin:  Descent  ofMan,  592d-593a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk v,
211a-213a;  bk  vii,  277a-278a;  bk  x,  424a-b; bk xii, 559d; BK xiii,
584c-585b 53 James: Psychology, 13a-15a; 886b-888a

[540b]
6  to 7 the les6b. The role of experience in politics: sons of history 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  178a-180a;  bk  vii, 225c-d 6 Thucydides :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  354b-c;  bk  IV,  451a-b  7 Plato: Gorgias,
288b-289b  / Republic, bk vii, 400d-401b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^27-1095* 11] 340a; bk vi, ch 8 390d-391c; bk x, ch 9
[1180^13-1181^24] 435b-436a,c / Politics, bk ii,
CH  5  [1264*1-11]  459a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  10 [1329* 40-^35] 533d-534b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1359^19-1360*37] 599d-600d
13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk XI [243-295] 334b-336a
14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b / Fabius 141a154a, c / Timoleon, 195a-b
/ Flamininus, 302d303a / Alexander, 540b,d-549c / Demosthenes, 692d-695d
/  Demetrius, 726a-d 15 Tacitus : Annals, bk iv, 71d-72b / Histories^ BK
I, 189a-190b 23 Machiavelli: Prince la-37d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
67d-68a; part ii, 112c-d; 128c-129b; part hi, 165a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
24a-25c;  68b-69d;  198c200d; 450d-451a; 455d-456c 30 Bacon: Advancement
ofLearning, 4c-7c;8Sa-c; 94b-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect
107  49b-d  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v, div ^6y 465a-d[fn
i];465c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  284a-c; 449a; 632a634a,c passim 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 13d;
194b; 326d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 266d
[fn2]
43  Federalist:  number  6,  39a;  number 28, 96c; NUMBER 38, 121b-122b;
number  53,  168b-169b;  number  72,  217d-218a; number 85, 258d-259a 43
Mill: Liberty, 320a-323a,c passim / Representative Government, 357b-d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 155b-d; PART IV, 367d-368b 50 Marx:
Capital,  7b  7.  Mystical  or  religious  experience: experience of the
supernatural  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  15; 17:1-19:23; 22:118; 26:1-6;
28:10-22;  32:34-32; 46:1-4 / Exodus, 3-4; 7-1 1 ; 19; 24 / Numbers, 12;
22:22-7,^  /  Joshua,  3:7-8; 5:13-6:5— (Z))/o^w^, 3:7-8; ^•.17,-6 :<^ /
Judges,  6:11-40;  it,  /I  Samuel, 3; 16— (D) / Kings, 3; 16 / / Kings,
3:5-15; 9:1-9; 19—P) i^i Kings, 3:5-15; 9:1-9; 19 / I Chronicles, ij—{D)
I  Paralipomenon,  ly  /  Job,  38:1-42:8  /  Isaiah,  6—(D) Isaias, 6 /
Jeremiah, i— {D) Jeremias, i / Ezei^iel, 1-4 esp i; 8-12

[541a]
7/0  8  Chapter  25: EXPERIENCE 483 esp 10 ; 40-48 passim— (D) Ezechiel,
1-4  csp  i;  8-12 esp 10; 40-48 passim / Daniel, 7-12 / Hosea, 1-3— (D)
Osee,  1-3  /  Amos,  7-8  /  Zechariah,  1-6—  {D)  Zacharias,  1-6 New
Testament:  Matthew,  1:20-25;  3:16-17;  17:1-9;  28  / Lul{e, I :i-38;
2:8-15,25-35  / Acts, 2:2-4; 7-55-56; 9-3-8; 10; 11:5-10; 12:7-11; 16:9;
18:9-11;  22:6-11;  23:11;  26:13-18;  27:2i-25-(D)  Acts,  2:2-4; 7:55;
9:3-8;  10;  11:5-10;  12:7-11; 16:9; 18:9-11; 22:6-11; 23:11; 26:13-18;
27:21-25  / // Corinthians, 12:1-9 / Revelation— {D) Apocalypse 4 Homer:
Odyssey,  bk xi 243a-249d 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [640-886] 46d49c
5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[i 500-1 666]
127d-129b  5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [1-41]  411a-b /
Bacchantes 340a-352a,c 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[250-365]
490d-492c  /  Frogs 564a-582a,c / Plutus [620-747] 636d637d 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  vii,  218d-220a  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi 211a-235a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr vi, ch 4 23a-b / Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 17
226a-c;  tr  v,  ch 10-12 233b-234d; tr viii, ch 10-12 244c-246a / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  34-36  338b-339d;  TR  IX,  CH  4 356a-b; ch 8-11
358b-360d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 28-30 60d-61c; BK IX,
par  23-25  68a-c;  bk  x,  par  65  87d-88a / City of God, bk ix, ch 16
294a295a;  bk  x, ch 13 307b-c; bk xvi, ch 6 426c427a esp 426d; bk xxii,
ch 29 614b-616d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, A 9 58b-59a;
a  ii, rep 2 59d-60d; part i-ii, Q 28, A 3, ANS 742a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 112, A 5, ans and rep 1,5 359c-360c; part hi, q
9, A 2 764c-765a; q 10 767b-772a;PART iiisuppl, Q 92, a I 1025c-1032b 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  paradise,  xxxXXXIII  151d-157d 22 Chaucer:
Prioress's Tale
[13,418-620] 392a395b esp [13,577-592] 394b-395a
23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  ii,  160b; part hi, 165d-166a; 174d-176d;
183d-185c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i 29a-31c; sc II
[160-258] 33b-34b; sc iv-v 35d-39a
/  Macbeth,  act  i,  sc  iii [1-88] 285b-286b; act IV, sc I 300b-302b /
Tempest  524a-548d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 95d-96c 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 277-288 222b-224b

[541b]
40C7ihbon:  Decline  and Fall, 81a; 189b 191a; 294d 296b; 605b d 41 Cm H
Hon: Decline and Fall, 476b-477a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 320c 321b 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-514]
lla-14b;
[1238-1321]
30b-32b;
[2337-2604]
56b-63b;
[38:55-4398]
93b-108b; part ii
[7005-8487]
171b-206b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 156d; 162b164a,c; bk v, 219b
220a; bk xi, 525c 526b; bk XV, 631a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  v,  127b137c; BK VII, 189a-191a,c 53 James: Psychology, 847b-848a 54
Freud:  Group Psychology, 688a-b 8. Variety of experience as an ideal of
human  life Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 34:9-11 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
34:9-12 4 Homer: Odyssey 183a-322d esp bk i
[i-io]
183a  7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 409b-411d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
i,  ch  6, lllc-112a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk viii, sect i 285a-b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 54-57 85a-86a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell,  xxvi  [49-142]  38c-39c  22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue
[=y^?>^-6ji^io]  256a-269b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  66b-69d;  74b'75a;  107a112d; 458b-462c; 471a-472a;
478c-479c 26 Shakespeare: Tivo Gentlemen of Verona, act I, sc III [1-44]
232c-233a / 1st Henry /F434a466d / 2nd Henry IV 467a-502d / Henry V, act
I, sc I
[22-66] 533b-c / As You Li^e
It,  ACT  IV,  sc I [21-41] 617b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43a;
44a-c  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  34-38 177a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  viii,  div  65,  479d-480a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 164a-b; 274c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 88d 43 Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim, esp
294c295a;  320a-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 302c-303b 47 Goethe: Faust esp
part i
[1765-1775] 42b,
[3217-3250] 79a-b
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 37c38a 53 James: Psychology,
736b-737a

[542a]
484 THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES I. II.

[542b]
For:  The  discussion of the faculties or the acts of the mind which are
related to experience, see Idea ic, 2b, 2e-2g; Induction la, 2; Judgment
8c;  Knowledge  6b(i),  6c(^);  Memory  AND  Imagination  la, 3c, 5a-5b,
6c(i)-6c(2); Mind ia(i)-ia(2), ie(i); Reasoning ic, 4c, 5b(3); Sense la,
ic-id,  3c(5), 4b, 5a; Universal and Particular 4c. The consideration of
the  empirical  foundations  or  sources  of science and art, see Art 5;
Dialectic  2a(i); Medicine 2a; Metaphysics 2c; Philosophy 3a; Physics 2;
Science  lb,  IC,  5a;  Sense  5b-5c.  The  discussion  of experience in
relation  to  the conditions or limits of human knowledge, see Induction
2;  Knowledge  5a-5a(6); Memory and Imagination 6d; Metaphysics 4b; Mind
5b.  Other  treatments  of  the  empirical verification of hypotheses or
theories, ^^^ Hypothesis 4d; Physics 4c; Science 5e; Sense 5c; Truth la.
Other  discussions of the role of experimentation in scientific inquiry,
see  Induction  5;  Logic  4b;  Mechanics  2a; Physics 4-4d; Science 5a.
Experience  as a factor in education, see Education 5f. The treatment of
religious  or  mystical experience or of related matters, see God 6c(3);
Prophecy  ib;  Religion  ib(2)-ib(3);  Sign  and  Symbol  5b. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included in Great BooI{s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  J.  Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind Augustine.
De  Genesi  ad Litteram, bk xii Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences^  Descartes.  The Principles ofPhilosophy, part in, 4 vol i, bk
i,  ch  5,  7  Hume.  A  Treatise ofHuman Nature Tennyson. Ulysses Kant.
Prolegomena  to  Any Future Metaphysic Emerson. "Experience," in Essays,
11   Hegel.   The   Phenomenology   of  Mind  Bernard.  Introduction  to
Experimental  Medicine  Scie?7ce  ofLogic, vol. I, BKU, SECT n; SECT ui^
Clifford.  "On  the Nature of Things-In-ThemCH I ; VOL II, sect hi, ch 3
selves,"  in  vol  ii,  Lectures and Essays . The Varieties of Religious
Experience  Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  i  (6)  .
Er\enntnis  und  Irrtum Peguy. Basic Verities (Innocence and Experience)
R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part vi . Men and Saints (The Holy Innocents) Duns
Scotus.  Oxford  Commentary,  bk  i,  dist  3,  q  4 Hugel. The Mystical
Elcfnetit   of   Religion   Leibnitz.   New   Essays   Concerning  Human
UnderBradley.  Appearance  and Reality, bk i, ch ii standing . Essays on
Truth  and Reality, ch 6 Voltaire. The Ignorant Philosopher, ch 7 Broad.
Perception,  Physics,  and Reality, ch 3 Wordsworth. The Prelude Proust.
Remembrance of Things Past

[543a]
Joyce.  Ulysses  Santayana. Scepticism and Animal Faith, ch 15 Bridgman.
The  Logic  of  Modern Physics Hook. The Metaphysics of Pragmatism J. S.
Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect xvi C. I. Lewis. Mind and the
World  Order  Whitehead.  Science  and  the Modern World • . Process and
Reality,   part   hi   HussERL.  Ideas:  General  Introduction  to  Pure
Phenomenology  .  Meditations Cartesiennes Bergson. Time and Free Will .
Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion, ch 4 GiLBY. Poetic Experience
Fisher. The Design of Experiments

[543b]
Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE  485 Dewey. "Expcricnccand Objective Idealism,"
"The   Posiulaie   of   Immediate  Empiricism,"  "  'Consciousness'  and
Experience,"  in  The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy . Reconstruction
in  Philosophy,  ch  4  . Experience and Nature, ch 1,9 . Experience and
Education,  ch  2-3,  8  Blanshard.  The Nature of Thought Maritain. The
Degrees  of  Knowledge, ch i, 5 . Ransoming the Time, ch i o B. Russell.
The Problems of Philosophy, ch i . An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, ch
8-11, 16-18, 21-23 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part III, ch
1-5; PART VI, CH 4, 10

[544a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  human  family,  according  to  Rousseau, is "the most
ancient  of  all  societies  and  the  only one that is natural." On the
naturalness  of  the  family  there seems to be general agreement in the
great books, although not all would claim, like Rousseau, that it is the
only  natural society. The state is sometimes also regarded as a natural
community,  but  its  naturalness  is  not as obvious and has often been
disputed.  The  word  "natural" applied to a community or association of
men can mean either that men instinctively associate with one another as
do  bees  and  buffaloes;  or  that  the  association in question, while
voluntary  and  to that extent conventional, is also necessary for human
welfare.  It  is in this sense of necessity or need that Rousseau speaks
of  family  ties as natural. "The children remain attached to the father
only  so  long  as they need him for their preservation," he writes. "As
soon  as this need ceases, the natural bond is dissolved." If after that
"they   remain  united,  they  continue  so  no  longer  naturally,  but
voluntarily;   and   the  family  itself  is  then  maintained  only  by
convention."  Locke  appears  to  attribute  the  existence of the human
family  to  the same sort of instinctive determination which establishes
familial  ties  among  other  animals,  though  he  recognizes  that the
protracted  infancy  of  human  offspring make "the conjugal bonds . . .
more  firm  and lasting in man than the other species of animals." Since
with  other  animals  as  well  as  in  the  human  species, "the end of
conjunction between male and female
[is] not barely procreation, but the continuation of the species,"
it  ought  to last, in Locke's opinion, "even after procreation, so long
as  is  necessary  to the nourishment and support of the young ones, who
are  to  be  sustained by those who got them till they are able to shift
and support for themselves. This rule," he adds, "which the infinite

[544b]
Chapter  ±6:  FAMILY  wise  Maker hath set to the works of His hands, we
find  the  inferior  creatures steadily obey." Yet Locke does not reduce
the  association  of father, mother, and children entirely to a divinely
implanted  instinct  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  species. "Conjugal
society,"  he  writes,  "is  made by a voluntary compact between man and
woman,  and  though it consists chiefly in such a communion and right in
one  another's bodies as is necessary to its chief end, procreation, yet
it  draws  with  it  mutual  support  and assistance, and a communion of
interests,  too."  If  the  human  family were entirely an instinctively
formed society, we should expect to find the pattern or structure of the
domestic  community  the same at all times and everywhere. But since the
time  of Herodotus, historians and, later, anthropologists have observed
the  great  diversity  in  the  institutions  of the family in different
tribes or cultures, or even at different times in the same culture. From
his  own  travels  among  different  peoples,  Herodotus  reports a wide
variety  of  customs  with  respect to marriage and the family. From the
travels  of  other  men, Montaigne culls a similar collection of stories
about  the  diversity  of  the  mores with respect to sex, especially in
relation  to  the  rules or customs which hedge the community of man and
wife.  Such  facts  raise  the  question whether the pattern of monogamy
pictured  by  Locke  represents  anything  more  than  one type of human
family—  the  type  which  predominates in western civilization or, even
more  narrowly,  in  Christendom.  Marx,  for  instance,  holds that the
structure  of  the  family  depends  on the character of its "economical
foundation,"  and  insists  that "it is of course just as absurd to hold
the Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it
would be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient 486

[545a]
Greek,  or  the  Eastern  forms  which,  moreover, taken together form a
series  in  historic development." Though the observation of the various
forms  which  the  human  family  takes has led some writers to deny the
naturalness  of  the  family  at least so far as its "naturalness" would
mean  a  purely  instinctive formation— it has seldom been disputed that
the family fulfills a natural human need. Conventional in structure, the
family  remains natural as a means indispensable to an end which all men
naturally  dtsnt.  "There  must  be  a  union  of those who cannot exist
without each other," Aristotle writes, "namely, of male and female, that
the  race may continue"; and he goes on to say that this union is formed
"not  of  deliberate  purpose, but because, in common with other animals
and  with  plants, mankind have a natural desire to leave behind them an
image  of  themselves."  The  human  infant, as Locke observes, requires
years  of  care  in  order  to survive. If the family did not exist as a
relatively  stable organization to serve this purpose, some other social
agency  would  have to provide sustained care for children. But wherever
we  find any other social units, such as tribes or cities, there we also
find  some  form  of  the  family  in existence, not only performing the
function  of rearing children, but also being the primitive social group
out  of  which  all  larger  groupings  seem  to  grow  or to be formed.
Aristotle, for example, describes the village or tribe as growing out of
an association of families, just as later the city or state comes from a
union  of  villages.  We have seen that the naturalness of the family—as
answering  a  natural  need—is  not  incompatible  with its also being a
product  of  custom  or  convention.  The  facts  reported by Herodotus,
Montaigne,  and  Darwin,  which show the variability of families in size
and  membership,  in  form  and  government,  do not exclude, but on the
contrary  emphasize, the further fact that wherever men live together at
all,  they  also live in famiUes. Whether or not the political community
is  also a natural society, and if so, whether it is natural in the same
way  as the family, are questions reserved for the chapter on State. But
it   should   be  noted  here  that  for  some  writers,  for  Aristotle
particularly and to a lesser extent

[545b]
Chapter 26: FAMILY 487 for Locke, the naturalness of the family not only
points  to a natural development of the state, but also helps to explain
how, in the transition from the family to the state, paternal government
gives rise to royal rule or absolute monarchy. Even Rousseau, who thinks
that   the   family   is   the  only  natural  society,  finds,  in  the
correspondence between a political ruler and a father, reason for saying
that  "the  family . . . may be called the first model of political soIn
western  civilization,  a family normally consists of a husband and wife
and  their offspring. If the procreation and rearing of offspring is the
function,  or  even  a  function,  which  the family naturally exists to
perform,  then  a  childless  family  cannot be considered normal. Hegel
suggests  another  reason for offspring. He sees in children the bond of
union  which makes the family a community. "The relation of love between
husband  and wife," he writes, "is in itself not objective, because even
if  their  feeling  is  their substantial unity, still this unity has no
objectivity.   Such  an  objectivity  parents  first  acquire  in  their
children,  in whom they can see objectified the entirety of their union.
In  the  child,  a  mother loves its father and he its mother. Both have
their love objectified for them in the child. While in their goods their
unity  is  embodied  only  in an external thing, in their children it is
embodied  in  a  spiritual  one in which the parents are loved and which
they  love."  Until  recent  times  when  it has been affected by urban,
industrial  conditions,  the family tended to be a much larger unit, not
only  with  regard  to  the number of children, but also with respect to
other members and relationships. The household included servants, if not
slaves;   it   included   blood-   relatives   in   various  degrees  of
consanguinity;  its  range extended over three or even four generations.
Sancho  Panza's  wife, for instance, pictures the ideal marriage for her
daughter  as  one in which "we shall have her always under our eyes, and
be  all  one family, parents and children, grandchildren and sonsin-law,
and the peace and blessing of God will dwell among us." Even though they
belong to the nineteenth century, the families in War and Peace indicate
how different is the domestic

[546a]
488  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  establishment  under  agrarian  and  semi-feudal
conditions.  But  even  when  it  comprised  a  larger  and  more varied
membership,  the  family differed from other social units, such as tribe
or  state,  in  both  size  and  function. Its membership, determined by
consanguinity,  was  usually  more restricted than that of other groups,
although  blood-relationships,  often  more  remote, may also operate to
limit  the membership of the tribe or the state. Its function, according
to  Aristotle, at least in origin, was to "supply men's everyday wants,"
whereas  the state went beyond this in aiming at other conditions '*of a
good  life."  In  an  agricultural society of the sort we find among the
ancients,  the  household  rather  than  the  city  is occupied with the
problems of wealth. In addition to the breeding and rearing of children,
and probably because of this in part, the family as a unit seems to have
been  concerned  with  the  means  of  subsistence,  on the side of both
production  and  consumption.  Its members shared in a division of labor
and  in  a  division  of the fruits thereof. Apart from those industries
manned solely by slave labor in the service of the state, the production
of goods largely depended on the industry of the family. In modern times
this system of production came to be called the "domestic" as opposed to
the  "factory"  system.  It  seems  to persist even after the industrial
revolution.  But,  according  to  Marx,  "this modern so-called domestic
industry  has  nothing, except the name, in common with the oldfashioned
domestic  industry, the existence of which presupposes independent urban
handicrafts,  independent  peasant  farming,  and  above all, a dwelling
house  for  the  laborer  and  his  family."  In  effect, the industrial
revolution  produced  an  economy  in which not only agriculture but the
family  ceased  to  be  central.  The  problem shifts from the wealth of
families  to  the  wealth of nations, even as production shifts from the
family  to  the  factory.  "Modern  industry,"  according  to  Marx, "by
assigning  an  important  part in the process of production, outside the
domestic  sphere,  to  women,  to young persons, and to children of both
sexes, creates a new economical foundation."

[546b]
k  The family was for centuries what the factory and the storehouse have
only  recently  become in an era of industrialism. For the ancients, the
problems   of   wealth—  its  acquisition,  accumulation,  and  use—were
domestic,  not  political.  "The  so-called  art  of  getting  wealth,'*
Aristotle  writes,  is "according to some . . , identical with household
management,  according  to  others,  a principal part of it." In his own
judgment, "property is a part of the household, and the art of acquiring
property  is  a  part  of  the art of managing the household" but a part
only,  because  the household includes human beings as well as property,
and  is  concerned  with  the  government  of  persons  as  well  as the
m^anagement  of  things.  The foregoing throws Ught on the extraordinary
shift  in  the  meaning  of  the word "economics" from ancient to modern
times.  In  the  significance  of  their  Greek roots, the word "polity"
signifies  a  state,  the  word  "economy"  a  family; and as "politics"
referred to the art of governing the political community, so "economics"
referred  to  the  art of governing the domestic community. Only in part
was  it  concerned  with  the  art  of getting wealth. As the chapter on
Wealth indicates, Rousseau tries to preserve the broader meaning when he
uses  the  phrase  "political  economy"  for  the  general  problems  of
government ; but for the most part in modern usage "economics" refers to
a  science  or  art  concerned with wealth, and it is "pofitical" in the
sense  that the management of wealth, and of men with respect to wealth,
has become the problem of the state rather than the family. Not only has
the  industrial economy become more and more a political affair, but the
character  of  the  family as a social institution has also changed with
its  altered  economic status and function. The chief question about the
family  in  relation  to  the  state  has been, in ancient as well as in
modern  times,  whether  the  family  has natural rights which the state
cannot  justly  invade  or transgress. The proposal in Plato's Republic—
''that  the  wives of our guardians are to be common, and their children
are  to be common, and no parent is to know his own child, nor any child
his parent"—was as radical in the fifth century

[547a]
B.C.  as  its  counterpart  would be today. When Socrates proposes this,
Glaucon  suggests  that "the possibihty as well as the utility of such a
law" may be subject to "a good many doubts." But Socrates does not think
that  "there  can  be any dispute about the very great utility of having
wives  and  children  in  common;  the  possibility," he adds, "is quite
another  matter,  and  will  be very much disputed." Aristotle questions
both  the  desirability  and  possibility.  "The  premise from which the
argument  of  Socrates proceeds," he says, is "'the greater the unity of
the state the better.' " He denies this premise. "Is it not obvious," he
asks, "that a state may at length attain such a degree of unity as to be
no  longer  a  state.? since the nature of a state is to be a plurality,
and  in  tending  to  a  greater unity, from being a state, it becomes a
family,  and from being a family, an individual." Hence "we ought not to
attain  this  greatest  unity  even  if  we  could,  for it would be the
destruction of the state." In addition, "the scheme, taken literally, is
impracticable." It is significant that Aristotle's main argument against
Plato's "communism" (which includes the community of property as well as
the  community  of  women  and children) is based upon the nature of the
state  rather  than on the rights of the family. It seems to have been a
prevalent  view  in  antiquity,  at  least  among philosophers, that the
children  should  be  "regarded as belonging to the state rather than to
their parents." Antigone's example shows, however, that this view was by
no  means  without  exception.  Her  defiance  of  Creon,  based on "the
unwritten and unfailing statutes of heaven," is also undertaken for "the
majesty  of kindred blood." In this sense, it constitutes an affirmation
of  the  rights  and  duties of the famiiyIn the Christian tradition the
rights of the family as against the state are also defended by reference
to  divine  law.  The  point  is  not  that  the state is less a natural
community  than the family in the eyes of a theologian like Aquinas; but
in  addition  to  having  a certain priority in the order of nature, the
family,  more  directly than the state, is of divine origin. Not only is
it  founded  on the sacrament of matrimony, but the express commandments
of God dictate the

[547b]
Chapter  26:  FAMILY  489  duties  of  care and obedience which bind its
members  together.  For  the  state  to interfere in those relationships
between  parents  and  children  or  between husband and wife which fall
under the regulation of divine law would be to exceed its authority, and
hence  to  act  wiiJiout right and in violation of rights founded upon a
higher  authority.  In  the Christian tradition philosophers like Hobbes
and  Kant  state  the  rights  of  the family in terms of natural law or
defend  them  as  natural  rights.  "Because  the  first  instruction of
children,"  writes  Hobbes, "depends on the care of their parents, it is
necessary  that  they  should  be  obedient to them while they are under
their  tuition.  .  .  . Originally the father of every man was also his
sovereign lord, with power over him of life and death." When the fathers
of  families  relinquished  such  absolute  power  in  order  to  form a
commonwealth  or state, they did not lose, nor did they have to give up,
according  to Hobbes, all control of their children. "Nor would there be
any reason," he goes on, "why any man should desire to have children, or
take  the  care to nourish and instruct them, if they were afterwards to
have no other benefit from them th^n from other men. And this," he says,
"accords  with  the Fifth Commandment." In the section of his Science of
Right  devoted to the "rights of the family as a domestic society," Kant
argues  that  "from  the  fact  of procreation there follows the duty of
preserving  and  rearing children." From this duty he derives "the right
of parents to the management and training of the child, so long as it is
itself incapable of making proper use of its body as an organism, and of
its mind as an understanding. This includes its nourishment and the care
of  its  education."  It  also  "includes,  in  general, the function of
forming and developing it practically, that it may be able in the future
to  maintain  and  advance  itself,  and  also  its  moral  culture  and
development, the guilt of neglecting it falling upon the parents." As is
evident from Hobbes and Kant, the rights of the family can be vindicated
without  denying that the family, like the individual, owes obedience to
the  state.  In  modern terms, at least, the problem is partly stated by
the  question,  To  what  extent can parents justly claim exemption from
pofitical interference in

[548a]
490 THE GREAT IDEAS the control of their own children ? But this is only
part  of  the  problem.  It  must  also be asked whether, in addition to
regulating  the  family  for the general welfare of the whole community,
the  state is also entitled to interfere in the affairs of the household
in  order  to  protect  children from parental mismanagement or neglect.
Both  questions  call  for a consideration of the form and principles of
domestic  government.  The  kinds of rule and the relation between ruler
and  ruled  in  the  domestic  community  have a profound bearing on the
theory  of  government in the larger community of the state. Many of the
chapters  on  the forms of government—especially Constitution, Monarchy,
and  Tyranny—indicate  that  the  great  books of political theory, from
Plato  and  Aristotle to Locke and Rousseau, derive critical points from
the  comparison of domestic and political government. We shall pass over
the  master-slave  relationship,  both because that is considered in the
chapter  on  Slavery,  and  because  not  all  households  include human
chattel.  Omitting  this,  two  fundamental relationships which domestic
government  involves  remain to be examined: the relation of husband and
wife,  and  of parents and children. With regard to the first, there are
questions  of  equality and administrative supremacy. Even when the wife
is  regarded  as  the  complete equal of her husband, the administrative
question  remains,  for there must either be a division of authority, or
unanimity must prevail, or one —either the husband or the wife—must have
the  last  word  when disagreement must be overcome to get any practical
matter  decided.  So  far  as husband and wife are concerned, should the
family be an absolute monarchy, or a kind of constitutional government.?
Both  an  ancient  and a modern writer appear to answer this question in
the  same  way. "A husband and father," Aristotle says, "rules over wife
and  children,  both  free,  but  the  rule  differs,  the rule over his
children  being  a  royal, over his wife a constitutional rule." Yet the
relation between husband and wife, in Aristotle's view, is not perfectly
constitutional. In the state "the citizens rule and are ruled in turn"

[548b]
. on the supposition that their "natures ... are equal and do not differ
at  all."  In the family, however, Aristotle thinks that "although there
may  be  exceptions to the order of nature, the male is by nature fitter
for command than the female." According to Locke, "the husband and wife,
though   they   have  but  one  common  concern,  yet  having  different
understandings,  will unavoidably sometimes have different wills too. It
therefore  being  necessary that the last determination {i.e., the rule)
should be placed somewhere, it naturally falls to the man's share as the
abler and the stronger." But this, Locke thinks, "leaves the wife in the
full  and  true possession of what by contract is her pecuHar right, and
at  least gives the husband no more power over her than she has over his
life;  the  power  of  the husband being so far from that of an absolute
monarch that the wife has, in many cases, a liberty to separate from him
where  natural  right  or  their  contract  allows it." In the so-called
Marriage  Group  of  the Canterbury Tales, Chaucer gives voice to all of
the possible positions that have ever been taken concerning the relation
of  husband and wife. The Wife of Bath, for example, argues for the rule
of the wife. She claims that nothing will satisfy women until they "have
the  sovereignty  as  well upon their husband as their love, and to have
mastery  their  man  above." The Clerk of Oxford, in his tale of patient
Griselda,  presents  the  wife  who  freely admits to her husband, "When
first  I  came  to  you, just so left I my will and all my liberty." The
Franklin  in  his  tale  allows the mastery to neither wife nor husband,
"save that the name and show of sovereignty" would belong to the latter.
He  dares  to say That friends each one the other must obey If they'd be
friends  and long keep company. Love will not be constrained by mastery;
.  .  Women  by nature love their liberty, And not to be constrained Uke
any  thrall. And so do men, if say the truth I shall. . . . Thus did she
take  her  servant  and  her  lord,  Servant  in  love and lord in their
marriage;  So  was  he  both in lordship and bondage. While there may be
disagreement  regarding  the relation between husband and wife, there is
none  regarding  the  inequality between parents and children during the
offspring's imma-

[549a]
turity.  Although  every  man  may enjoy "equal right ... to his natural
freedom,  without  being subjected to the will or authority of any other
men,"  children, according to Locke, "are not born in this full state of
equality,  though  they  are  born to it." Paternal power, even absolute
rule,  over  children arises from this fact. So long as the child "is in
an  estate  wherein  he  has  no  understanding of his own to direct his
will," Locke thinks he "is not to have any will of his own to follow. He
that understands for him must will for him too; he must prescribe to his
will,   and   regulate  his  actions."  But  Locke  adds  the  important
quahfication  that  when  the  son  "comes  to the estate which made his
father  a  free  man,  the  son is a free man too." Because children are
truly  inferior  in  competence,  there would seem to be no injustice in
their being ruled by their parents; or in the rule being absolute in the
sense  that  children  are precluded from exercising a decisive voice in
the conduct of their own or their family's affairs. Those who think that
kings  cannot  claim  the absolute authority of parental rule frequently
use   the   word   "despotic"   to   signify  unjustified  paternalism—a
transference  to  the state of a type of dominion which can be justified
only  in  the  family.  The  nature  of  despotism  as  absolute rule is
discussed  in  the  chapters  on Monarchy and Tyranny, but its relevance
here  makes  it  worth repeating that the Greek word from which "despot"
comes, like its Latin equivalent paterfamilias, signifies the ruler of a
household  and  carries  the  connotation  of absolute rule the complete
mastery  of  the  father over the children and the servants, if not over
the  wife.  Accordingly  there  would  seem  to  be nothing invidious in
referring to domestic government as despotic, at least not to the extent
that,  in  the case of the children, absolute rule is justified by their
immaturity.  The  problem  arises  only with respect to despotism in the
state,  when  one man rules another mature man as absolutely as a parent
rules  a  child.  The  great defender of the doctrine that the sovereign
must  be  absolute,  "or  else  there is no sovereignty at all," sees no
difference between the rights of the ruler of a state— the "sovereign by
institution"—and those of a father as the

[549b]
Chapter  26:  FAMILY  A9\  natural master of his family. "The rights and
consequences   of   both   paternal  and  despotical  dominion,"  Hobbes
maintains, "are the very same with those of a sovereign by institution."
On  the  other  hand,  Rousseau, an equally staunch opponent of absolute
rule,  uses  the word "despotism" only in an invidious sense for what he
regards  as  illegitimate  government —absolute monarchy. "Even if there
were  as close an analogy as many authors maintain between the State and
the  family,"  he writes, "it would not follow that the rules of conduct
proper  for  one of these societies would be also proper for the other."
Rousseau  even  goes so far as to deny that parental rule is despotic in
his  sense  of that term. "With regard to paternal authority, from which
some writers have derived absolute government," he remarks that "nothing
can  be further from the ferocious spirit of despotism than the mildness
of  that  authority  which  looks more to the advantage of him who obeys
than  to  that  of  him  who  commands."  He  agrees  with  Locke in the
observation  that,  unlike  the  political  despot,  "the  father is the
child's  master  no  longer  than  his help is necessary." When both are
equal,  the  son  is  perfectly  independent of the father, and owes him
"only  respect  and  not  obedience." Misrule in the family, then, would
seem  to occur when these conditions or limits are violated. Parents may
try  to  continue  their  absolute  control  past the point at which the
children  have become mature and are competent to take care of their own
affairs.  A  parent who does not relinquish his absolutism at this point
can  be called "despotic" in the derogatory sense of that word. Applying
a  distinction  made by some political writers, the parent is tyrannical
rather  than despotic when he uses the children for his own good, treats
them  as property to exploit, even at a time when his absolute direction
of  their  affairs  would  be  justified  if  it were for the children's
welfare.  The  existence of parental tyranny raises in its sharpest form
the  question  of  the  state's right to intervene in the family for the
good  of  its  members. The central element in the domestic estabUshment
is, of course, the institution of mar-

[550a]
492 THE GREAT IDEAS riage. The discussion of marriage in the great books
deals  with  most  of  the  moral  and  psychological, if not all of the
sociological and economic, aspects of the institution. The most profound
question,  perhaps, is whether marriage is merely a human institution to
be  regulated  solely  by  custom and civil law, or a contract under the
sanctions  of  natural  law,  or  a  religious  sacrament signifying and
imparting  God's  grace.  The  last  two  of  these alternatives may not
exclude  one another, but those who insist upon the first usually reject
the  other  two. Some, like the Parson in the Canterbury Tales, consider
marriage not only a natural but also a divine institution—a "sacrament .
.  . ordained by God Himself in Paradise, and confirmed by Jesus Christ,
as  witness St. Matthew in the gospel: 'For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be
one  flesh,'  which betokens the knitting together of Christ and of Holy
Church."  Others, like Kant, seem to stress the character of marriage as
an  institution  sanctioned  by  natural  law. The "natural union of the
sexes,"  he writes, "proceeds either according to the mere animal nature
{vaga  libido,  venusvulgivaga,  fornicatio),  or  according to law. The
latter  is  marriage {matrimonium), which is the union of two persons of
different  sex  for  life-long  reciprocal  possession  of  their sexual
faculties."  Kant  considers offspring as a natural end of marriage, but
not  the  exclusive  end,  for  then "the marriage would be dissolved of
itself  when the production of children ceased. . . . Even assuming," he
declares, "that enjoyment in the reciprocal use of the sexual endowments
is  an  end  of  marriage,  yet  the contract of marriage is not on that
account  a  matter of arbitrary will, but is a contract necessary in its
nature by the Law of Humanity. In other words, if a man and a woman have
the  will  to  enter  on  reciprocal  enjoyment in accordance with their
sexual  natures,  they  must necessarily marry each other." Still others
see  marriage  primarily  as  a  civil  contract.  Freud,  for  example,
considers  the  view  that  "sexual  relations are permitted only on the
basis of a final, indissoluble bond between a man and woman" as purely a
convention  of  "present-day civilization." Marriage, as a set of taboos
restricting the sexual Hfe, varies from

[550b]
culture  to culture; but in Freud's opinion the "high-water mark in this
type   of   development   has  been  reached  in  our  Western  European
civilization."  The conception of marriage—whether it is merely a civil,
or  a  natural,  and  even  a  divine  institution—obviously affects the
position  to be taken on monogamy, on divorce, on chastitv and adultery,
and on the comparative merits of the married and the celibate condition.
The  pagans,  for  the  most  part,  regard  celibacy  as  a misfortune,
especially  for  women,  as witness the tragedy of the unwedded Electra.
Christianity, on the other hand, celebrates the heroism of virginity and
encourages  the  formation of monastic communities for cefibates. Within
the  Judaeo-Christian tradition there are striking differences. Not only
were  the  patriarchs  of  the  Old  Testament  polygamous, but orthodox
Judaism  and  orthodox  Christianity  also  differ on divorce. Augustine
explains  how  a  Christian  should  interpret those passages in the Old
Testament  which  describe  the  polygamous practices of the patriarchs.
"The  saints  of  ancient  times," he writes, "were under the form of an
earthly  kingdom,  foreshadowing  and foretelling the kingdom of heaven.
And  on account of the necessity for a numerous offspring, the custom of
one  man  having  several  wives was at that time blameless; and for the
same  reason  it  was not proper for one woman to have several husbands,
because  a woman does not in that way become more fruitful ... In regard
to  matters of this sort," he concludes, "whatever the holy men of those
times  did  without  lust, Scripture passes over without blame, although
they  did  things  which  could  not  be done at the present time except
through  lust."  On similar grounds Aquinas holds that "it was allowable
to  give  a bill of divorce," under the law of the Old Testament, but it
is  not  allowable  under the Christian dispensation because divorce "is
contrary  to the nature of a sacrament." The greatest famiharity between
man  and  wife  requires the staunchest fidelity which "is impossible if
the marriage bond can be sundered." Within the Christian tradition Locke
takes  an  opposite  view  of  divorce.  He can see good reason why "the
society of man and wife should be more lasting than that of

[551a]
male and female amongst oihcr creatures," but he does not sec "wliy this
compact,  where  procreation and education are secured, and inlieritance
taken  care for, may not be made determinable either by consent, or at a
certain  time,  or  upon  certain  conditions,  as  well  as any other \
oluntary  compact, there being no necessity in the nature of the thing .
. . that it should always be for life." Against Locke, Dr. Johnson would
argue that "to the contract of marriage, besides the man and wife, there
is  a  third  party  Society;  and if it be considered as a vow—God; and
therefore  it  cannot  be  dissolved  by  their consent alone." Laws and
customs,  however,  represent  only  the  external  or  social aspect of
marriage.  The  discussion of these externals cannot give any impression
of  the  inwardness  and  depth of the problem which marriage is for the
individual person. Only the great poems, the great novels and plays, the
great  books  of  history  and  biography  can  adequately  present  the
psychological   and  emotional  aspects  of  marriage  in  the  life  of
individuals.  Heightened in narration, they give more eloquent testimony
than  the  case  histories  of  Freud  to  support  the proposition that
marriage  is  at all times—in every culture and under the widest variety
of  circumstances—one  of  the  supreme  tests  of  human character. The
relation  between  men and women in and out of marriage, the relation of
husband  and wife before and after marriage, the relation of parents and
children—  these  create crises and tensions, conflicts between love and
duty,  between  reason  and  the  passions, from which no individual can
entirely  escape. Marriage is not only a typically human problem, but it
is  the  one  problem  which,  both psychologically and morally, touches
every  man,  woman,  and  child.  Sometimes  the  resolution  is tragic,
sometimes  the  outcome seems to be happy, almost blessed; but whether a
human  Ufe is built on this foundation or broken against these rocks, it
is  violently  shaken  in the process and forever shaped. To some degree
each  reader  of  the  great books has, in imagination if not in action,
participated in the trials of Odysseus, Penelope, and Telemachus; in the
affections of Hector and Andromache, Alcestis and Admetus, Tom Jones and
Sophia,  Natasha  and  Pierre  Bezukhov, in the jealousy of Othello, the
anguish oi Lear,

[551b]
Chapter  26:  FAMILY  4W  the  decision  of  Aeneas or the indecision of
Hamlel; and certainly in the reasoning of Panurge about whether to marry
or  not.  In  each of these cases, everyone finds some aspect of love in
relation  to  marriage,  some phase of parenthood or childhood which has
colored his own life or that of his family; and he can find somewhere in
his  own  experience  the  grounds  for sympathetic understanding of the
extraordinary  relation  between  Electra  and  her mother Clytemnestra,
between  Augustine  and  Monica his mother, between Oedipus and Jocasta.
Prince  Hamlet and Queen Gertrude, Pierre Bezukhov and his wife, or what
is  perhaps  the most extraordinary case of all—Adam and Eve in Paradise
Lost.  On  one  point  the  universality  of the problem of marriage and
family  life  seems  to  require  qualification.  The  conflict  between
conjugal  and  illicit  love exists in all ages. The entanglement of the
bond  between  man  and  wife with the ties—of both love and blood—which
unite  parents  and children, is equally universal. But the difficulties
which  arise  in  marriage as a result of the ideals or the illusions of
romantic  love  seem  to  constitute  a  peculiarly  modern problem. The
ancients  distinguished  between  sexual love and the love of friendship
and  they understood the necessity for both in the conjugal relationship
if  marriage  is to prosper. But not until the later Middle Ages did men
think  of  matrimony as a way to perpetuate throughout all the years the
ardor  of that moment in a romantic attachment when the lovers find each
other without flav/ and beyond reproach. Matters relevant to this modern
problem  are  discussed  in  the chapter on Love. As is there indicated,
romantic  love, though it seems to be of Christian origin, may also be a
distortion  even  an  heretical perversion—of the kind of Christian love
which  is  pledged  in  the  reciprocal  vows of holy matrimony. We have
already  considered  some  of the problems of the family which relate to
children  and  youth—  the  immature  members  of the human race—such as
whether  the  child  belongs to the family or the state, and whether the
family is solely responsible for the care and training of children, or a
share of this responsibility falls to the state or the church.

[552a]
494  THE GREAT IDEAS There are other problems. Why do men and women want
offspring  and what satisfactions do they get from rearing children? For
the most part in Christendom, and certainly in antiquity, the lot of the
childless  is  looked upon as a grievous frustration. To be childless is
not  merely  contrary  to  nature, but for pagan as well as Christian it
constitutes  the  deprivation  of  a  blessing  which  should  grace the
declining  years of married life. The opposite view, so rarely taken, is
voiced  by the chorus of women in the Medea of Euripides. "Those who are
wholly  without  experience  and  have never had children far surpass in
happiness those who are parents," the women chant in response to Medea's
tragic  leave-taking  from  her  own babes. "The childless, because they
have  never  proved whether children grow up to be a blessing or a curse
to  men,  are  removed from all share in many troubles; whilst those who
have  a sweet race of children growing up in their houses do wear away .
.  . their whole life through; first with the thought how they may train
them  up  in  virtue,  next how they shall leave their sons the means to
live;  and  after  all  this  'tis far from clear whether on good or bad
children they bestow their toil." Still other questions arise concerning
children,  quite  apart  from  the attitude of parents toward having and
rearing  them.  What  is  the  economic position of the child, both with
respect  to  ownership  of  property  and  with respect to a part in the
division  of  labor  ?  How  has  the  economic  status of children been
affected   by   industrialism   ?   What   are   the  mental  and  moral
characteristics of the immature which exclude them from participation in
political  life,  and  which require adult regulation of their affairs ?
What    are    the    criteria—emotional   and   mental   as   well   as
chronological—which  determine  the  classification  of  individuals  as
children  or adults, and how is the transition from childhood to manhood
effected  economically,  politically,  and  above  all emotionally ? The
authors  of  the  great books discuss most of these questions, but among
them  only  Freud  sees in the relation of children to their parents the
basic emotional determination of human life. The fundamental triangle of
love  and  hate,  devotion  and rivalry, consists of father, mother, and
child. For Freud all the intricacies and per-

[552b]
versions  of  love,  the qualitative distinctions of romantic, conjugal,
and  iUicit  love,  the factors which determine the choice of a mate and
success  or  failure in marriage, and the conditions which determine the
emergence from emotional infantilism—all these can be understood only by
reference  to  the  emotional  life  of  the  child in the vortex of the
family.  The  child's  "great  task,"  according  to  Freud,  is that of
"freeing  himself  from the parents," for "only after this detachment is
accomplished  can  he  cease to be a child and so become a member of the
social  community.  .  . . These tasks are laid down for every man" but,
Freud  writes,  "it  is  noteworthy  how seldom they are carried through
ideally, that is, how seldom they are solved in a manner psychologically
as well as socially satisfactory. In neurotics, however," he adds, "this
detachment  from  the parents is not accomplished at all." In one sense,
it  is  never  fully  accomplished by anyone. What Freud calls the "ego-
ideal"— which represents our higher nature and which, in the name of the
reality-principle,  resists  instinctual  compliance  with the pleasure-
principle—  is  said  to have its origin in "the identification with the
father, which takes place in the prehistory of every person." Even after
an  individual  has  achieved detachment from the family, this ego-ideal
acts  as "a substitute for the longing for a father"; and in the form of
conscience  it "continues ... to exercise the censorship of morals." One
other   group   of  questions  which  involve  the  family—at  least  as
background—concerns  the  position  or  role  of  women. We have already
considered  their  relation  to  their husbands in the government of the
family  itself.  The way in which that relation is conceived affects the
status  and  activity  of women in the larger community of the state, in
relation  to  citizenship  and  the  opportunities for education, to the
possession  of  property  and the production of wealth (for example, the
role  of  female  labor in an industrial economy). Again it is Euripides
who  gives  voice to the plight of women in a man's world, in two of his
great  tragedies,  the  Trojan Women and Medea. In the one, they cry out
under the brunt of the suffering which men leave them to bear in the

[553a]
backwash  of  war. In the other, Medea passionately berates the ignominy
and  bondage which women must accept in being wives. "Of all things that
have  life  and  sense,"  she  says,  "we  women  are  the  most hapless
creatures;  first  must  we  buy a husband at great price, and then o'er
ourselves  a  tyrant  set,  which  is an evil worse than the first." The
ancient  world contains another feminist who goes further than Euripides
in  speaking for the right of women to be educated like men, to share in
property  with them, and to enjoy the privileges as well as to discharge
the  tasks  of  citizenship.  In  the  tradition of the great books, the
striking  fact  is  that  after  Plato the next great declaration of the
rights  of women should be written by one who is as far removed from him
in  time  and  temper as John Stuart Mill. In Plato's Republic, Socrates
argues  that  if  the difference between men and women "consists only in
women  bearing and men begetting children, this does not amount to proof
that  a woman differs from a man in respect to the sort of education she
should  receive." For the same reason, he says, "the guardians and their
wives  ought to have the same pursuits." Since he thinks that "the gifts
of nature are aUke diffused in both," Socrates insists that "there is no
special  faculty  of administration in a state which a woman has because
she  is  a  woman,  or  which  a  man  has by virtue of his sex. All the
pursuits  of  men  are the pursuits of women also." Yet he adds that "in
all of them a woman is inferior to a man." Therefore when he proposes to
let  women "share in the toils of war and the defence of their country,"
Socrates suggests that "in the distribution of labors the lighter are to
be assigned to the women, who arc the weaker natures." OUTLINE OF TOPICS
1.  The  nature  and  necessity  of the family 497 2. The family and the
state  2a. Comparison of the domestic and political community in origin,
structure,  and  function  2c. The place and rights of the family in the
state: the control and education of children

[553b]
Chapter  26:  FAMILY  495 Mill's tract on The Subjection of Women is his
fullest  statement  of  the  case  for  social,  economic, and political
equality between the sexes. In Representative Government, his defense of
women's  rights  deals  primarily  with  the  question  of extending the
franchise  to  them.  Difference  of  sex,  he contends, is "as entirely
irrelevant to political rights, as difference in height, or in the color
of  the hair. All human beings have the same interest in good government
.  .  .  Mankind have long since abandoned the only premisses which will
support  the  conclusion  that women ought not to have votes. No one now
holds  that women should be in personal servitude; that they should have
no  thought,  wish,  or  occupation,  but  to be the domestic drudges of
husbands,  fathers,  or  brothers. It is allowed to unmarried, and wants
but little of being conceded to married women to hold property, and have
pecuniary  and  business  interests,  in  the  same manner as men. It is
considered  suitable  and proper that women should think, and write, and
be teachers. As soon as these things are admitted," Mill concludes, "the
political disqualification has no principle to rest on." Though no other
of the great books speaks so directly for the emancipation of women from
domestic  and  political  subjection,  many  of  them  do  consider  the
differences  between men and women in relation to war and love, pleasure
and pain, virtue and vice, duty and honor. Some are concerned explicitly
with  the  pivotal  question—whether  men  and women are more alike than
different,  whether  they  are  essentially  equal  in their humanity or
unequal. Since these are matters pertinent to human nature itself, as it
is  affected  by  gender,  the  relevant  passages  are collected in the
chapter on Man. PAOB

[554a]
496  THE  GREAT IDEAS 3«. The wealth of families: the maintenance of the
domestic  economy 4. The institution of n^rriage: its nature and purpose
^b.  The  religious view of marriage: the sacrament of matrimony 4^. The
laws  and  customs  regulating marriage: adultery, incest government 5^.
Women  in relation to war 6a. The desire for offspring 6c. The condition
of immaturity 7. The life of the family ya. Marriage and love: romantic,
conjugal, and illicit love

[554b]
1  Page  3.  The economics of the family ^c)() 4^. Monogamy and polygamy
500  4^.  Matrimony  and celibacy 501 ^e. Divorce 502 5. The position of
women  503  5^. The role of women in the family: the relation of husband
and  wife in domestic 5^. The status of women in the state: the right to
citizenship,   property,   education   504   6.  Parents  and  children:
fatherhood,  motherhood  505  6b.  Eugenics:  control of breeding; birth
control  506  6d.  The  care  and government of children: the rights and
duties  of  the  child;  parental  despotism  and  tyranny  507  6e. The
initiation  of  children  into  adult life 508 yb. The continuity of the
family: the veneration of ancestors; family pride, feuds, curses 509 yc.
Patterns  of  friendship  in  the  family:  man  and  wife;  parents and
children;  brothers  and  sisters 510 yd. The emotional impact of family
life upon the child: the domestic triangle; the symbolic roles of father
and mother 5 1 8. Historical observations on the institution of marriage
and the family 512

[555a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homf.r: Iliad, hk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed   in   one   column,   the   letters   a  and  b  refer  to  the
uppcrandlovverhalvesof    the   page.   For   example,   in   53   James
:Pjr)'f/!o/o^^,116a-l  19b, the passage begins in the upper half of page
116  and ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is printed in
two  columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of
the lefthand sideof the page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  right-hand  sideof  the  page. For example, in 7 Plato:
Symposium,  163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-
hand  side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side
of  page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a
work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  arc  sometimes  included in the
reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are given in certain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk  it  [265-283]  12d.  Bible References: The references are to
book,  chapter, and verse. When the King James and Douay versions differ
in  title  of  books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King
James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows;
e.g.,  Old  Testament: Nehemiah, 7:45— (D) // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed intermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in  the  use  of  The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. I. The
nature  and  necessity  of  the family Old Testament: Genesis, 2:18-25 7
Plato: Republic, bk v, 361b-365d / Laws, BK IV, 685a-c; bk vi, 707c-709a
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i  445a-455a,c;  bk ii, CH 1-4 455b,d-458a
passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk \'
[loii1027] 74b-c
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 22, 198c199c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
39a-41a  /  LycurgusNuma,  62d-64a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch
14-17  520a-523a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 92, AA 1-2
488d-490c; q 98 516d-519a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94,
»  A  2,  ANS  221d-223a; q 105, a 4, ans 318b321a 23 Hobbes: Leriathan,
part  ii, 121a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xx 449a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk viii [357-451] 240a242a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vi,  sect  56-63 36d-38c; ch vii, sect 77-86 42b-44a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part i, 29b-30a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 410a-411a I \

[555b]
Chapter 26: FAMILY w 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiii, 187d-188a
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  350a-c / Social Contract, BK I, 387d-388a 42
Kant:  Sciejue  of  Right,  418c-422d;  433c434a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par 158181 58a-63d; additions, 47 124a-b / Philosophy
ofHistory,  intro,  172b-d;  part iv, 353a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 241c-d 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427b-c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  i,  659d662a  53  James:  Psychology,  189a  54  Freud:  Group
Psychology,  686c-687d  esp 687d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 781
d-  782c;  788a-b  2.  The  family  and  the state 2a. Comparison of the
domestic  and  political  community in origin, structure, and function 7
Plato:  Crito,  216d-217d  /  Republic,  bk  v,  356b-365d / Laws, bk i,
641a-642b;  bk  hi,  664a-666c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch 12
[1162^16-18]  414c  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2 445a-446d; bk ii, CH 2
455d-456c; ch 5 [1263^30-35] 459a

[556a]
498  THE GREAT IDEAS (2. The family and the state. 2a. Comparison of the
domestic  and political community in origin, structure, andfunction.^ 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk v [35-103] 188a-190a; bk VI
[679-702]
229a-b;
[756-789]
231a-232a;  BK  vm [66-80] 260b-261a; bk x [1-117] 302a305a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-b  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xix, ch 12, 517c-d; CH
13-17 519a-523a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 3, REP
3  207a-c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  99b-c;  llla-b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  ofLearning,  34a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch vi-vii
36a-46c;  CH  XV  64c-65d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  214b-217b esp
216b;410a-411a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 13b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  359b-c / Political Economy, 367a-368c / Social Contract, bk
i,  387d388a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 75 31d-32b; part
hi,  par 157 57d; par 181 63c-d; par 203 68a-c; par 255-256 79d-80a; par
303  101c-102a;  par  349  llld-112a;  additions,  47  124a-b; 11 5-1 16
135c-d;  157  142b-c  /  Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 172b'd; 180c-182c;
part  I,  211a-212c; 246d-247a; part hi, 288c-289d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  308b-d;  310a-c;  579b-581c esp 581a-b 54 Freud: Group Psychology,
664b-d;   685b-687d   esp  686c-687d;  692a-b  /  Civilization  and  Its
Disco?itetits,  781d-783d  esp  781d-782d;  796b-c 2b. Comparison of the
domestic  and political community in manner of government Old Testament:
Isaiah,  22:20-22—  (D)  Isaias,  22  :20-22 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
35c-d  7  Plato:  Statesman,  581a-b  /  Laws,  bk  i, 641a642b; BK III,
664a-666c esp 666b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1134^8-17]
382b-c; ch ii [1138^5-14] 387a,c; bk vi, ch 5
[1140^7-10]
389b; CH 8
[1141^28-1142^11]
390d-391a;  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii 412c-413d; bk X, CH 9 [1180^3-7] 435b /
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  445a-446d; ch 5 447d-448c; ch 7 [1255^15-20]
449b; CH 12 453d-454a; ch 13
[1259^301260^33] 454b-455a; bk
hi, ch 6
[1278^301279*2] 476a-b; ch 14 [1285^29-33] 484a
13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk v [35-103] 188a-190a; bk VI [756-789] 231a-232a;
bk  vin  [66-80]  260b261a; bk x [1-117] 302a-305a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xix,  ch  12,  517c-d;  CH  13-17  519a-523a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  92,  A  I,  rep  2 488d-489d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90,  A  3,  rep 3 207a-c; q 105, a 4, rep 5
318b321a

[556b]
2b to Ic 23 Hobbes: leviathan, part i, 67d-68a; 86a; PART II, 109b-lllb;
121a;  155b;  part  hi,  228b-c  30  Bacon: Nd-w^ Atlantis, 207b-209d 32
Milton:   Samson   Agonistes   [1010-1060]   361b362b  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch  i,  sect  1-2  25a-c; ch vi-vii 36a-46c esp ch vi, sect
66-75 39b-42a; ch viii, sect 105-112 48c-51b;cH XIV, sect 162 63a; ch xv
64c-65d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  214b-217b esp 216b;410a-411a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  21a-22d;  120c-121a,c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  i,  3b;  bk  IV,  13b; BK V, 28b-29a; bk xvi, 118b-c; bk XIX,
140a-c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357a-b / Political Economy, 367a-368c /
Social Contract, bk i, 387d388a; bk iii, 411c-d; 414c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  412c-413b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 82b-83c 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 421c-422d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 47
124a-b;  in  134d-135a;  157  142  b-c  /  Philosophy of History, intro,
172b-d;  part  i, 211a213a 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 687a-d; 688d-689a
2c.  The  place  and  rights of the family in the state: the control and
education  of  children  Old  Testament:  Deuteronofny,  20:5-7;  ^4-5 5
Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes 27a-39a,c esp [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c 5
Sophocles:  Antigone 131a-142d 5 Euripides: Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d
esp
[1255-1275] 436c, [1368-1401] 437c-d
5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae [611-6=^0] Q22a.-c 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  iv,  139a-b; bk vii, 223c-d 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
398c-d  7  Plato:  Crito,  216d-217d  /  Republic,  bk  v,  360d-365d  /
Statesman,  606d-608d  /  Laws,  BK III, 665d-666c; bk vi, 707b-708a; bk
vii, 721d-723d; bk xi, 775d-780c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1179^311180^13]
434c-435b / Politics, bk i, ch 13
[1260^8-19] 455c; BK
II,   CH   2-3   455d-457a;   CH   6   [1265*38-^17]   460d-461a;  ch  9
[1269^^131270^6] 465d-466c; bk hi, ch 9
[1280^301281*2] 478c; BK
IV, ch 15
[1300*4-8] 500d;
BK VI, CH 8
[1322^38-1323*6] 526d; bk
vii,  CH  16  [i334^28]-BK  VIII,  CH  2 [1337*34] 539d542b 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,   21a-26b   /  Lycurgus,  36a-45c  /  Numa  Pofnpilius,  58d  /
LycurgusNuma,  62d-64a / Cato the Younger, 629a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii, 32b-d; bk hi, 51a; 51d-52a; bk xv, 162b-c / Histories, bk hi, 248c-d
18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 16 521d522a

[557a]
3/0  4 Chapter 26: FAMILY 499 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
90,  A  3,  REP  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a i, ans 226c 227c; q 104, A 4, ANS
306d-307c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  121a;  155b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  344a-c  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vt 36a-42a; ch VII, SECT
83  43b-c;  ch  xv  64c-65d; cii xvi, SECT 180-183 67b-68b; sect 188-192
69a-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a;  park  iv, 166b-167a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk iv, 13b; BK V, 22d-23a; bk xii, 95c-d;
bk xix, 140a c; BK xxiii, 189b-c; 190b; 192d-199b; bk xxvi, 216b-217b 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 327c-d / Political Economy, 376b-377a; 377d-378a /
Social Contract, BK IV, 439b,d [fn 2] 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
338c-339b;  341c-342a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 66d-67b: 175c-d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73c;  82b-83c;  86b-d;88d-89a;92c 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 404d; 421a-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 317c-319d 44 Boswell:
/citeo;2,  280c-281a; 304a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
166  59d-60a;pari8o62c-63c;  par  238-241  76c-77a; par 255-256 79d-80a;
additions, 146-147 140b-c / Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 172b-d; part I,
246d-247a;   part  ii,  277c;  part  hi,  288c-289b  50  Marx:  Capital,
193a-196d;  241a-d; 245a-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 427b428a
54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 783b784d esp 783d- 784b /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  868d-871a  passim  3. The economics of the
family  3<2.  The  wealth  of  families: the maintenance of the domestic
economy  Old  Testament:  Numbers,  27:1-11  / Deuteronomy, 21:15-17 New
Testament:  / Timothy, 5:8 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 360c-365d / Laws, BK
III,  664a-666a;  bk  vi,  709a-710a;  bk  xi,  775d-778b  9  Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  3-1  i 446d-453d esp CH 3 [1253^12-14] 447a, ch 4
447b-c,  ch  8-1  1 449d-453d; bk ii, ch 5 [1264*^1-7] 459d; bk hi, ch 4
[1277^20-25]  474d  14  Plutarch:  Solon,  72b-c  /  Pericles,  130b-d /
Pelopidas, 233a-h / Marcus Cato, 278b-279c; 286b-287d / Aristides-Marcus
Cato,  291b-292b  /  Crassus,  439a-c  / Crassus-Nicias, 455b, d / Agis,
650d-651b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 32b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch  14 520a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A 4,
ANS and REP 1-4 318b-321a

[557b]
b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  122b 124c; 184a 191c; 458c-462a;472a-473a 29
(Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, 148b 149a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  vi,  sect  72-73  40d-41a;  ch vii, sect 79-80 42c-43a; ch xvi, sect
182-183   67c-68b;  sect  190-192  69b-d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,
376b-379a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk vii, 50a-b; BK XVIII,
129d-132b;  bk  xxiii,  190a-b;  bk  XXVI, 216a-b; bk xxvii 225a 230d 38
Rousseau  :  Inequality, 350a-b / Political Economy, 367a-368c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  Ib-c; bk hi, 165b-167a; bk v, 383d-384d 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 16c- 17d; 66d-67b; 498b-501b passim 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  83a;  86d-89d  43 Mill: Liberty, 319b-d 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 147c-148b
[fn
3];  274b278a;  280c-281a; 282a-b; 289c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi, par 169-172 60c-61a; par 178-180 62a-63c; additions, 109 134c;
114 135b-c / Philosophy of History, part 1 11, 289a49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  324a-c  50  Marx:  Capital,  34c-d;  171d-172a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; bk vn 275a-302d passim, esp 275a-278a, 291a292b,
301b-302d;  bk  xv,  633a-d;  epilogue  i,  650d-652a;654a-655c 3>b. The
effects  of  political  economy:  the family in the industrial system 38
Rousseau:  Political, Economy, 367a-368c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i,  27b-37b  esp 28d-29a, 29d-30d, 34b-c; bk iv, 243b,d; bk V, 383d-384d
43   Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d  44  BoswEi,!.:  Johnson,  197d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 253 79a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 117c-144a
passim;  192c-196d;  226d-248c esp 241a-d; 318a-319a; 375c-376c 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto, 420d; 423a; 424c; 427b-d 4. The institution
of  marriage:  its  nature  and purpose Old Testament: Genesis, 1:27-28;
2:18-25;  30:1-24  /  Proverbs, 18:22 New^ Testament: Matthew, 19:3-12 /
MarJ{,  10:1-12 / LuJ^e, 16:18 / / Corinthians, 7 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 /
Colossians,  3:18-19 / I Peter, y.i-j 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 361b-365d
/  Statesman,  QOSa-c/  Laws,  bkiv, 685a-c; bk vi,707c709a 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2 [1252*25-^9] 445b-d; bk vii, ch 16 539d-541a 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 7, 183b-d; CH 22, 198c-199c

[558a]
500  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (4.  The institution of marriage: its nature and
purpose.^  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk iv [1-172] 167a-171b; bk VII [81-106]
238a-239a;  [248-434]  242b-248a; BK XI [336-375] 337a-338a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus, 39a-^0c / LycurgusNuma, 62d-64a / Solon, 71d-72a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  3  9b-c;  BK IV, par 2 19d; bk vi, par 22-25
41d-42d  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  21-26  392b-396c; bk XV, CH 16
410b-411d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  III,  CH  12,  663a-c;  ch 18-20
664d-665d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, AA 1-2 488d-490c;
q  98 516d'519a 22 Chaucer: WifeofBath's Prologue [^^S7,-6^io] 256a-269b
/ Merchant's Tale
[9121-9562]
319a-326a / Franklin's Tale 351b-366a esp
[11,041-117] 351b-352b
/  Parson's Tale, par 77-80 540b-542a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 410d-413a 26
Shakespeare: As You Like It, act v, sc iv
[114-156] 625a-b
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 261c-262a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  appendix,  xx  449a 32 Mii.TOi>i : Paradise Lost, bk viii [357-451]
240a242a;  bk ix [952-959] 268a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect
77-83  42b-43c  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part i, 29b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  xxiii, 187d188a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 364d-365b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  418c-420b; 433d-434a 43 Mill: Liberty, 316d-317c 44
B0SWE1.1.:  Johnson, 194a; 289d-290a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  75 31d-32b; part hi, par 161-169 58b-60c; additions, 47 124a-b;
103-108  133c-134c  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 579b-581c 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk i, 14b-15a; 55c59d; BK III, llla-128d; bk vi, 245d-274a,c;
bk  vii, 301b-302d; epilogue i, 659d-662a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  784c  / Netv hitroductory Lectures, 862d-863b 4a. Monogamy
and  polygamy  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  16;  29:1-30:24 / Deuteronomy,
17:16-17;  21:15-17  /  /  Samuel,  25:39-44— (D) / Kings, 25:39-44 / //
Samuel, 3:1-5; 11-12— (D) // Kings, 3:1-5; 11-12 / I Kings, 11:1-13— (D)
///  Kings,  11:1-13  New  Testament:  /  Timothy,  3:2,12  5 Sophocles:
Trachiniae [307-489] 172d-174b 5 Euripides: Andromache 315a-326a,c esp
[147-244]
316c-317b / Electra
[1030-1040]
336c  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 32a; 48c; bk iv, 155c-156a; bk v, 160d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 39d-40c / Demetrius, 731a-b / Antony-Demetrius,
780d

[558b]
4^  to  43  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, -bv. iii,ch 12, 663a-c; ch
18-22   664d-666c  22  Chaucer:  Wife  ofBath's  Prologue  [^^S^-^C^j^o]
256a-257a  30  Bacon : New Atlantis, 209b-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
162b-166b esp 162b, 166a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 28d; bk
XV,  112a-b;  bk  xvi, 116a-120a; bk xxiii 188c-d;BKxxvi,218d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  92c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86a; 245b'246c 42
Kant: Science of Right, 419c-420a 43 xMill: Liberty, 311a-312a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofRight, part hi, par 167168 60b-c; additions, 105 133d-134a
/  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  hi,  294c-d  49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
579b-583a  esp 581b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 660d661b 53
James:  Psychology,  735a-b  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
784b-c  4b.  The  religious view of marriage: the sacrament of matrimony
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:23-24  /  Proverbs,  18:22 Apocrypha: Tobit
passim,  esp  6:10-17,  8:1-17, 9:6, 10:1-12— (D) OT, Tobias passim, esp
6:10-22,  8:1-19,  9-12,  10:1-13 NewTestament: Matthew, 19:3-12 / Mar^,
10:112  /  John,  2:1-12  /  I  Corinthians,  7 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 / /
Timothy,  4:1-5  / Hebrews, 13:4 5 Aeschylus: Eum.enides [210-224] 83b 5
Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii
[81-106]
238a-239a;
[248-434] 242b-248a
18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 3 9b-c; BK IV, par 2 19d / City of
God,  bk  xiv,  ch  22  392d-393b  / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 18-22
664d-666c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, AA 2-3 489d-491b;
q  98 516d-519a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 102, A 5, REP
3  283c-292c; q 105, a 4, ans and rep 6-9 318b-321a; part hi, q 65, a i,
ans  and REP 5 879c-881d; a 2, ans and rep i 881d-882c; a 3, ans and rep
1,4  882d-883d;  A  4,  ANS  and  rep 3 883d-884a,c; part hi SUPPL, Q 95
1042c-1049d  passim  22 Chaucer: Wife ofBath' s Prologue [^^^i-^-/ Ji()\
256a-258b / Merchant's Tale
[9193-9210]
320a-b  /  Parson's Tale, par 75, 536a; par // -80 540b-542a 23 Ho^^-Es:
Leviathan,  part  iv, 250c; 272d-273a; 276a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 219b-222b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 124b-c
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[379-560]
240b-244a

[559a]
d 4r to ^d Chapter 26: FAMILY 501 217c38 MoNTiiSQUiEu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
xxv  218a;219b-d 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 439b, lfn2] 40 Gib
bon  :  Decline  and  Fall, 193a-b 41 GihBOs: Decline and full, 83d-85c;
177d-178b 44 Hosw ell: Jo/jnson, 304a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  hi,  288c289b;  294c-d;  part iv, 333c; 353a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk i, 50c; bk xi, 476c-479d passim 4c. Matrimony and celibacy New
Testan4ent:  Matthew,  19:10-12 / / Corinthians, 7 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv,
685a-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 22, 198c199c 14 Plutarch:
Numa  Pompilius,  54c-55a  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 44c; bk hi, 51a 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk ii, par 3 9b-c; bk VI, par 21-25 41c-42d; bk
viir, par 26-27 60b-c 20 Aquinas: Swnma Theologica, part ii-ii, q 186, A
4  655c-656b;  part  hi,  q  65, a 4, ans and REP 3 883d-884a,c; part hi
suppl,  q  96, AA 3-5 1053c-1058a; aa 11-12 1063d-1065b 22 Chaucer: Wife
of Bath's Prologue
[56335732] 257a-258b
/  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b471b  esp  [15,588-706] 463b-465b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan^  part  iv,  272d-273a;  276b; 278c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk i, 60c-66b;BKiii, 219b-221b I 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet^ act
hi,  sc i [120-157] 48b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [736-749] 168b
36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 522a-523b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
xxiii,  189d;  197a-c; bk xxv, 210a-b 40 GiBBoyi: Decline and Fall, 82a;
193a-c;  533c-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 86a; 177d-178a; 422c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  308c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part iv, 333c;
353a-b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 315c-d; 327d 50 Marx: Capital, 305b
[fn  2]  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  695a-b 4d. The laws and customs
regulating  marriage: adultery, incest Old Testament: Genesis, 19:30-38;
24;   29;  35:22;  38;  39:7-20;  49:3-4/  Exodus,  20:14,17;  22:16-17;
34:15-16/   L^r/V/W/i",  18;  19:29:20:921  /  Numbers,  5:12-31;  36  /
Deuteronomy, 5:18,21; 7:1-4; 21:10-14; 22:13-30; 24:5; 25:510; 27:20-23/
Ruth, 3-4 / // Sainuel, 11-13; 1 6 :2o-23— (D) // Kings, 11-13:16 :2o-23
/  Ezra,  10—  (D)  I  Esdras,  10  / Esther, 2:12.-1^ / Joby 24:15-25 /
Proverbs, 5; 6:20-7:27 / Jeremiah 5 :7-9— (JD) JeremiaSy 5 :7-9

[559b]
Apocrypha:  Tobit, 4:12-13— (D) OT, Tobias^ 4:^ / Ecclesiasticus, 9:1-9;
23:17-28—  (O)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 9:1-1:5; 23:24-^8/ Susanna -{D) Qy\\
Daniel,  17,  New Testament: Matthew, 14:3-4; 19:3-9 / A/^/r^, 10:1-12 /
Lu/{e,  16:18  /  John^ 4:16-18; 8:1-11 / Romans, 7:1-3 / / Corinthians,
5:7/ Hebrews, 13:4 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d; bk xi
[385-461]
247a-c; bk xvih
[250-312]
286d287b  5  Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes [734-757] 35b-c / Agamemnon
52a-69d  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the  King  99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus [939-999] 123a-c 5 Euripides:
Medea  212a-224a,c  /  Andromache  315a-326a,c  esp [147-244] 316c-317b/
Electra
[1008-1123] 336b-337b / Phoenician Maidens
[1-87] 378a-379a / Cyclops [175-187] 441d-442a
5 Aristophanes: Clouds [1060-1104] 501c-502a / Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2d-3d;32a;34a-b; 39b-c; 44c-d; 48c; bk hi,
96a-b;  104d-105a;  BK  IV, 144b; BK v, 160d-161a 7 Plato: Crito, 217a /
Republic,  bk  v,  360d365d;  BK  VIII,  403b-d  /  Timaeus, 442d-443a /
Statesman, 605d-608d esp 608a-c / Laws, BK IV, 685a-c; bk vi, 707b-709a;
710d-711a;  712b-713c;  bk  vhi,  735b-738c;  bk  xi, 777b778a; 780a-c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 1-4 455b, d458a esp ch 4 457b-458a; ch 9
[1269^131270*^7]
465d-466c; bk v, ch 4
[1303^401304^17] 505c-d; CH 6 [1306^33-^3] 508b; bk
vii,  CH  i6 539d-541a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 18, 124b-c; bk
ii, ch 4 142a-c; ch 10, 149c-150a 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 21a-22a; 26a-b /
Lycurgus,  39a-40c  / Lycurgus-Numa, 62d-63d / Solon, 71d-72a; 72d-73a /
Cato the Younger, 629a-c / Artaxerxes, 855b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
51a;  53a-d;  bk xi, 107b-110a; bk xh, llla-c; 121d-122a; bk xiv, 141c-d
18 Augustine: City of God, bk xv, ch 16 410b411d/ Christian Doctrine, bk
hi,  ch  12,  663a-c; CH 18-22 664d-666c esp ch 21 665d-666b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, A 2, rep 3 489d-490c 20 Aquinas : Summ.a
Theologica,  part  i-h,  q  72,  A  2,  rep  4 112b-113a; q 94, A 2, ans
221d223a;  q  105,  a  4, ans and rep 6-9 318b-321a; PART HI suppl, q 95
1042c-1049d passim 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxx
[37-45]
44d-45a;  purgatory,  xxv  [109-139] 92c-d 22 Chaucer: Miller's Prologue
[3150-3166] 212a / Miller's Tale 212b-223b esp
[3221-3232]
213a  / Reeve's Tale [4136-4291] 228b-231b / Merchant's Tale 319a-338a /
Fra?i\lin's Tale
[11,667-854] 361b-365a
/ Parson's Tale, par 75-76 536a-540a

[560a]
(4.  T^e  institution  of marriage: its nature and purpose. Ad. The laws
and   customs   regulating   marriage:  adultery,  incest.^  23  HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part ii, 155b-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
5c-6b;  BK  III,  140c-141c;  144d-146a; 148d150d; 154a-156c; 159d-163c;
166a-169d;  173d200d;  BKiv,  248d-250a  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 44c-46b
passim;  47a-c; 89d-90c; 185d-186c; 409d-434d passim 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  v  31b32a,c  / 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc i [1-74J
33b,d34c / Comedy of Errors, act ii, sen
[i 12-148]
154c-d; ACT III, sc 11 [1-70] 157c-158b / Taming of the Shrew, act i, sc
i  [48-101]  203a-c; ACT II, sc I [37-413] 208c-212c / Romeo and Juliet,
ACT II, sc II [142-158] 295d-296a; sc in
[55-94] 297a-b; sc vi 300c-d; act hi, sc iv-v
306d-309d / Much Ado About Nothing 503a531a,c esp act iv, sc i
[1-256]
520b-523a  /  As  You  Like  It,  act  hi, sc hi 613d-614d; ACT IV, sc i
[127-180]  618b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [138-159] 33a; sc
v
[42-91] 37b-d; act hi, sc iv [39170] 55a-56b / Merry Wives of Windsor 73a102d / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii [173206] 115b-c /
Othello, act i, sc hi
[52-209]
209c-211a; act iv, sc hi [60-108] 236c-237a / King Lear, act iv, sc vi
[109-135] 274c-d /
Pericles  421a-448a,c  esp  act  i, prologue-sc II 421b-425a / Cymbeline
449a-488d  esp  act  II,  sc  iv-v  461b-463c,  act hi, sc iv 466d468d /
Winter's Tale, act i, sc ii
[186-228]
492a-c;  act hi, sc ii [1-117] 501b-502c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
i,  124a-c; part II, 270c-271a 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 209a-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk xi
[708-721]
314b-315a  /  Samson  Agonistes [30-1060] 340a362b esp [292-325] 346a-b,
[1010-1060] 361b362b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vh, sect 81-83 43a-c
36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 98b-99a; 127b; PART IV, 166a-b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a; 258b261a;374b-376a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
297d-298a; 375b-d; 388c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vh, 48a50a;
bk  x,  67a-b; bk xiv, 108a-b; bk xv-xvi, 115c-122a,c; bk xviii, 132b-c;
bk  xix,  141c142a;  bk  xxhi,  187d-189d;  193a-197c;  bk XXVI, 215b-c;
217c-218d; 219b-221c; 223a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 439b,
[fn2]
40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92c-d; 579a-b; 650c-d; 742b [n 93]; 750d [n
52]  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 83d-86a; 93c-94a; 174b; 177d-178b;
245b-246a; 319b-d; 759b
[n3oJ

[560b]
d  502  THE  GREAT IDEAS 4^ to Ae 42 Kant: Science ofRight, 419a-420b 43
Mill: Liberty, 311b-312a: 316d-317c: 319b-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 160a-b;
304a-b;  411d;  429d-430b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRight, part hi, par
163164  58d-59d;  par  168  60b-c;  additions,  108 134b-c; 113 135a-b /
Philosophy  of  History,  PART  HI, 288c-289a; 294c-d 48 Melville : Moby
Dic\, 289a-292a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 276c; 313c-d; 315c-d; 565a-b;
578b-580c   passim;   581d-582c;  584d-585d  50  Marx-Engels:  Commtmist
Manifesto,  427d428a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 119a-128d; BK IV,
177a-179a;  bk vi, 250a-251c; bk vh, 291a-292b; bk xi, 476c-479d; bk xh,
540d541a;  545d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 531c-d; 555a-b; 583c-d /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  784a-d  4e. Divorce Old Testament:
Deuteronomy,   24:1-4   /   Malachi,  2:11-17—  (^)  Malachias,  2:11-17
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7:19—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:21  New
Testament:  Matthew,  5:31-32;  19:3-9  /  Mar\, 10:2-12 / LuJ^, 16:18 /
Romans,  7:1-3  / / Corinthians, 7:10-16,39 5 Euripides: Medea [131-268]
213b-214b  7  Plato:  Laws, bk vi, 712c-713c; bk xi, 780a-c 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  26a-b / Lycurgus-Numa, 62d-63c / Alcibiades, 158b-d / Aemilius
Paulus,  215a-b  /  Pompey,  502d-503a  /  Cato  the  Younger, 629a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 102, A 5, REP 3 283c-292c; q
105,  a  4,  ans  and  REP8  318b-321a  25  Montaigne  : Essays, 299c 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  261c262a  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 84b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix
[952-959]
268a  35  Locke:  Civil  Govermnent,  ch  vh, sect 81-82 43a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  hi,  127b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xvi,
120b122a,c; bk xxvi, 215c; 217c-218d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92c 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 84c-85c; 759b
[n3o]
42 Kant: Science of Right, 419c-420a; 421c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 316d-317c
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  220d-221a;  304a-b; 411d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part hi, par 176 61d-62a; additions, 105 133d-134a; 113 135a-b /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  288c289a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
584d-585c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv, 177a-179a; bk V, 203a-d; bk
xi, 476c-479d

[561a]
b  5 to 5a 5. The position of women 5a. The role of women in the family:
the  relation  of husband and wife in domestic government Old Testament:
Genesis,  2:18-25;  3:16  / Numbers, 30 / Deuteronomy, 22:13-30; 24:1-4;
25:5-10  /  Esther,  1 / Proverbs, 31:10-31 Apocrypha: Tobit, 10:12— (D)
OT,   Tobias,  10:12-13  /  Ecclesiasticus,  25-26;  40:19,23—  {D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  25-26;  40:19,23 New Testament: / Corinthians, 11:1-16;
14:3435 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 / Colossians, 3:18-19 / / Timothy, 2 :9-i 5
/ Titus, 2 :3-5 / / Peter, 3 :i-j 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk ii
[85-145]
189a-c; BK xvtii [185-289] 286a-287a; bk xix 289a295a,c; bk xx
[56-90] 296d-297a; bk
xxiii
[205-309] 314b-315b; bk xxiv [191-202] 319a
5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[181-202]
29a5 Sophocles: yi/jx [284-294] 145d 5 Euripides: Medea
[131-268]
213b-214b / Andromache
[147-244]
316c-317b / Electra
[1008-1123] 336b-337b
/ Iphigenia at Aulis
[i 146-1208] 435c-436a
5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c/ Thesmophoriazusae 600a-614d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  11,  56c;  bk  iv,  143b144b;  153a-b;  bk  v,
160d-161a; 167b-d 7 Plato: Meno, 174d-175d / Republic, bk v, 356b-365d /
Laws, bk vii, 721d-722d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1134^8-17]
382b-c; ch ii [1138*^5-14] 387a,c; bk viii, ch 7
[1158^12-28] 410c-d; CH
10
[1160^32-1161^2]
413a-b; ch ii
[1161^23-24] 413c; ch 12 [1162^
15-33] 414c-d / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1252^26-
^12] 445c-d; ch 5
[1254^12-16] 448b; ch
12 453d-454a; ch 13 [1259^30-1260^30] 454b-d; BK II, CH 9
[1269^12-1270^14]
465d-466b; bk III, CH 4 [1277^20-25] 474d; bk v, ch ii
[1313^33-42]
516c; bk VI, CH 8
[1323*2-6]
526d   14   Plutarch:   Lycurgus,  39a-41a  /  LycurgusNuma,  62d-63c  /
Themistocles,  99a-b  /  Marcus  Cato, 286b-c / Agis, 654c-655a / Marcus
Brutus,  807b-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk ix, par 19-22 67a-d; bk
xiii,  par  47,  123d  /  City of God, bk xix, ch 14, 520c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, AA 1-3 488d-491b 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part hi, q 6, A I, rep 3 740b-741b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xv
[97135] 129b-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 108 35b/ Miller's
Prologue [3150-3166] 212a / Tale ofMan ofLaw 2Z^h-2SSh ts^l^^-joi-^jo"]]
239a  /  Wife  of  Bath's Prologue [5583-6410] 256a-269b esp [5893-5914]
261a-b  /  Tale  of  Wife  ofBath  270a-277a  esp  [6619-6627]  273a-b /
Summoner's Tale [7571-7582] 290a / Clerics

[561b]
Chapter  26:  FAMILY  503  Tale  296a-318a  esp  [9053-9088] 317a-318a /
Merchant  s  Tale 319a-338a / Franklin s Tale 351b-366a esp [11,041-114]
351b-352b / Shipman s Tale 383b-390b esp
[13,093-107] 386a
/   Tale   of  Melibeus,  par  14-16  405a-407b  /  Nuns  Priest's  Tale
[15,262-272]  457a  / Manciple s Tale [17,088-103] 490a / Parson's Tale,
par  79-80  541a-542a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  109c-110b  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  84a-b;  89d-90c; 188c191c; 358b-362a; 409d-434d esp
413a-416c,  428a-d;  472a-473a 26 Shakespeare: Comedy of Errors, act ii,
sc i
[6-43] 152a-c; sc
11
[i 12-148] 154c-d/ Taming
of the Shrew 199a-228a,c esp act v, sc ii
[136-185] 227d-228a,c / Merchant of Venice,
act III, sc II [150-187] 421c-d / 1st Henry IV, ACT II, sc III
[39-120]
443c-444b / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i [234-309] 577a-c 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus  and  Cressida, act ii, sc II [173-193] 115b-c / Othello, act i,
sc hi
[175-189] 210d-211a; act iv,
sc hi
[60-108]
236c-237a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  270c271b 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost, bk iv [288-301] 158b159a; [440-502] 162a-163a; [634-658]
166a-b; bk viii [452-594] 242a-245a; bk ix [226-269] 252a-253a; bk x
[144-156]
277b;
[182-196]
278b;
[867-936]
293b-294b / Samson Agonistes [871-902] 358b-359a;
[997-1060] 361b362b
35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 52-53 36a-c; sect 65 38d-39a; ch
vii,  sect  77-86 42b-44a passim 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98b-99a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 100b-102a;
120c-121a,c;  126d-127b;  219a-b;  229b-233d;  235b-238d ^^ Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  50d;  BK  XVI,  118a-119c;  120a; bk xxiii,
187d-188c;   BK   XXVI,   217d-218a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  327c-d;
345d-346a;  350b-c  / Political Economy, 367d-368a 40 Gi B BON : Decline
and Fall, 92c-93b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 83d-86d esp 83d84a; 522d;
759b  [n  30-31]  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 404d; 418c-420a 43 Mill:
Liberty,   317c-d  /  Representative  Government,  387d-389b  passim  44
Boswell:  Johnson,  160a-b;  165b-c;  274d277d; 293d; 297a-b; 301d-302a;
304a-b;  411d;  429d-430a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRight, part hi, par
165166  59d-60a / Philosophy of History, part hi, 288c-289a 48 Melville:
Mo  ^jv^^"*^^.  289a-292a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 579b-580c passim;
582c;584c-585c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 13a-15a; 55c59d; bk VI,
263b-264b; bk xi, 490a-493d; epilogue I, 659d-662a

[562a]
504  THE GREAT IDEAS (5. The position of women. 5a. The role of women in
the family: the relation of husband and wife in domestic government?) 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  hi,  46a-48b;  bk v, 112a-113b 54
Freud:  Group Psychology, 692b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 783d-
784a  bh.  The  status  of women in the state: the right to citizenship,
property, education Old Testament: Numbers, 27:1-11 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk
xi [385-461] 247a-c 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[181-202]
29a-b    5    Euripides:    Medea   [410-445]   215d   5   Aristophanes:
Thesmophoriazusae  600a.'614d  I  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  39b-c;  bk  ii,  56c; bk IV, 128c-d; 143b-144b; 154b 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  356b-365d;  bk  vii, 401b-c / Timaeus, 442d /
Latvs,  bk  vi,  710d711d;  BK  vn,  716b-717a;  721d-722c 9 Aristotle :
Politics, bk ii, ch 1-4 455b,d-458a; CH 9
[1269^13-1270*33]
465d-466c;  bk  iv, CH 15 [1300*4-8] 500d; bk v, ch ii [1313^3342] 516c;
bk VI, CH 4
[1319^26-33]
523b; CH 8
[1322^38-1323*6]
526d; bk vii, ch 16 539d-541a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361*6-12]
601c  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk v [604-699] 202b-205b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
39a-41a / Nutna Pompilius, 54a-55a / Lycurgus-Numa, 62d-63c / Solon, 72c
/  Pericles,  133a-d  / Coriolanus, 189d-191c / Agis, 650d-651b / Marcus
Brutus,  811c-d  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 44b-c; bk hi, 53a-d; bk xii,
117d  /  Histories,  bk iv, 285d286a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  105,  A  2,  REP  2  309d-316a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
109c-110b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 60c-66b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 59d-60a; 399c-d 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act v, sc
hi 387a389b 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[871-902] 358b359a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  82 43b; CH XVI, sect 183
67d-68b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 98b-99a; part iv, 166b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 7b-c; 283b-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii, 47c50d; bk XII, 90c-d; bk xiv,
107d-108c;  bk  XVI  116a-122a,c; bk xix, 137a; 137c-138c; 145c; bkxxvi,
215b-216a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 327c-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk hi, 165b-166a; bk V, 340b-c

[562b]
5b  to  5c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 61b-c; 122c-125b 533b'535d esp
533b-534a;  557c-d;  esp  122c;  649c-652a 41 Gibbon: Declifie and Fall,
14d-16a; 84a-b; 87d-88c passim; 89c; 164a-b; 170b-171c; 174bc; 182a-183b
42  Kant:  Science of Right, 419c-420a; 436d-437c 43 Constitution of the
U.S.:  amendments,  XIX  19d  43  Mill: Liberty, 317c-d / Representative
Government,  387d-389b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 257d; 259d-260a; 274d277d;
289c;  312a;  391c-392a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 166
59d-60a;  additions,  107  134a-b  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
423a; 427c-428a 5c. Women in relation to war Old Testament: Deuteronomy,
21:10-14  /  Judges,  4-5 \vocKYvna: Judith, S-i6—{D) OT, Judith, 8-16 4
Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[155-162]
lie; bk hi
[146-160] 2Gc; BK xxn
[405-515] 159c-160d;
bk  XXIV  [707-804]  178d-179d  /  Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d 5 Aeschylus:
Persians  [1-139]  15a-16d  /  Seven  Against  Thebes [79-263] 28a-30a /
Agamemnon [399-455] 56b-57a; [855-922] 61b-d 5 Euripides: Medea
[247-268] 214b
/ Trojan Women 270a-281a,c / Helen 298a-314a,c / Andromache
[91-116]
316a-b  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata
583a-599a,c  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 2a; bk hi, 121c-d; 123c; BK IV,
143b-144b;  153a-b;  bk  vii,  232b 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 356b-368c /
Critias, 479c-480a / Latvs, bk vi, 713b-c; bk vii, 721d-722c; 726a-c; bk
viii, 734a-735a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[1269*^131270*14] 465d-466b
10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 17 16a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk
i
[490-493] 116b; bk
ii
[567-623
1 140a-141b; bk v
[605-699]
202b205b;  bk  xi  [486-915]  341b-353a  14 Plutarch: Theseus, lOb-llc /
Romulus,  21a24d  /  Coriolanus, 189d-191c / Pyrrhus, 328c330a / Antony,
756c-779c  esp  760c-d,  767c774a  /  Marcus  Brutus, 811c-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk i, 12b-d; 20b-c; bk ii, 26b-c; bk hi, 53a-d; bk xiv, 150a-b /
Histories, BK IV, 271c-d 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[859-1004]
174a176b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 140c-141c; 144b-c
26  Shakespeare: King John, act hi, sc i [299338] 389b-c / 1st Henry IV,
act ii, sc hi
[77-120] 444a-b / 2nd Henry IV, act u, sc hi
477d-478c

[563a]
6 to 6a Chapter 26: FAMILY 505 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Crcssida, act
ii,  sc  II  [16:5-206]  115b-c / Corioianus, act v, sc III 387a-389b 35
Loc;ke:  Cifil  GovernmerU, ch xvi, sect 182183 67c-68b 39 Smith: Wealth
ofNations,  uk  v, 301 b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93a b; 509d-510b
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  fall, 437b c; 551d 552c 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  565a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 13a-14b; 55c59d; bk II,
76a-b;  90c-91a;  bk  v,  222d-223a;  bk  IX,  367c-369a;  bk x, 392a-b;
397a-398c;  410c-42Ic;  bk  xi,  485a-488c;  518b  c;  528b531d; BK XII,
538a-539c;   bk  xiii,  580c-d  6.  Parents  and  children:  fatherhood,
motherhood   Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:5-6,12  /  Proverbs,  20:20  /
Jeremiah, 31:29-30— (D) Jerenuas, 31:29-30 / Ezel{iel, 18— (D) Ezechiel,
18  Apocrypha:  Tobit—{D)  OT,  Tobias / Ecclesiasticus,y.'i.-i6—{D) OT,
Ecclesiasticiis,  3:1-16  4  Homer: Iliad, bk xxii [429-515] 159d-160d /
Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d; bk xi
[458-540]
247c-248b;  bk  xv-xvi 266a-276d 5 Euripides: Medea [1081-1115] 221b-c 6
Herodotus:  History, bk vi, 212c-213a 6 ThucYDiDES : Pelopo?7nesian War,
bk ii, 398c-d 7 Plato: Laches, 29b / Sytnposium, 165b-167a / Crito, 214c
9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch 12 [1161^16-32] 414a-b / Politics, bk
i, ch 12 453d-454a; bk ii, CH 3
[1262^14-24]
457a; bk vii, ch 16-17 539d-542a,c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1360^91361*11] 601a-c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173b-c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch 22, 198c199c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [679-698]
229a-b; bk viii
[508-519]
272b-273a; bk ix
[224-313]
285a-287a  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v, par 15 31a-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 27, a 2 154c-155b; q 28, a 4, ans and rep 5
160c161d;  Q  30, A 2, ans and rep 1-2 168a-169b; Q 31, a 2 172b-173c; q
32,  a  2, ans and rep 2 178a-179b; a 3, ans and rep 4-5 179b-180b; Q 33
180d-185a;  q  39,  a  8  210a-213a; qq 4042 213a-230a passim; q 43, a 4
232c-233a;  q  93,  A 6, REP 2 496b-498a; Q 119, a 2, rep 2 607b-608d 20
Aquinas:   Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81  162d-167d  passim  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  184a-b; 191c-192d 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act
iv,  sc  v-vii  23d-26a  /  3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc v [55-122] 82b-d 27
Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  i,  sc ii [1-22] 247d-248a 30 Bacon: New
Atlantis,  207c-208d  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [388-403] 183b184a;
bk x [182-196] 278b

[563b]
35  Locke:  Civil  Government, en vi 36a 42a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
29b-31a;  part  iv,  165b  167a  36Sti:rne: 'Tristram Shandy, 191b 192a;
210b213a;  352a  353b; 400a-402a 37 Fielding: 'Tom Jones, 44b d; 305b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 364d-365b / Political Economy, 367a-368c / Social
Contract,  bk  i, 387d-388a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 420b-421c 44 Bosw
ell:  Johnson,  510b-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 173
61a-b  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 579d-580a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk xii, 395a-398d 53 James: Psychology,
189a;  717b  54  Freud:  Narcissism, 406b-c / New Introductory Lectures,
863a-c;  876a-d  6a.  The  desire for oflfspring Old Testament: Genesis,
15:1-6;  19:30-38;  25:19-26; 30:1-24 / / Samuel, i:i'2:ii— {D) I Kings,
1:1-2:11  Apocrypha: Tobit, 8:4-8— (D) OT, Tobias, 8:4-10 New Testament:
Luf^e, i :5-25 5 Euripides: Medea
[1081-1115] 221b-c
/ Ion 282a-297a,c / Andromache 315a-326a,c esp
[309-420]
318a-d  6 FIerodotus: History, bk i, 32a-b 7 Plato: Symposium, 165b-167a
/  Laws,  bk iv, 685a-c; bk vi, 708a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1252*27-30]  445c  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 22, 198c199c 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[657-722]
121a-123a;  bk  IV  [296-330]  175a-176a  14 Plutarch: Cato the Younger,
629a-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  51a; bk xv, 162b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk ii, par 6 lOa-b; BK IV, par 2 19d / City of God, bk xiv,
ch  21-22  392b-353b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch 12, 663a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 98, A2 517d-519a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84,  A 4, ANS 176d-178a; part hi, q 65, a i
879c881 d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 155b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 484c
27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  i-xvii  586a-588d  30 Bacon: Adva?2cement of
Learning,  72c-73a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, appendix, xx 449a 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [720-775]  168a169a;  bk  x [966-1053]
295b-297a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 165b-166b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shaiidy,  522a-523a;  549a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 21c-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 364d-365b

[564a]
506  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (6. Parents and children: fatherhood, motherhood.
6a.  The  desire  for  offspring.)  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i,
29d-30d  44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 293d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
in, par i6i 58b 54 Freud: Instincts, 415a-b / New Introductory Lectures,
860d-861a;  863a-b  6b.  Eugenics:  control of breeding; birth control 6
Herodotus: History, bk iv, 143b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 361c-363b; bk
viii, 403a-d / Timaeus, 443a / Statesman, 605d608d esp 608a-c / Laws, bk
v,  693a-c; bk vi, 707b-709a; 712b-713c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk vii, ch 3
[583^14-25] 108d / Politics, bk
ii, ch 6 [1265^ 38-^18] 460d-461a; ch 9
[1270^39-^6] 466c;
CH  10  [1272*23-24] 468c; bk vii, ch 16 539d541a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
39a-40c  /  Solon, 71d72a / Cato the Younger, 629a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk hi, 51a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 99, A 2, REP 2 520a-d
22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  35,  520b  30  Bacon:  New Atlantis,
207b-209d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  166a-b;  168a-b  36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  193b-194b;  271b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit ofLaws, bk
xxiii,  187d; 190a-b; 191c-d; 192a-b; 192d-199b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
335a-b;  364d-365a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 175c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  83c  43  Mill:  Liberty, 319b-d / Representative Government,
426d-427a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 267b-c; 275d-277c esp 276d-277a;
323b-328a;391d-394a,c;  578a579a; 581c-d; 583a; 596b-d 6c. The condition
of  immaturity  New  Testament:  / Corinthians, 13:10-11 7 Plato: Lysis,
16c-17c  /  Protagoras,  46b-d  /  Euthydemus,  67a  /  Republic, bk ii,
320c-321d;  bk  iv,  353b-d;  bk v, 366a-c; bk vii, 399c401a / Philebus,
611c-d  /  Laws,  bk  ii, 653a-c; bkvii, 723c-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
vii,  ch  3  [247^13-248* 6] 330c-d 9 Aristotle : History of Animals, bk
viii, ch I
[588*25-^5]
114b,d  /  Parts of Animals, bk IV, CH 10 [686^5-30] 218a-c / Ethics, bk
i, ch 3 [1094^27-1095*11] 340a; ch 9 [1099^32-1100* 9] 345b-c; bk hi, ch
12 [1119*35-^19] 366a,c; BK IV, ch 9
[1128^15-20] 376a; bk
v, ch 6
[1134^8-17] 382b-c; bk vi, ch 8
[1142*12-19]
391b;  BK  VII,  CH  13  [1153*27-35] 404c-d; bk VIII, CH 3 [1156*22-^5]
407d-408a; bk x, ch 3
[1174*1-4] 428b /
Politics,  bk  i, ch 12 453d454a; bk hi, ch 5 [1278*3-6] 475a-b; bk vii,
ch 9 [1329*2-17] 533b-c; ch 14 [1332^36-41]

[564b]
6b to 6c 537c-d; ch 15
[1334^8-28]
539b-d;  ch 17 541a-542a,c / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 12 636a-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk v [222-234] 64a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, 12
AuRELius: Meditations, bk i, 256d 14 Plutarch: Alexander, 540b,d-549c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i, par 7-31 2c-9a; BK II, par 3-9 9b-lla /
City  of  God, bk xxi, CHi6 573b-574a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  qq loo-ioi 520d-523d; part i-ii, q 34, a i, rep 2 768c-769d; q 40, a
6  796c-797a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, ch 6, 182b
sect  17  255dA  I, REP to CONTRARY 221a-d; Q 95, A I 226c227c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  purgatory, xvi [8596] 77d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
60b;  78b;  part II, 132b-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
9c-lld;  14c-18b;  24a-30c;  bk ii, 74b-75c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 43a-c;
63d-79c  passim, esp72b-75a;414a-d 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida,
act  ii,  sc  II  [163-173] 115b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect
54-75  36c-42a  passim;  ch  vii,  sect  79-81  42c-43a; ch XV, SECT 170
64d-65a  /  Human  Understanding,  bk II, CH XXXIII, SECT 8-10 249c-d 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 36a-54c esp 36a-38b, 53b-54c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  xxiii,  189b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 387d-388a;
389c 43 Mill: Liberty, 271d-272a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  159  58a;  par  173-175  61a-d;  additions,  68  126d127a;  111-112
134d-135a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 20c-26a; 35b37d; bk III,
132b-c;  bk  iv,  192d-193c; bk vi, 252d-254c; 269c-270a; bk ix, 381b-c;
382a384b;  BK  XII,  559d;  bk  xiv,  592d-604b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  iv,  90b-92b;  100c-109a,c;  bk  x  272a-297d; epilogue,
408a-412d   53   James:  Psychology,  206b-207a  54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development   of  PsychoAnalysis,  15a-18a  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of
Children  119a-122a,c  /  Interpretation ofDreams, 191b-193a; 238c-239a;
241b-243c  /  Narcissism, 400a / General Introduction, 495a-496b passim;
526d-532a  esp  526d-527c, 530d-532a; 572d576d; 579b-584d esp 579b-580d;
591a-d;  592c;  594d-599b;  612d-614b  / Beyond the Pleasure Prifjciple,
641d-643c;  644d-645a;  651b-c  /  Group  Psychology,  685b-d;  693a-c /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 724a-727c; 737c-740c; 741b; 743a-d;
746c-747a;  751d-753c  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 768b-c / New
Introductory Lectures, 855b-861c passim; 868d-870c

[565a]
6d  Chapter  26: FAMILY 507 6^. The care and government of children: the
rights  and  duties  of  the  child;  parental despotism and tyranny Old
Testament:  Genesis,  9:21-26  /  Exodus,  12:26-27;  20:12;  21:15,17 /
Leviticus,  19:3  /  Deuteronomy,  5:16;  6:6-7;  ^i : 15-23 / Proverbs,
1:8-9;  3:12;  6:20-23;  13:1,24; 15:5; 19:18; 20:20; 22:6,15; 23:13-24;
28:24; 29:15,17; 30:17 / Zechariah, 13:3— (D) Zacharias, 13:3 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  4:1-5—  (D)  OT,  Tobias,  4:1-6 / Ecclesiasticus, 3:1-18; 4:30;
7:23-28;   30:1-13;  42:9-11—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-20;  4:35;
7:25-30;  30:1-13;  42:9-11  New  Testament: Matthew, 10:35-37; 15:3-6 /
Luke,  2:51-52;  12:51-53  /  II Corinthians, 12:14 / Galatians, 4:1-2 /
Ephesians,  6:1-4  / Colossians, 3 :20-2i / / Timothy, 5 :8 5 Aeschylus:
Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1458-1530]
112c-113a,c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c  /  Antigone [626-767]
136c-137d / Electra 156a169a,c / Trachiniae
[i 157-1278]
180a-181a,c  5  Euripides  :^/(r^:f//.j  [280-325]  239c-240a;  [611738]
242c-243c / Heracles Mad
[562-584]
369d-370a;
[622-636]
370c / Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d esp
[i 485-1 766]
391a393d / Orestes 394a-410d 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [791-888] 498b-499b;
[1321-1451]
504c-506b / Birds
[1337-1371]
558d-559b;  [1640-1675]  562b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 76a; bk iv,
155c156a;  bk  v,  160d-161a;  bk  viii,  281c 7 Plato: Lysis, 16c-17c /
Laches, 26a-27d / Protagoras, 42d-43d; 45d-47c / Syrnposium, 165c-166b /
Meno, 186a-187b / Euthyphro, 192a-c / Crito, 214c; 216d-217d / Republic,
BK  II,  321b-c;  BK  V,  360d-365d / Timaeus, 442d-443a / Latvs, bk hi,
672d-673d;  bk  iv,  683b-c;  bk  v,  686d-688b  esp  687d-688a; bk vii,
713c-716c;  723c-d;  bk  ix,  750d-751b;  755a-757c;  bk xi, 779b-781c /
Seventh Letter, 804a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[581^11-22] 107b / Ethics, bk hi, ch 12
[1119^
33-^18]  366a,c;  bk  v,  ch  6  [1134^8-17]  382b-c;  BK  VIII,  cH  10
[1160^23-32] 413a; bk ix, ch 2 417c-418b; bk x, ch 9
[1180^14-^14] 434d435c
/   Politics,   bk   i,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c  passim;  bk  hi,  ch  6
[i278'^30-i279*2] 476a-b; BK IV, CH II [1295^14-20] 495d; bk vii, ch 15
[1334^8-28] 539b-d; ch
17  541a-542a,c;  bk  VIII,  CH  3  [1338^30-^8]  543c-d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch ii 116d118d; ch 23 128c-d; bk hi, ch 22, 198c-199c
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i 253a-256d 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv [60-64]
^^^ / Aeneid, bk VIII
[508-519]
272b-273a; bk ix
[224-313]
285a-287a  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 40c-41a / Fabius, 152b-d / Coriolanus,
174b,d-175a; 189d-191d / Marcus Cato, 286c-287b

[565b]
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk i, par 18 5c-d; bk II, par 3-8 9b-10d /
City  of  God,  bk xix, CH 14 520a-d 20 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  94,  A 2, ANS 221d-223a; o 95, a i, ans 226c-227c; Q 105, A 4,
ans  318b-321a;  part  ii-ii,  q  26,  AA  9-1  1  517a-519a 22 Chaucer:
Physician's  Tale  [12,006-038]  367b368a 23 Mobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
109c-110b;  121a; 137d;155b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
14c-18b;  bkii,  74b-75c;81a-83b; bk hi, 219b222b 25 Montaic7Ne: Essays,
43a-c;  63d-79c  passim,  esp  63d-64b,  66c-67a;  83a-c;  183c-192d esp
183d-185d; 344a-c; 534a-d 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc ii
[1-55] 78d-79b / Titus Andronicus, act v, sc
III  [35-64]  196d-197a  /  Romeo and Juliet 285a319a,c esp act hi, sc v
[127-215]  308c-309c  /  Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  act  i, sc i [1-121]
352a-353c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  hi,  sc  ii 452d454d 27 Shakespeare:
Othello,  act  i,  sc hi [175-189] 210d-211a / King Lear 244a-283a,c esp
act  i 244a-254c / Cymbeline, act i, sc i [125-158] 451a-c 29 Cervantes:
Do«  Quixote, part ii, 218c-220c; 251b;261c-262a 30 Bacon: New Atlantis,
207b-209d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xx 449a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  vi,  sect  52-cH  VII, sect 81 36a-43a; ch xv, sect 170
64d65a;  sect  173-174 65c-d / Human Understanding, bk I, CH II, sect 9,
106a-b;  sect  12  107b-d;  BK II, CH xxxiii, sect 7-10 249b-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  29b;  part iv, 166a167a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
191b-192a;  250b251a;  400a-402a;  410a-411a; 423b-424b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  35a-49a,c;  65b-c;  108c-110c;  120c-121a,c;  124a-126c; 136a-c;
217d-219c;   283c-d;   310b-313b;  321b-324b;  338d-345d;  359b-364d  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit ofLaws, bk v, 22d-23a; BK xxiii, 187d-188a; 189b-d;
bk  xxvi, 216a217b;220a-b 38 Rousseau: /;z(f^«a//>y,326c-d;357a-b;365a-b
/ Political Economy, 367a-368c; 377a / Social Contract, bk i, 387d-388a;
389c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 29d-30d; BK V, 338c-d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  45b-c;  82b-83c  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 404d;
420b-422d  43  Mill:  Liberty, 316d-319d passim, esp 31 7d 44 BoswEi.1.:
Johnson,  199d-200d;  247c-d; 301d302a;424d-425a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part hi, par 159 58a; par 173-175 61a-d; additions, hi 134d135a /
Philosophy of History, part i, 211d212c; part hi, 288c-289b

[566a]
(6.  Parents  and  children:  fatherhood,  motherhood.  6d. The care and
government  oj  children:  the  rights and duties of the child; parental
despotism  and  tyranny.)  50  Marx: Capital, 193a'194b; 241a-d 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  'Mlo.  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
2c-3a;  22b23a; 34d-35b; 47b-48d; bk hi, 119a-128d; bk IV, 192b-193d; bk
v,   207b-208a;  210b-211a;  BK  VI,  252d-254c;  271c-274a,c;  bk  vii,
291a292b;  BK  VIII,  305b-307d;  324b-325c; 335d336a; bk ix, 356b-358b;
381b-c;  382a-384b;  BK  x, 406c-410c; epilogue i, 659d-674a,c passim 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk i, 2d11a; BK XII, 370b-d; 395a-398d
54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development of PsychoAnalysis, 17d-18a / Sexual
Enlightenment of Children 119a-122a,c passim / Interpretation of Dreams,
244a-c   /   Narcissism,   406b-c   /  General  Introduction,  573b-d  /
hihibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  751  d  /  Civilization  and Its
Discontents,  794c-795a  esp  795b  [fn  2] / New Introductory Lectures,
832b-c;  834b-c; 868d871a esp 869b-c, 870a-c; 876c 6e. The initiation of
children  into adult life New Testament: Lul^, 2:41-52 4 Homer: Odyssey,
bk i-ii 183a-192d,' bk xi
[487-540] 247d-248b
6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 125c-126a; 155c156a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
hi, ch 12
[1119*33-
^i8]366a,c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d  14  Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  41b-42b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 3-8 9b-10d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  63d-79c  passim, esp 72b75a; 156d-158a,c;'l84a-191c
esp 187a-c 26 Shakespeare: Two Gentlemen of Verona, act I, sc III [1-42]
232c-d  /  2nd  Henry IV, act v, so II 497d-499b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act  i,  sc  hi  [52-136]  34d-35d  / Cymbeline, act iv, sc iv 478b-d 30
Bacon:  New  Atlantis, 207b-209a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect
59-69 37b-40b passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xviii, 133a-b 38
Rousseau:  Political  Economy, 376b-d / Social Contract, bk i, 387d-388a
40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82a; 91b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86b-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 159 58a; par 174 61b; par
177  62a; additions, ' 111-112 134d-135a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 387b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk i, 36d-37a; bk HI, 12Sd-131c esp 130d-131b;
bk  iv, 192d193c; bk VI, 254c-260a; 267c-270a; bk ix, 381b-c; 382a-384b;
bk xiv, 592d-604b

[566b]
508  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6e  to  la  54  Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  17d-18a  / Sexual Enlightenment of Children 119a-122a,c
passim  / General Introduction, 512a; 583c-d; 584b-c / Group Psychology,
682a-b  /  Civilization  ajid  Its  Discontents, 783d 7. The life of the
family  7a.  Marriage and love: and illicit love romantic, conjugal, Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:23-24;  24:67; 29:1630 / Ruth I I Samuel, 1:1-8—
(Z))  /  Kings,  1:1-8  /  //  Samuel,  11; 13:1-20— (£>) // Kings, II ;
13:1-20  / Proverbs, 5; 6:20-7:27 / Ecclesiastes, 9:9 / Song of Solomon—
{D)  Canticle  of  Canticles  Apocrypha: Tobit, 6:10-17— (D) OT, Tobias,
6:11-22  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7:26;  25:1; 40:23— ip) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
7:28;  25:1-2;  40:23  New  Testament: Matthew, 19:4-6 / Mar\, 10:6-9/ /
Corinthians, 7:1-15,32-34 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 / Colossians, 3:18-19 / /
Peter, 3:1-7 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix [334-347] 60c-d; bk xiv
[229-360] lOGc-lOld / Odyssey, bk xxiii [152365] 313d-316a; bk xxiv [191-202] 319a
5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[681-781] 59b-60b
/ Choephoroe
[585-651]
75d-76b;
[892-930]
78d-79b   5   Sophocles:   Trachiniae  170a-l81a,c  5  Euripides:  Medea
212a-224a,c  esp [446-662] 215d-217c / Hippolytus 225a-236d esp [373481]
228b-229b / Alcestis 237a-247a,c^ esp
[152-198] 238c-239a, [329-368] 240a-b / Suppliants [990-1071] 267a-c/ Trojan Wojnen [634683] 275c-d / Helen 298a-314a,c / Andromache
315a-326a,c esp [147-244] 316c-317b / Electra
[988-1122] 336a-337b
5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a-599a,c / Thesmophoriazusae 600a-614d esp
[383-532]  604d606a  6  Herodotus:  History  ^  bk  vi,  197a-c;  bk ix,
311b-312d  7  Plato:  Symposium, 152d-153a / Republic, bk V, 361b-363b 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  12 [1162^15-34] 414c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv
[11921287] 59d-61a.c
13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk ii [730-794] 144b-146b; bk iv[i-36i]167a-177a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 39d-40b / LyciirgusNuma, 62d'63c / Solon, 71d-72a /
Demetrius,  731a-b / Antony, 756c-779d / Marcus Brutus, 807b-d;811c-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk iv, 64b-c; bk xi, 107b110a; bkxii, 121c 17Plotinus:
Third  Ennead, tr v, ch i 100c101c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
2-8 9blOd; bk iv, par 2 19d; bk vi, par 21-25 41c-

[567a]
la  to  lb  Chapter  26:  FAMILY 509 42d / City of God, bk xiv, ch 16-26
390a396c;  BK  XV,  ch  16,  411b-c / Christian Doctrine, BK III, CH 12,
663a-c; ch 18-22 664d666c 19 Aquinas: Summa T/ieologica, part i, q 92, A
2, ANS 489d-490c; q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 28, a
4, ans 742d743c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105. A 4, ans
318b-321a;  part  ii-ii,  q 26, a ii 518b-519a; part hi, q 6, a i, rep 3
740b741b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v [25-142] 7b8b; purgatory, viii
[67-84] 65a; xxv
[109139] 92c-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida la-155a / Miller's Tale 212b-223b /
Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5583-6410] 256a-269b / Tale of Wife of Bath
270a-277a  csp  [6619-6623]  273a  / Cler{'s Tale 296a-318a / Merchant's
Tale 319a-338a / Franklins Tj/<fi 351b-366a esp
[11,041-125]
351b-352b,
[ii,754-766b] 363a
/ Manciple s Tale
[17,088-103] 490a
/  Parson's  Tale,  par  79-80  541a-542a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii,
155b-c; part iv, 272d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 8c-d;
BK  II,  73b-74b;  106a-108d;  109c126d;  BK  III, 144d-146a; 148d-150d;
154a156c;   159d-163c;   166a-169d;   186d-188c;  196b-d  25  Montaigne:
E:*/^;'^,  37c-40a;  84a-b; 89d-90c; 306d-307a; 358b-362a; 409d-434d esp
410a422b;472a-473a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act v, sc hi
[80-195]
28a-29b; sc v
[48-78]
31d-32a / Comedy ofErrors, act ii, sc 1 152a-153b; sc 11
[112-148]
154c-d; ACT III, sc 11
[1-70]
157c158b;  ACT  V,  sc  i  [38-122]  165c-166b  /  Taming  of  the Shrew
199a-228a,c  /  Two Gentlemen of Verona, act i, sc ii [1-34] 230d-231b /
Romeo and Juliet 285a-319a,c / Richard II, act v, sc i
[71-102] 345d-346b / Much Ado About Nothing 503a-531a,c / Henry
V, act v, sc ii [98306] 564b-566a / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i
[261-309] 577b-c
/  Aj.s  You  Like  It,  act  iv,  sc  i  [127-1S0] 618b-c; act v, sc iv
[114-156]  625a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [137-159I 33a; sc
in
[5-51] 34c-d; sc v [34-91] 37b-d;
act  III,  sc  I  [120-157]  48b-c  /  Merry Wives of Windsor 73a-102d /
Troilus  and  Cressida  103a141a,c  /  Othello  205a-243a,c / Antony and
Cleopatra  311a-350d  / Cymbeline 449a-488d esp act II, sc V 463a-c, act
hi, sc iv 466d468d, ACT V, sc v [25-68] 483c-484a, [129-227] 484d-485d /
Tempest, act iv, sc i
[1-133]
542b-543a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  120b-137d;  PART II,
261c-262a; 270c-271a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xix-xx 449a

[567b]
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [172-340) 156a159b;
[440 504]
162a-163b;
[736-775]
168b169a; bk v
[443-450]
185a; bk viii
[^9-65]
233a-b;
[491-520]
243a-b; bk ix
[226 269)
252a-253a;
[952-959]
268a; bk x
[888-908]
293b  294a  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 193b-194a; 522a523a 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  2b-c;  14b-16b; 17a b; 30a 32d; 108c-lllc; 118d; 124a-125b;
130b  c;  199b-200a;  230a-231c; 283b-c; 289b 291a; 321b322a; 332a 333a;
349b-350b;  352d353a; 360b-d; 400a-402d; 405a,c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
364d-365b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c-93a;  649c652a 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  419a-420b 44 Boswell: /oA«io«, 22a; 57a; 64a; 107a;
160b;  194a;  294d-295a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 158
58a; par 161-168 58b-60c; additions, 101-108 133b-134c 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i
[4243-4250]
104a; part II
[6479-9944]
158a-241b esp
[64876500] 158b, [7070-7079] 173a-b,
[9182-9272]
223a-225a,
[9356-9573]
227a-232a,
[96959754] 235a-236b, [9939-9944] 241b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace  esp  bk  i,  3a-c,  bk HI, 122b-c, BK IV,
173d-179a,  bk  vi,  245d250a,  269c-d,  bk vh, 291a-292b, 301b-302d, bk
viii,  311a-313a,  bk  xii,  539c-547a,  bk xv, 635a-644a,c, epilogue i,
650d-674a,c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a5b; bk ii,
21b-24d;   39a  53  James:  Psychology,  735a-b  54  Freud:  Narcissism,
404d-406b  /  Group  Psychology,  694b-695b / New Introductory Lectures,
862d-863c lb. The continuity of the family: the veneration of ancestors;
family  pride,  feuds,  curses  Old Testament: Genesis, 9:21-27; 12:1-3;
13:14-17;  15:2-5;  17;  22:16-18; 25:20-34; 26:24; 27:1-28:5; 28:13-15;
30:1-24;   48-49   /  Exodus,  3:15-16;  20:5-6  /  Numbers,  36:3-10  /
Deuteronomy,  5:9-10; 25:5-10 / Ruth / // Samuel, 21:1-9— (D) // Ki?igs,
21:1-9  /  /  Chro7iicles,  28:1-8—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon,  28:1-8 / //
Chronicles,  2.y.^-j^—(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  25:3-4  /  Proverbs, ij:6
/Jeremiah, 31:29-30— (D) Jeremias, 31:29-30 / Ezekjel, 18— (D) Ezechiel,
18  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 3:1-16— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 3:1-16 4
Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [458-540] 247c-248b 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against
Thebes  27a-39a,c  esp [720-791] 35a-d / Prometheus Bound [887893] 49c /
Agamemnon  52a-69d  5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c / Ajax
[1290-1315]   154a-b   /   Electra   156a-169a,c  5  Euripides:  Electra
327a-339a,c / Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d

[568a]
(7.  The  life  of  the  family,  lb.  The  continuity of thefamily: the
veneration  of  ancestors;family  pride,  feuds,  curses.^  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  13b-c;  bk  hi,  96c-d;  BK  IV, 146a-b; 149b-c; bk v,
167b-168a  7  Plato:  Charmides,  3c-d  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 683b-c; bk IX,
752d-753a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 6
[1149^4-13]
400a; bk viii, ch ii
[1161^15-21] 413b-c
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [1360^19-38] 601a-b 12 AuRELius : Meditations, bk
i 253a-256d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii
[671-804]
143a-146b; BK V
[42-103]
188a-190a; bk vi
[679-702]
229a-b; [756-901] 231a'235a; bk viii [609-731] 275a-278b; bk x [276-286]
309b-310a  14  Plutarch:  Aratus,  826a-c  15 Tacitus: Histories, bk ii,
227b-c  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk ii, par 6 lOa-b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [4672]  69b-c;  paradise,  xv-xvi  128b-132a 22
Chaucer: Tale of Wife of Bath
[6691-6788]
274b-276a  /  Parson's Tale, par 27, 514b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii,
121d  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 140c-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  411a-d 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act iv, sc v-vii 23d-26a /
Romeo  and  Juliet  285a-319a,c  / Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii [132-161]
570d-571a  27  Shakespeare:  All's  Well  That  Ends Well, act II, sc hi
[110-151]  152c-153a  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 626 286b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  225b-227b;  307b310a  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 15c-17d; 106b-c;
125b;  275a;362c-364d  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xix, 140a; BK
xxiii,  188b-c;  189b-c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 242a-b; 412c-413a
passim;  497a-498a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81d; 389b-c; 453a456a,c
esp 453a-b; 571a-572d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 274b-278a; 280c-281a; 282a-b;
289c-d;  293d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 173 61a-b; par
180  62c-63c  / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 197c-d; part i, 211d-212c;
part  iv, 320c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 399d-401d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, BKii,41a-b 7c. Patterns of friendship in the family:
man  and wife; parents and children; brothers and sisters Old Testament:
Genesis, 4:1-16; 9:18-29; 22:119; 24; 25:21-34; 27; 29:21-30; 32-34; 37;
42-45;  50:15-23  /  Exodus, 2:1-8 / Judges, 11:30-40 / Ruth, 1:3-18 / I
Samuel,  18:1-4; ^^ — (D) / Kings, 18:1-4; 20 / // Samuel, 13-14; 18:33—
(Z))  II Kings, 13-14; 18:33 / Proverbs, 10 :i ; 15 :20 / Micah, 7 :5-6—
(D) Micheas, 7 :5-6

[568b]
510  THE GREAT IDEAS Ic Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:1-4— (D) OT, Tobias, 4:1-5 /
Ecclesiasticus, 25:1; 40:23-24— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 25:1-2; 40:23-24
New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:21,35-37; 12:4650; 19:29 / Mar/{, 3:31-35;
13:12  /  Lu{e,  8:1921;  12:51-53;  14:26;  15:11-32; 18:29-30 4 Homer:
Iliad,  bk  xxii [1-98] 155a-156a; [405515] 159c-160d; bk xxiv [159-804]
172d-179d / Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d; bk xi
[458-540]
247c-248b; bk xiv-xv 260a-271d; bk xvi
[167-225] 273d-274b; bk xvh [31-60] 277b-c;
BK xxiii
[1-245] 312a-314d; bk xxiv [290361] 320a-d
5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [956-1078] 37d-39a,c / Choephoroe
70a-80d esp [212-305] 72b-73a, [892-930] 78d-79b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at
Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[324-460]
117a-118b,
[i 150-1446]
124d127b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [1290-1315]  154a-b / Electra
156a-169a,c  /  Trachiniae 170a181a,c 5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c esp
[976-1270] 220b-222d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[614740] 242c-243c
/ Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp
[990-1 1 13] 267a-268a / Trojan Women [740798] 276c-d; [1156-1255] 219d-2^Qc / Andromache
[309-420]
318a-d / Electra
[988-1122]
336a-337b / Hecuba
[383-443]
356a-d  /  Heracles Mad [562-584] 369d-370a; [622-645] 370c / Phoenician
Maidens 378a-393d / Orestes 394a-410d esp
[211-315]
396a-397a,
[10121055] 404a-c / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a424d
esp
[769-849] 417d-418c / Iphigenia at
Aulis  425a-439d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 7a-b; 8a-10a; 32a-c; bk ii,
73b-74d;  76b-d; bk hi, 89d; 95d-96c; lOOb-lOlb; 114d-115a; 116a; bk iv,
143b-144b;  bk  vi,  194d-195b; 212c-213a; bk IX, 311b-312d 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 398c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 296d-297a; bk
v  360d365d / Laws, bk iv, 683b-c 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk
hi, CH 2 [753^7-15] 294a-b / Ethics, bk vii, ch 4
[1148^26-^4] 398d; BK VIII, ch
i [1155^16-21] 406b,d; ch 7
[1158^12-24]
410c-d; ch 8
[1159^24-33]
411b-c; CH 9
[1159^25-1160^9]
411d-412b; ch 10
[ii6ob23]-cH
11
[1161^29]
413a-c;  ch  12  413d-414d;  ch  14  [ii63''i3-27]  416c-d;  BK IX, CH 2
417c-418b;  ch  4 [1166^ 1-9] 419a-b; ch 7 [1168^21-27] 421d / Politics,
BK I, CH 12-13 453d-455a,c; bk ii, ch 3-4 456C'458a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk v
[ioiiioi8]74b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 23 128c-d 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv
[60-64]  15b / Aeneid, bk III [692-715] 166a-b; bk v [42-103] 188a-190a;
bk VI
[679-702]
229a-b; bk viii
[554-584]
273b-274b; bk ix [280-302] 286b-287a; bk x
[822-828]
324b-325a; bk xi
[29-71]
328b-

[569a]
Ic to Id Chapter 26: FAMILY 511 330a;
[139-181] 331b-333a; bk
xii
[409-440]
365a-b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  62d-63c / Solon, 66b-d; 71d-72a /
Pericles,  139a-140a / Coriolamis 174b,d-193a,c csp 175d-176b, 189d-191d
/  Timoleon,  196b-198b / Marcus Cato, 286b287b / Alexander, 542a-545b /
Cato  the  Younger,  623c-624a  /  Agis,  654c-655a / Demetrius, 727a-b;
740d-741c  /  Marcus  Brutus,  807b  d; 811c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
lOc-d; bk xi, 107b110a; BK XII, 115a-c; 118d-119b; bk xiii, 128a131b; BK
XIV,  141b-143d; bk xvi, 183a-c / Histories, bk iv, 282b-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 19-21 18b-19b; bk v, par 15 31a-c; bk ix, par
17-37  66a-71b  /  City  of  God, bk xix, ch 14 520a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 60, A 4, ANS 312c-313b; q 96, a 3, rep 2 512a-c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 26, AA 8-11 516a-519a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xxxii
[124]-
xxxiii  [90]  49a-50c;  paradise,  xv-xvii  128b133c  passim 22 Chaucer:
WifeofBath's  Prologue  [<^Sg^-^gi^]  261a-b / Clerk's Tale 296a-318a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xvn, 24b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 155b
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 8c-d; bk II, 81a-83b; bk
hi,  144b-c;  196b-d;  bk IV, 242c-244d; 248d-250a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
66c-67a;   83a-84b;   184a192d  esp  184a-d;  358b-362a;  409d-434d  esp
410a-422b;  472a-473a  26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry VI, act iv, sc v-vii
23d-26a / 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc v [55-113] 82b-d / Richard II, act i,
sc ii
[1-41] 322d323a / 2nd Henry IV, act ii, sc hi 477d-478c;
ACT IV, sc iv-v 492d-496d / Julius Caesar, ACT II, sc I [234-309] 577a-c
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc iii
[5-51]
34c-d;  [84-136]  35b-d;  act  iv,  sc  v [115-216] 60d-62a / Ki?ig Lear
244a-283a,c  /  Coriolanus,  act  I,  sc  III  355b-356b;  act  ii, sc i
[110-220]  362a-363b;  act  v,  sc hi 387a-389b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  84b-c  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk iv [720-775] 168a169a /
Samson Agonistes
[1476-1507] 371b372b
36   Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165b-166a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,
17d-19a,c;  22d-25a;  44b-d; 65b-c; 126c-127b; 235b-238d; 304a-c; 405a,c
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  117c;  BK  XIX, 140a-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  326c-d;  327c-d;  350b;  364d-365b  /  Political
Economy,  368b-c  /  Social Contract, bk i, 387d-388a 40 GiBBOs: Decline
a?id  Fall,  92d-93a  42  Kant: Science of Right, 419a-420b 44 BoswEhi.:
Johnson, 57a; 57d-58a; 90c; 305b; 424d-425a; 510b-c

[569b]
46  llij.v.u:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 158 58a; par 17^ 61a-b;
additions,  no  134d;  112  135a / Philosophy of History, intro, 172b d;
part I, 211d-212c; part hi, 288d-289b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3620-3775]
88b92a  48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 387a-388b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  2c-3a; 7d 8d 13a-14b; 25a-31a; 37d-47b; 55c 59d; bk hi 119a-131c; bk
iv,  165a-168d; 179b 180d 183d-184b; 192b-193d; bk v, 203a-d; 210b 211a;
BK  VI,  247a-248a;  251a-b;  252d-254c  270b-274a,c; bk vii, 276b-277a;
290b-291a  BK viii, 305b-310d; 314a-316a; 326b 329c bk IX, 356b-358b; bk
x, 406c-410c; 412d 414b; 416c-417b; bk xi, 485a-d; bk xii 553c-d; bk xv,
614a-618b;  epilogue i, 650d674a,c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
iv,  90b-92b;  100c-109a,c; bk v, 117c-121d; 137ac; bk vi, 148d-150d; bk
x,  285a-297d;  epilogue,  408a-412d  53  James: Psychology, 189a; 190a;
717b;   735b736b   54   Freud:   Interpretation  ofDreams,  241b-246b  /
Narcissism,  406b-c  /  General  Introduction, 528d-529d; 583a-c / Group
Psychology,  685c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 783 b-c / New
Introductory  Lectures,  856d-859a; 862d863c Id. The emotional impact of
family life upon the child: the domestic triangle; the symbolic roles of
father and mother 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d; bk xv-xvi 266a-276d
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[976-983] 108b / Electra 156a-169a,c esp [254309] 158a-b, [516-633] 160a-161a
5  Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d / Electra 327a-339a,c esp [1008-1123]
336b-337b  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 89d; lOOb-lOlb; bk IV, 151a-b 9
Aristotle:   Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  6  [1149^4-13]  400a;  bk  viii,  ch
io'^[ii6o^23-33]  413a;  ch  12 413d-414d passim / Politics, bk i, ch 12
[1259**  10-16] 454a 14 Vi^uTAKcn: Artaxerxes,^SSh-c 26 Shakespeare: 3rd
Henry VI, act i, sc i [211263] 72b-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet 29a-72a,c 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xiii 448b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv,  165b-166a  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 126c-127c 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  377a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, additions, no 134d; 112
135a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 271c-273c; BK VIII, 305b-307d; bk
ix,  356b-358b;  epilogue I, 658a-659d; 662a-664b; 667b-d; 669a; 669c-d;
673d-674a,c

[570a]
(7. The life of the family. Id. The emotional impact of family life upon
the  child:  the  domestic  triangle;  the  symbolic roles of father and
mother.)  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 34b36c; 38b-39b; bk
hi,  59d-62a;  69d-70c;  bk  IV,  104b-109a,c;  bk  viii, 207a-d; bk ix,
244b245b; bk xii, 365a-b; 395a-398d 54 Freud: Origin a?id Development of
PsychoAnalysis,   14b-19a   esp  17b-18a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
240d-249a  /  General  Introduction,  528d-531d;  573d-574d;  580d-585a;
591a-d;  594d-599b  passim  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 644d-645a /
Group  Psychology,  678d681b;  685b-687d; 692a-694b esp 693a-b / Ego and
Id, 703c-708c esp 704d-707d / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 7 24a-
7  2  7c;  738d-742a;  743a-b;  751d;  752c-753c  / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  792 b-796c esp 794c- 795a / New Introductory Lectures, 832
b834d; 855a-863b esp 856b-860a; 876a-d 8. Historical observations on the
institution  of  marriage  and  the  family  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  ii
188a-192d;  bk xivXV 260a-271d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 34a-b; 39b-c;
44b-d;  48c;  bk  hi,  104d-105a;  bk  iv,  143b144b;  155c-156a;  bk v,
160d-161a; 167b-168a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[i269''i^-
1270^7] 465d-466c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [953-965] 73c;
[1011-1027]
74b-c  14  Plutarch: Romulus, 26a-b / Lycurgus, 39a41a / Numa Pompilius,
54a-55a;  58d / LycurCWSS-KEFEKENCES see Desire 4a-4d; Emotion 3c-3c(4);
Love 2b(4), 2d.

[570b]
512 THE GREAT IDEAS 8 gus-Numa, 62d-64a / Solon, 72b-73a / Themistocles,
99a-b / Alcibiades, 158b-d / Lysander, 368a,c / Cato the Younger, 629a-c
/  Agis^  650d-651h  / Antony-Demetrius, 780d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
44b-c;  bk hi, 53a-d; BK IV, 67d-68a; 73d-74c; bk xii. llla-c; 121d122a;
bk xv, 162b-c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ih, ch 12, 663a-c; ch
18-22  664d-666c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q '5' A 4
318b-321a  30  Bacon:  New Atlantis, 207b-209d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  vii, 47c50d; BK xvi 116a-122a,c; bk xviii, 129d-134a; BK XIX,
141c-142a;  bk  xxiii, 192c-198a; bk XXVI, 214b,d-221c; 223a-c; bk xxvii
225a230d  38  Rousseau:  /nf^«(7///y,340b-c;348b,d;350a-c;  364d-365b 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 29d-30d; BK HI, 165b-166a; bk v, 338c-d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 92c-93a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 39a;
39d;  82b89d  esp  82b-86b;  319b-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 197d; 289c-d;
301d302a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 194c195a; part i,
211a-212c;  246c-247b;  part hi, 288c-289b; 294c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  579b-583b  50  Marx:  Capital,  241a-d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  427b428a  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology, 686c-687c; 692a- b;
694d-695a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discoritents^  781d-782c  For: The
general problem of the naturalness of human association in the family or
in  the  state,  see  Nature 2b; Necessity and Contingency 5b; State la,
3b-3d.  The  political  significance  of the domestic community, and for
comparisons  of government in the family and in the state, see Education
8a; Government ib; Monarchy 4a, 4e(i); Slavery 6b; State ib, 5b; Tyranny
4b.  The  economic  aspects of the family, see Labor 5a, 5c; Slavery 4a;
Wealth  2,  3d.  Religious  considerations  relevant  to  matrimony  and
celibacy,  see Religion 2c, 3d; Virtue AND Vice 8f-8g. Other discussions
of  women  in  relation to men, and of the difference between the sexes,
see  Happiness  4a;  Man  6b;  War  and  Peace  5a. Other discussions of
childhood  as  a stage of human life, see Life and Death 6c; Man 6c; and
for  the  problem  of  the  care  and training of the young, see Duty 9;
Education  4b,  8a;  Religion  5c,  A  more general consideration of the
problems of heredity, see Evolution 2—36. The distinction of the several
kinds  of  love  and  friendship which may enter into marriage, see Love
2-2d;  and  for  matters  relevant  to  the  emotional pattern of family
relationships,

[571a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool(s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  arc  divided  into two groups: L Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  L  Plutarch.  "A  Discourse  Touching the Training of Children,"
"Concerning  the  Virtues  of  Women,"  "Conjugal Precepts," "Of Natural
Affection Towards One's Offspring," in Moralia Augustine. On the Good of
Marriage  .  On  the  Good  of Widowhood . Of Marriage and Concupiscence
Aquinas.  Surnma  Contra Gentiles, bk hi, ch 122-126 . Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  qq  i  51-154;  PART  III,  SUPPL, QQ 4 1-68 F. Bacon. "Of
Parents  and  Children,"  "Of  Marriage  and Single Life," "Of Youth and
Age,"  in  Essays Milton. The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce HoBBES.
Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Government and Society, ch 9 . The
Elements  of  Latv,  Natural  and Politic, PART II, CH 4 Swift. A Modest
Proposal  Fielding.  Amelia  }. S. Mill. The Subjection of Women Engels.
TJie  Origin  of the Family, Private Property and the State Freud. Three
Contributions  to the Theory of Sex, CH 2-3 IL Xenophon. The Oeconomicus
Cicero. De Do?no Sua Vdlsu?2g Saga Njalssaga Boccaccio. Patient Griselda
Alberti.  Delia  Famiglia BoDiN. The Six Boof^es of a Commonweale, bk i,
ch  2-4  Spenser.  The  Faerie  Oueene,  bk hi . Epithalamion Heywood. a
Wo?nan  Killed  with  Kindness Calderon. Life Is a Dream Moliere. Uecole
des  maris  {Schoolfor  Husbands)  .  Uecole desfemmes {Schoolfor Wives)
Chesterfield.  Letters  to  His Son \'oltaire. "Marriage," "Women," in A
Philosophical Dictionary R. Burns. The Cotter's Saturday Night Franklin.
On Marriage Wollstonecraft. The Rights of Woman

[571b]
Chapter   26:  FAMILY  513  F.  Schlegel.  Lucinde  Fourier.  Traite  de
Vassociation  domestique-agricole Lamb. "A Bachelor's Complaint," in The
Essays  of  Elia  Balzac. The Physiology of Marriage . Eugenie Grandet .
Old  Goriot  .  The  Petty  Annoyances  of  Married  Life . Cousin Bette
Whewell.  The Elements of Morality, bk iv, ch 5 E. J. Brontil. Wuthering
Heights  Thackeray.  Vanity Fair Schopenhauer. "On Women," in Studies in
Pessimism  CoMTE.  The  Catechism  of  Positive Religion (Preface to the
first  edition)  .  System  ofPositive  Polity,  vol  i. General View of
Positivism,  ch  4; vol ii, Social Statics, ch 3 Flaubert. Madame Bovary
Bachofen. Das Mutterrecht Maine. Ancient Law, ch 5 TuRGENEV. Fathers and
Sons  Dickens.  Our  Mutual Friend FusTEL de Coulanges. The Ancient City
Tylor. Primitive Culture Zola. Les Rougon Macquart L. H. Morgan. Systems
of  Consanguinity  and  Affinity  of the Human Family . Ancient Society,
part hi, ch i S. Butler. The Way of All Flesh T. H. Green. Principles of
Political  Obligation,  (n)  Ibsen.  A  Doll's House . Ghosts Stevenson.
Virginibus  Puerisque  Mark  Twain.  The  Adventures of Tom Sawyer . The
Adventures  of  Huckleberry  Finn Nietzsche. Human, All-Too-Human, vii .
Beyond  Good  and Evil, ch vii (232-238) Strindberg. The Father ToNNiEs.
Fundamental Concepts of Sociology, part i Frazer. The Golden Bough, part
i,  ch  i 1-12; part HI, CH 6 Westermarck. The History of Human Marriage
Mason.  Woman's  Share  in  Primitive  Culture  Meredith.  The Ordeal of
Richard  Feverel  .  Modern Love . Dia?2a of the Crossways . The Amazing
Marriage Shav*'. Candida

[572a]
514  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Bryce.  Marriage  and Divorce Mann. Buddenbrooks
Synge.  Riders to the Sea Weininger. Sex and Character Santayana. Reason
in Society, ch 2 GossE. Father and Son Sertillanges. La famille et Vetat
dans  Veducation Dewey and Tufts. Ethics, part hi, ch 26 GALTON. Natural
Inheritance . Essays in Eugenics Chesterton. What's Wrong with the World
Bateson.  Problems  of  Genetics  Ellis.  Man and Woman . Studies in the
Psychology  of Sex D. H. Lawrence. Sons and Lovers H. James. A Small Boy
and  Others . Notes of a Son and Brother Joyce. A Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man Proust. Remembrance of Things Past

[572b]
a  Flugel.  The  Psycho-Analytic Study of the Family Hartland. Primitive
Society,  the  Beginnings  of  the  Family  and the Reclining of Descent
Galsworthy.  The  Forsyte  Saga  Martin  du  Gard. The Thibaults Undset.
Kristin  Lavransdatter J. B. S. Haldane. Daedalus Gorky. Decadence Jung.
Marriage  as a Psychological Relationship Briffault. The Mothers Dawson,
"Christianity  and Sex," in Enquiries into Religion and Culture Pius XI.
Casti  Connubii (Encyclical on Christian Marriage) O'Neill. Desire Under
the  Elms  .  Strange Interlude . Mourning Becomes Electr L. Sturzo. The
Inner Laws of Society, ch ii T. S. Eliot. The Family Reunion

[573a]
Chapter  17:  FATE  INTRODUCTION  FATE— sometimes personified, sometimes
abstractly conceived— is the antagonist of freedom in the drama of human
hfe and history. So at least it seems to the poets of antiquity. In many
of  the  Greek  tragedies,  fate  sets  the  stage.  Some  curse must be
fulfilled. A doom impends and is inexorable. But the actors on the stage
are  far from puppets. Within the framework of the inevitable the tragic
hero  works  out  his  own  destiny,  making  the choices from which his
personal  catastrophe  ensues.  Oedipus,  doomed  to kill his father and
marry  his mother, is not fated to inquire into his past and to discover
the  sins which, when he sees, he wills to see no more. The curse on the
house  of Atreus does not require Agamemnon to bring Cassandra back from
Troy  or to step on the I purple carpet. The furies which pursue Orestes
he  has  himself  awakened by murdering his mother, Clytemnestra, a deed
not  fated  but  freely  undertaken  to  avenge  his father's death. The
ancients  did  not  doubt  that  men  could  choose and, through choice,
exercise  some control over the disposition of their lives. Tacitus, for
example,  while  admitting  that  "most  men  . . . cannot part with the
belief  that  each person's future is fixed from his very birth," claims
that "the wisest of the ancients . . . leave us the capacity of choosing
our  life."  At  the  same  time he recognizes an order of events beyond
man's  power  to  control,  although he finds no agreement regarding its
cause—whether  it depends "on wandering stars" or "primary elements, and
on a combination of natural causes." For his own part, Tacitus declares,
"I  suspend  my  judgment"  on  the  question  "whether  it  is fate and
unchangeable  necessity or chance which governs the revolutions of human
affairs."  In  so  doing,  he grants the possibility that not everything
which  lies  beyond  man's  control  is  fated. Some of the things which
happen with515

[573b]
out  man's willing them may happen by chance or fortune. It is sometimes
supposed  that  "fate"  and  "fortune"  are  synonyms, or that one has a
tragic  and  the  other  a  happy  connotation. It is as if fortune were
always  good  and fate always malevolent. But either may be good or evil
from  the  point of view of man's desires. Although fate and fortune are
hardly the same, there is some reason for associating them. Each imposes
a limitation on man's freedom. A man cannot compel fortune to smile upon
him  any  more than he can avoid his fate. Though alike in this respect,
fate  and  fortune  are also opposed to one another. Fate represents the
inexorable  march  of  events.  There is no room for fortune unless some
things  are  exempt from necessity. Only that which can happen by chance
is  in  the lap of fortune. It would seem that fate stands to fortune as
the  necessary  to the contingent. If everything were necessitated, fate
alone  would reign. Contingency would be excluded from nature. Chance or
the fortuitous in the order of nature and freedom in human life would be
reduced   to  illusions  men  cherish  only  through  ignorance  of  the
inevitable.  In  a  sense fortune is the ally of freedom in the struggle
against fate. Good fortune seems to aid and abet human desires. But even
misfortune  signifies the element of chance which is more congenial than
fate, if not more amenable, to man's conceit that he can freely plan his
life. The terms necessity and contingency cannot be substituted iov fate
and  fortune  without  loss of significance. As the chapter on Necessity
and  Contingency indicates, they are terms in the philosophical analysis
of  the  order of nature and causality. They may have, but they need not
have, theological implications. Necessity

[574a]
516  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and  contingency  can  be  explained without any
reference  to  the  supernatural,  as  is evident from the discussion of
these  matters  in the chapter on Chance. But fate and fortune, in their
origin at least, are theological terms. In ancient poetry and mythology,
both   inevitability   and   chance   were  personified  as  deities  or
supernatural  forces.  There  were  the goddess of Fortune and the three
Fates,  as well as their three evil sisters or counterparts, the Furies.
The Latin word from which "fate" comes means an oracle, and so signifies
what  is  divinely  ordained.  What  happens  by fate is fated—something
destined  and  decreed in the councils of the gods on Olympus; or it may
be  the  decision  of  Zeus,  to whose rule all the other divinities are
subject; or, as we shall see presently, it may be a supernatural destiny
which  even  Zeus  cannot  set  aside.  In  any case, the notion of fate
implies  a  supernatural will, even as destiny implies predestination by
an  intelligence  able not only to plan the future but also to carry out
that  plan.  The inevitability of fate and destiny is thus distinguished
from  that  of merely natural necessity which determines the future only
insofar  as  it  may  be  the  inevitable  consequence of causes working
naturally.  But  the ancients do not seem to be fatalists in the extreme
sense  of  the  term.  To the extent that men can propitiate the gods or
provoke  divine  jealousy and anger, the attitudes and deeds of men seem
to  be  a  determining  factor in the actions of the gods. To the extent
that the gods align themselves on opposite sides of a human conflict (as
in  the  Iliad),  or  oppose  each  other (as in the Odyssey), it may be
thought  that what happens on earth merely reflects the shifting balance
of  power  among the gods. But human planning and willing do not seem to
be  excluded  by  the  divine  will and plan which are forged out of the
quarrels  of the gods. On the contrary, polytheism seems to make fortune
itself  contingent  on  the  outcome  of  the  Olvmpian conflict, and so
permits  men  a certain latitude of self-determination. Men can struggle
against  the gods precisely because the gods may be with them as well as
against  them.  The  ultimate  power  of  Zeus  to decide the issue may,
however, place the accent on fate

[574b]
rather  than  on freedom. This is certainly so if Zeus is not the master
of  even  his own fate, much less the omnipotent ruler among the gods or
the arbiter of human destiny. In Prometheus Bound, the Chorus asks, "Who
is  the  pilot of Necessity?" Prometheus answers, "The Fates triform and
the unforgetting Furies." The Chorus then asks, "Is Zeus of lesser might
than  these  ?"  To which Prometheus replies, "He shall not shun the lot
apportioned."  When they ask what this doom is, Prometheus tells them to
inquire  no  more, for they verge on mysteries. Later Zeus himself sends
Hermes to wrest from Prometheus the secret of what has been ordained for
him  by  "all  consummating Fate" or "Fate's resistless law." Prometheus
refuses, saying that "none shall bend my will or force me to disclose by
whom 'tis fated he shall fall from power." The question Aeschylus leaves
unanswered  is whether Zeus would be able to escape his doom if he could
foresee  what  Fate  holds  in store for him. The suggestion seems to be
that without omniscience the omnipotence of Zeus cannot break the chains
of  Fate.  In  the tradition of Judaeo-Christian theology the problem of
fate  is  in  part  verbal  and  in  part real. The verbal aspect of the
problem  concerns  the  meaning  of  the  word "fate" in relation to the
divine  will,  providence,  and  predestination.  With the verbal matter
settled, there remains the real problem of God's will and human freedom.
The strictly monotheistic conception of an omnipotent and omniscient God
deepens  the  mystery,  and  makes it more difficult than the problem of
fate  and  freedom  in  pagan  thought. If anyone "calls the will or the
power  of God itself by the name of fate," Augustine says, "let him keep
his  opinion,  but  correct  his  language. . . . For when men hear that
word,  according to the ordinary use of language, they simply understand
by  it  the  virtue  of  that particular position of the stars which may
exist  at the time when anyone is born or conceived, which some separate
altogether  from the will of God, whilst others aflirm that this also is
dependent  on  that  will.  But those who are of the opinion that, apart
from the will of God, the stars determine what we shall do, or what

[575a]
good  things  \vc shall possess, or what evils \vc shall suffer, must be
reiused  a hearing by all, not only by those who hold the true religion,
but by those who wish to be the worshippers ot any gods whatsoever, even
false  gods.  For what does this opinion really amount to but this, that
no  god  whatsoever  is  to  be worshipped or prayed to?" Since the word
"fate"  has  been  used for those things which are determined apart from
the  will  of  God  or  man,  Augustine  thinks  it  would be better for
Christians   not   to   use   it,  but  to  substitute  "providence"  or
"predestination"  when  they  wish  to refer to what God wills. Aquinas,
however,  retains  the  word  "fate"  but  restricts  its meaning to the
"ordering  ...  of mediate causes" by which God wills "the production of
certain  effects."  According  to the definition given by Boethius which
Aquinas quotes, "Fate is a disposition inherent to changeable things, by
which  providence connects each one with its proper order." Thus fate is
not  identified  with  providence,  but  made  subordinate  to  it.  The
distinction,  Aquinas  explains,  depends  on  the  way we consider "the
ordering of effects" by God. "As being in God Himself . . . the ordering
of  the  effects  is  called  Providence."  But "as being in the mediate
causes  ordered  by  God,"  it is called fate. While admitting that "the
divine power or will can be called fate, as being the cause of fate," he
declares that "essentially fate is the very disposition or series, i.e.,
order,  of  second  causes."  The  position  Lucretius takes seems to be
exactly  opposite  to  that of Augustine and Aquinas. Lucretius condemns
the  fatalism  of  those  who believe that the gods control the order of
nature  and  who  therefore  attribute  whatever  befalls them to divine
ordination.  For  him, "nature free at once and rid of her haughty lords
is seen to do all things spontaneously of herself without the meddHng of
the  gods."  He  tries to teach men that everything happens according to
the  laws  of nature, other than which there is no fate. The "decrees of
fate" lie in the laws by which "all motion is ever linked together and a
new  motion  ever  springs from another in a fixed order." If man by his
"power  of  free  action" can "make some commencement of motion to break
through the decrees

[575b]
Chapter  27: FATE 517 of late, in order that cause follow not cause from
everlasting," it is because in the atoms of his makeup "there is another
cause  of  motions . . . caused by a minute swerving of first-beginnings
at  no  fixed  part  of  space  and  no fixed Nevertheless, according to
Augustine,  Lucretius is a fatalist who disbelieves in providence, other
than  which there is no fate. Each of them uses the word "fate," the one
to  deny, the other to affirm, the power of God. But even if a Christian
avoids  the  superstitions  of  astrology,  or  some similar belief in a
natural  necessity which does not depend on God, he may still commit the
sin  of  fatahsm  which  follows  from  the  denial  of man's free will.
Understanding  fate  as  identical  with  providence, the Christian is a
fatalist  if, in the belief that every human act is foreordained by God,
he  resigns  himself  to  his fate, making no moral effort and taking no
moral responsibility for his soul's welfare.,To do that is to argue like
Chaucer's  Troilus: I am, he said, but done for, so to say; For all that
comes,  comes  by  necessity,  Thus to be done for is my destiny. I must
believe  and  cannot  other  choose,  That  Providence,  in  its  divine
foresight,  Hath  known  that  Cressida I once must lose, Since God sees
everything  from heaven's height And plans things as he thinks both best
and right, As was arranged for by predestination. Troilus sees no way of
avoiding  the  conclusion  that  "free  choice  is  an  idle dream." The
theologians  recognize the difficulty of reconciling providence and free
will. The truth must lie somewhere between two heresies. If it is heresy
to  deny God's omnipotence and omniscience, then nothing remains outside
the   all-encompassing  scope  of  divine  providence,  nothing  happens
contrary  to  the  divine  will,  no  future  contingency  is  or can be
unforeseen  by  God. If, on the other hand, to deny that man sins freely
means  that  God must be responsible for the evil that man does, then it
is a heresy to deny free will, for that imputes evil This is the problem
with  which  Milton  deals in Paradise Lost, announcing that he will try
"to  justify  the  ways of God to man." In a conversation in heaven, the
Father tells the

[576a]
518 THE GREAT IDEAS Son that though He knows Adam will disobey his rule,
Adam  remains quite free to sin or not to sin, and the fault is his own,
just  as the rebellious angels acted on their own free will. The angels,
God  says,  So  were  created, nor can justly accuse Thir maker, or thir
making,  or  thir  Fate;  As  if  Predestination  over-rul'd  Thir will,
dispos'd  by  absolute  Decree  Or  high  foreknowledge; they themselves
decreed  Thir  own  revolt,  not  I: if I foreknew, Foreknowledge had no
influence  on their fault. Which had no less prov'd certain unforeknown.
So  without  least  impulse  or shadow of Fate, Or aught by me immutabUe
foreseen.  They  trespass,  Authors to themselves in all, Both what they
judge  and  what  they  choose; for so I formed them free, and free they
must  remain.  Till  they  enthrall  themselves: I else must change Thir
nature, and revoke the high Decree Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain'd
Thir  freedom,  they  themselves  ordain'd their fall. A solution of the
problem  is  sometimes  developed  from  the  distinction  between God's
foreknowledge  and God's foreordination. God foreordained the freedom of
man,  but  only  foreknew  his fall; man ordained that himself. Strictly
speaking,  however, the word "foreknowledge" would seem to carry a false
connotation,  since  nothing  is future to God. Everything that has ever
happened  or ever will is simultaneously together in the eternal present
of the divine vision. During his ascent through Paradise, Dante, wishing
to  learn  about  his immediate future, asks his ancestor Cacciaguida to
foretell  his fortune, for he, "gazing upon the Point to which all times
are  present,  can  see  contingent things, ere in themselves they are."
Cacciaguida  prefaces  his  prediction of Dante's exile from Florence by
telling him that the contingency of material things *'is all depicted in
the  Eternal  Vision;  yet  thence it does not take necessity, more than
does  a  ship which is going down the stream from the eye in which it is
mirrored."  The  difference  between  time  and eternity is conceived as
permitting  the  temporal  future to be contingent even though God knows
its  content  with certitude. But, it may still be asked, does not God's
knowledge   imply  the  absolute  predestination  of  future  events  by
providence, since what God knows with certitude cannot happen otherwise

[576b]
than  as  He  knows  it ? In a discussion of divine grace and man's free
will. Dr. Johnson remarks, "I can judge with great probability how a man
will  act  in  any case, without his being restrained by my judging. God
may  have  this  probability  increased  to certainty." To which Boswell
replies that "when it is increased to certainty, freedom ceases, because
that  cannot  be  certainly foreknown, which is not certain at the time;
but if it be certain at the time, it is a contradiction to maintain that
there  can  be afterwards any contingency dependent upon the exercise of
will  or  anything else." Against such difficulties Aquinas insists that
divine  providence  is  compatible, not only with natural necessity, but
also with contingency in nature and free will in human acts. Providence,
he  writes,  "has prepared for some things necessary causes so that they
happen  of necessity; for others contingent causes, that they may happen
by  contingency."  Human liberty does not imply that the will's acts are
not caused by God who, being the first cause, "moves causes both natural
and  voluntary.  Just  as  by moving natural causes. He does not prevent
their  acts  being  natural,  so by moving voluntary causes. He does not
deprive  their  actions  of  being  voluntary." God causes man to choose
freely  and  freely to execute his choice. The uncompromising conception
of  fate is that which leaves no place for chance or freedom anywhere in
the  universe,  neither  in the acts of God, nor in the order of nature,
nor  in  the  course  of  history. The doctrine of absolute determinism,
whether  in theology, science, or history, is thus fatafism unquafified.
The  ancient  historians are not fatalists in this sense. Herodotus, for
example,  finds  much  that  can  be  explained  by the contingencies of
fortune  or by the choices of men. The crucial decision, for example, in
the  defense  of  Athens  is  presented  as an act of man's choice. Upon
receiving  the  prophecy  that  "safe shall the wooden wall continue for
thee  and  thy  children,"  the  Athenians  exercise  their  freedom  by
disagreeing  about  its  meaning.  "Certain  of  the old men," Herodotus
writes, "were of the opinion that the god meant to tell them the citadel
would  escape;  for  this  was  anciently  defended by a palisade. . . .
Others maintained

[577a]
that  the  fleet  was what the god pointed at; and their advice was that
nothing  should  be  thought  of  except  the  ships."  Ihe eloquence of
Themistocles  carried  the  latter  view.  To stress its importance, the
historian  observes that "the saving of Greece" lay in the decision that
led  Athens  to  "become  a  maritime power." In presenting a comparable
decision  by  the  Persians,  Herodotus  seems  to  be contrasting their
fatalism  with  the  freedom  of the Greeks. At first Xerxes accepts the
council  of  Artabanus  not to go to war against the Greeks. But after a
series  of  visions,  which  appear to both the king and his councillor,
that  decision  is  reversed,  for,  according to the dream, the war "is
fated to happen." The conception of fate and freedom in the Aeneid seems
closer  to  the  Greek  than  to  the  Persian  view.  Even  though  the
consummation  of history, which will come with the founding of the Roman
empire,  is  projected  as  a  divinely  appointed destiny, the hero who
brings  that  great event to pass acts as if he were free to ' accept or
evade  his  responsibilities.  The Christian understanding of historical
destiny  in  terms of providence permits—more than that, requires—men to
exercise free choice I at every turn. "The cause of the greatness of the
Roman  empire,"  writes  Augustine,  "is  neither  fortuitous nor fatal,
according  to  the  judgment  or  opinion of those who call those things
fortuitous  which either have no causes or such causes as do not proceed
from  some  intelligible  order,  and  those  things _/^/a/ which happen
independently  of the will of God and man, by the necessity of a certain
order.  .  . . Human kingdoms are established by divine providence." The
fatalism which Augustine here condemns involves independence not only of
the  will  of  God,  but of man's will also. It is only in modern times,
with  Hegel and Marx, that necessity reigns supreme in the philosophy of
history.  Hegel spurns the notion that history is "a superficial play of
casual,  socalled  'merely  human'  strivings  and  passions."  He  also
condemns those who "speak of Providence and the plan of Providence" in a
way  that  is "empty" of ideas since "for them the plan of Providence is
inscrutable  and incomprehensible." For Hegel, history is "the necessary
development, out of the concept of the

[577b]
Chapter  27:  FATE  519  mind's freedom alone." But this development and
this freedom are entirely matters of necessity as far as individuals and
their  works are concerned. "They are all the time the unconscious tools
and  organs  of  the  world mind at work within them." For Marx, history
seems likewise to have the same necessity. He deals with individuals, he
writes  in  the  preface  to  Capital,  "only  in so far as they are the
personifications  of  economic  categories,  embodiments  of  particular
classrelations  and  class-interests.  My  stand-point," he says, is one
from which "the evolution of the economic formation of society is viewed
as a process of natural history," and within which the individual cannot
be  "responsible  for  relations  whose  creature  he  socially remains,
however much he may subjectively raise himself above them." Here it is a
question  only  "of  these  laws themselves, of these tendencies working
with  iron  necessity  towards  inevitable  According  to the historical
determinism  of  Hegel  and  Marx,  which  is  further considered in the
chapter on History, men play a part which is already written for them in
the  scroll  of  history.  Human  liberty  apparently  depends  on man's
knowledge  of  and acquiescence in the unfolding necessities. Historical
determinism is merely a part of the doctrine of a causal necessity which
governs  all  things.  Causality  seems to be understood by moderns like
Spinoza,  Hume, and Freud as excluding the possibility of chance or free
will.  Among  the ancients, Plotinus alone seems to go as far as Spinoza
in affirming the universal reign of natural necessity. What Spinoza says
of  God  or  Nature,  Plotinus says of the All-One, namely, that for the
first  principle which is the cause of everything else, freedom consists
in  being  causa  sui,  or  cause  of itself—self-determined rather than
determined  by  external  "God  does  not act from freedom of the will,"
Spinoza writes. Yet "God alone is a free cause, for God alone exists . .
. and acts from the necessity of his own nature." As for everything else
in  the  universe,  Spinoza maintains that "there is nothing contingent,
but all things are determined from the necessity of the divine

[578a]
520  THE  GREAT IDEAS nature to exist and act in a certain manner." This
applies  to man, who, according to Spinoza, does "everything by the will
of  God  alone." From quite different premises, Hume seems to reach much
the  same conclusion concerning chance and liberty. "Chance," he writes,
"when strictly examined, is a mere negative word, and means not any real
power  which  has  anywhere  a being in nature." But he also thinks that
liberty,  "when  opposed  to  necessity,  not to constraint, is the same
thing  with  chance." Hume embraces the consequences of such a position.
"If voluntary action be subjected to the same laws of necessity with the
operations  of  matter,  there is a continued chain of necessary causes,
pre-ordained and pre-determined, reaching from the original cause of all
to  every  single  volition  of  every  human  creature.  No contingency
anywhere  in the universe; no indifference; no liberty." When confronted
with   the  objection  that  it  then  becomes  impossible  "to  explain
distinctly, how the Deity can be the mediate cause of all the actions of
men,  without  being the author of sin and moral turpitude," Hume rephes
that  "these  are mysteries, which natural and unassisted reason is very
unfit  to handle. ... To defend absolute decrees, and yet free the Deity
from  being the author of sin, has been found hitherto to exceed all the
power  of philosophy." Unlike Spinoza and Hume, Freud does not deal with
the  theological implications or presuppositions ofdeterminism. For him,
determinism is an essential postulate of science and even to some extent
a scientifically discoverable fact. The "deeply rooted belief in psychic
free1. The decrees of fate and the decisions of the gods 2. The fated or
inevitable in human life 4. Fatalism in relation to the will of God: the
doctrine  of predestination 5. The secularization of fate: scientific or
philosophical  determinism  6.  The historian's recognition of fate: the
destiny of cities, nations, empires

[578b]
dom  and  choice,"  he  writes, is "quite unscientific, and it must give
ground  before  the  claims  of  a determinism which governs even mental
life."  He  thinks  it  can be shown on the basis of clinical experience
that every psychic association "will be strictly determined by important
inner attitudes of mind, which are unknown to us at the moment when they
operate,  just  as  much  unknown as are the disturbing tendencies which
cause  errors, and those tendencies which bring about so-called 'chance'
actions."  The  fatahsm of what is often called "scientific determinism"
is  that of Wind necessity. It not only ehminates hberty and chance, but
also  purpose  and the operation of final causes. Every future event, in
nature,  history,  or  human  behavior,  is  completely predetermined by
efficient  causes—predetermined,  but  not  predestined, for there is no
guiding intelligence at work, no purpose to be fulfilled. "The system oi
fatality^  of  which  Spinoza is the accredited author," Kant writes, is
one which "eliminates all trace ofdesign^ and leaves the original ground
of  the  things  of  nature  divested of all intelligence." Whether such
complete  fatalism  is  the only doctrine compatible with the principles
and findings of natural science has been questioned by philosophers like
William James. It is certainly not the only doctrine compatible with the
view that nothing happens without a cause. As the chapters on Chance and
Will  show,  ancient  and  mediaeval  thinkers who affirm contingency in
nature  or  freedom  in  human  acts do so without denying the universal
reign of causation. OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 522

[579a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the  upper and lower halves of the lefthandsideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283I 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. The decrees of fate and the
decisions of the gods 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[503-531] 8b-c;
bk viii
[66-77] 51d; BK
XIII
[631-632] 94d; bk xiv
[52-53] 98c; bk xvi
[431-461] 117a-b;
[657658] 119b; [843-861] 121c; bk xviii
[97-126]
131a-c; BK XIX
[74-94]
137d-138a; bk xxi
[81-84] 149a; bk xxii
[131-223] 156c-157c
/ Odyssey y bk hi [225-239] 195b-c; bk xx
[75]
296d 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[1032-1073]
14a,c  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  esp  [507521]  45a-b  /  Agamemnon
[1018-1034] 63a 5 Euripides: Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[1-76]
237a-238a,
[213-243] 239a-b,
[962-990] 245c
/   Heracles   Mad  [1313-1357]  376c-d  /  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri
[1435-1499]  424a-d  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 20a-22a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 12 118d-120b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect
3  257a-b; sect 11 258a-b; bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [1-33] 103a-104a; [261262] 110a; bk II [428-433]
136a; bk hi
[1-12]
147a; bk iv
[440]
179a;
[651]
185a; bk vii
[286-322]
243b-245a; bk x
[100-117] 304b305a; bk xi [108-119] 331a; bk xh
[725-842]
373b-376b

[579b]
Chapter  27: FATE 521 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 216d-217a 32
Milton:  Arcades  [54-83]  26b-27a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
ii, 271b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [5305-5344] 131b-132a 2. The fated or
inevitable in human life 4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk xv
[47-77]
104c-d, bk xvi [843-861] 121c, bk xviii [52137] 130c-131c, BK xxii
[355-366]
159a, bk xxiv [522-532] 176d-177a / Odyssey, bk xviii
[124-150] 285b-c; bk xxii [412] 310a
5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[1032-1073]
14a,c / Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp
[631-956] 34a-37d / Prometheus Bound [640886] 46d-49c
/   Agamemnon  52a-69d  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d  /  Eumenides  81a-91d  5
Sophocles:  Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c
esp [939-999] 123a-c / Antigone
[944-987]
139a-c / Ajax
[736-783]
149b-d;
[925-935]
151a / Electra 156a-169a,c / Philoctetes
[13 16-1347]
193-d  194a  5 Euripides: Rhesus [595-641] 208b-c / Alcestis 237a-247a,c
esp
[1-76]
237a-238a,
[213-243]
239a-b,  [962-990]  245c  /  Trojan  Women  [686705] 275d-276a / Electra
327a-339a,c / Bacchantes
[i 327-1 392]
351b-352a,c  /  Heracles  Mad  [1311-1358]  376c-d / Phoefiician Maidens
378a-393d esp
[1-87]
378a-379a,
[867-928]

[580a]
(2, The fated or inevitable in human life.) 385d-386b,
[1595-1614]
392a,
[1758-1766]
393d  /  Orestes  [1-70]  394a-d; [807-843] 402c-d / Iphigenia Among the
Tauri [482-489] 414d415a;
[1435-1499] 424a-d
6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 8a-10a; 20a-22a; 46c; BK II, 65b; 77a'b; bk
hi,  98b-99a;  102d104b;  BK  IV, 153b-d; 155b-c; bk ix, 291b-c 7 Plato:
Apology,  210d / Republic, bk x, 437b441a,c esp 439a-441a,c / Statesman,
587a-589c  12  AuRELius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk ii, SECT 3 257a-b,
sect  7  257c,  bk hi, sect ii 262a-b, BK IV, sect 33-35 266c-d, sect 44
267b, BK V, sect 8 269d-270b, sect 19-20 272a, sect 36 273d, bk vi, sect
8  274b,  sect  II  274c, SECT 20 276a, sect 39-40 277d, sect 50 279a-b,
sect  58  279d, bk vii, sect 8 280b, SECT 46 282c, SECT 54 283b, sect 58
283c-d,  bk  viii,  sect  17  286d, sect 32 287d-288a, SECT35 288b, SECT
45-47  289a-c, sect 51 289d290a, bk IX, sect 41 295c, bk x, sect 3 296d,
sect  5-6  296d-297b,  sect 25 299c, sect 33 300c-301a, sect 35 301b, bk
xii,  sect 3 307b-d, SECT 11-14 308b-c 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b /
Aeneid, bk i
[1-33]
103a-104a;
[204-207]
108b;
[223-304]
109a-llla; bk hi
[356-462]
157a-160a; bk IV
[218-396]
173a-178a; bk vi
[752-901]
231a-235a; bk viii
[520-540] 273a-b; bk ix
[77-122]
281a-282a; bk x
[100-117]
304b305a;  [621-632]  319a-b;  bk  xi  [108-119]  331a; bk XII [133-150]
357b-358a  14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  20b-c  / Camillus,\^lh-6. I Aemilius
Paulus,  225a-c;  228c-229c  /  Sulla,  370c-371b  / Caesar, 600a-604d /
Marcus  Brutus, 814d-815c; 822a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49c; bk vi,
91b-d  /  Histories,  bk  i, 191d; 194b 17 Plotinus : Third Ennead, tr i
78a-82b  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, stanza 89 66a; bk iv,
stanza  137-155  106b-108b  /  Knighfs  Tale  174a-211a  esp [1081-1111]
177b178a,
[1251-1267]
180b,
[1663-1672]
187b,
[3027-3066] 209b-210a / Tale of Man of Law
[4610-4623]
237b;
[4701-4735]
239a-240a  /  MonI(s  Prologue  432a-434a  /  MonI(s  Tale  434a-448b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  258c-259d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  214a-c;  342a-d  26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet, prologue
285a-b;  act  i,  sc  iv  [106-113] 291d / ]uliiis Caesar, act ii, sc ii
[1-107] 578a-579b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc ii
[4-48]
68a-b / King Lear, act i, sc ii
[i 12-166]
249a-c;  act iv, sc hi [34-37] 272a / Macbeth 284a-310d esp act i, sc hi
285b-287b  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [30-122] 481c-482b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 194b-195a; 202b208b;502b-503a 37 Fielding: Tom Jo7ies,
275d-276a; 310b

[580b]
522  THE GREAT IDEAS 2/0 3 43 Mill: Representative Government, 347b-c 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[9695-9944]
235a241b  esp  [9908-9938] 241a-b 48 Melville: Moby DicJ{, 4a-b; 120a-b;
396b397a; 398a; 409b-410b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 303d-304b;
BK  xii,  542d;  547a-549d;  553c-d;  bk xih, 578b-582a esp 578d-579a 54
Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246b-247c  / Geiteral Introduction,
581d-582a  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 796a-c 3. The antitheses
of  fate:  fortune,  freedom, natural necessity, chance or contingency 7
Plato: Republic, bk x, 437b-441a,c esp 439a441a,c / Statesman, 586c-589c
8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  9  28a-29d  / Physics, BK II, CH 4-6
272c-275a  /  Metaphysics,  BK  VI,  CH  3  549c-d; bk ix, ch 5 573a-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9 345a-c; bk hi, CH 3 [1112^18-33] 358a-b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293]  18b-d  12  AuRELius:
Meditations, bk ii, sect 3-4 257a-b; bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; bk v, sect 8
269d-270b;  sect  36  273d; bk vi, sect 40 277d; bk xii, sect 14 308c 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk iv, 68a; bk vi, 91b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr
i  78a-82b  /  Fourth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  v,  ch  i  207d208c;  CH  8-10  212c-216c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 116 592d-595c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi
[52-84] 77b-c
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 163d-164a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar,
act i, sc ii
[135-141] 570d; ACT IV, sc
iii [215-224] 590d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc h
[220223] 51b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi, 49b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop 49, schol, 394c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [170-173] 220b221a
34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 542b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk i, la-b
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 45b-c; 133a; 140b,d-143a; 146a-c; 147b; 164a-171a;
205b-209b   /   Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265a;  275b;
279b,d-287d   esp  281c-283d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-293b;  296a-d;
301d-302d;  304a-d; 307d314d; 319c-321b; 331c-337a,c / Intro. Metaphysic
of   Morals,   386d-387a,c;  390b  /  Judgement,  463a-467a;  571c-572a;
587a-588a  44 Boswell: Johnson, 549c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  340  llOb-c;  par  342-344  llOc-llla / Philosophy of History,
intro,  160c-165b;  166b-168a;  part  IV, 368d-369a,c 48 Melville : Moby
Dic{, 158b-159a

[581a]
^  to 5 Chapter 27: FATE 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b; BK
X, 389a-391c; bk xi, 469a-472b; bk xniXIV, 563a-590c; bk xiv, 609a-613d;
bk xv, 618b-621b; 626d-630a; epilogue i, 645a650c; EPILOGUE II 675a-696d
53  James:  Psychology,  291a-295b;  657a-b;  820b824a 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  486c-487a 4. Fatalism in relation to the will of God: the
doctrine  of  predestination  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  45  esp  45:4-8
/Exodus,  4:21;  7-14  esp  7:3,  9:12, 10:1, 10:20, 10:27, 11:10, 14:4,
14:8,  14:17;  33:19  / Deuteronomy, 7:6-8; 14:2 / Psalms, 147:12-20 esp
147:20—  (D)  Psalms,  147  esp 147:20 / Proverbs, 16:33 / Ecclesiastes,
9:11-12  /  Isaiah^  41:8-14—  (D)  Isaias,  41:8-14  Apocrypha: Rest of
Esther, 13:8-18— (D) OT, Esther, 13:8-18 / Wisdom ofSolomon, 19:4-5— (D)
OT,   Boo{  of  Wisdom,  19:4-5  /  Ecclesiasticus,  33:10-13—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-13 New Testament: Matthew, 22:1-14 / John, 6:22-71
esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:64-65— (D) John, 6:22-72 esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:65-66
/ Acts, 17:24-27 / Romans, 8:28-11:36 / // Corinthians, 3-4 / Galatians,
4:4-6 / Ephesians, 1:4-2:10; 4:1-16 esp 4:7, 4:11 / Philippians, 2:12-15
/James,  4:13-15  / 1 Peter, 1:1-5 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 12
118d120b;  CH  17  122d-124a;  bk  ii,  ch  16  156b158d;  bk III, CH 22
195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d;  ch 3 224b-d; ch 7 232c-235a I 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; BK VI, SECT 44 278b-c 17
Plotinus  :  Fowr//j  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 16 150c-d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  v, ch i 207d208c; ch 8-10 212c-216c; ch 15-16 220d221b; BK XV,
CH  i  397b,d-398c; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c; bk xxii, ch 1-2 586b,d-588a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 2324 132b-143c; q 116 592d-595c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, xvi [52-84] 77b-c; paradise, I
[94-142]
107b-d; IV
[49-63]
111b; vin
[91-148] 117d-118c; xvii
[13-45] 132b-c;
XX  [31-141]  137a-138a  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza
137-154  106b-108b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 113b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  254b-d;  342a-c  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 408b-c 30
Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 93 125d126a 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies, 141b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk i
[1-26] 93b-94a, bk hi [80-134] 137a-138a, bk
v [224-245] 180a-b,
[506-543] 186a-187a, bk
VII
[139-173]
220a-221a / Samson Agonistes
[373-419] 347b-348b;
[667-709] 354a-355a /
Areopagitica, 394b-395b

[581b]
523  35 Ih'ME : Human Understanding, sect viii, div 78 8i485c-487a 37 Im
elding:  Tom Jones, 32c-33b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv, 107a
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract, wk iv, 437d-438b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Pall, 230b; 239c 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 334a-335b / Judgc- ;;;£-/;/,
594d  [fill]  44  Bos-well:  Johnson,  13b; 173c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  343  llOd-llla  /  Philosophy of History, intro,
153a-190b  esp  158c-162a;  part  hi,  305c-d;  PART  IV, 368d-369a,c 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii [5305-5344] 131b-132a 48 Melville: Moby DicJ{,
396b-397a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b; bk IX, 357b-358b; bk
xv,  631a-c;  epilogue  ii,  675b-677b;  680b-c;  684b-d  52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  127b137c  passim 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams, 246c-247d / Civilization and Its Discontents , 776b; 793c 5. The
secularization of fate: scientific or philosophical determinism 7 Plato:
bk  x, 437b-441a,c esp 439a-441a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[184-307]  17b-19a  esp  [251-293]  18b-d; bk v [55-58] 61d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d270b  17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i
78a-82b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
def  6-7  355b;  axiom  3  355d;  prop  17,  schol  362c-363c; prop 2529
365b-366c; prop 32-APPENDix 367a-372d; part II, PROP 48 391a-c; prop 49,
schol,  394b-c  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  542b  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge, sect 93 431b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii 478b487a
passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-143a;  164a-171a  /  Judgement,
463a-467a;  575b-578a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 342348
llOc-llld  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d-190b esp 156d-158a,
161d-162a; 203a206a,c 50 Marx: Capital, 6d; 7c; lOb-lld; 35b-c; 36c-d
[fn2];378b-desp378d
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 416c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii  675a696d  53  James:  Psychology, 291a'295b; 820b-825a esp
823a-825a  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development of PsychoAnalysis, 13c /
Interpretation    of    Dreams,    246b247c    /    Generallntroduction,
454b-c;486d-487a; 581d-582a / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 645b-646a /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772b-c;  796a-c; 801c-802a,c / New
Introductory Lectures, 882c-883d

[582a]
524  THE GREAT IDEAS 6. The historian's recognition of fate: the destiny
of  cities, nations, empires 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 214d-220b esp
218b-220b; 239a-240d; bk viii, 262b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 403a-d
13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b / Aeneid, bk i
[441-493]
li5a-116b; bk vi
[752-901]
231a235a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b; bk x
[100-117] 304b-305a; bk xii [725-842] 373b376b
14  Plutarch:  Rofnulus,  18d;  20b-c  /  Camillus,  107b-d; 109c-110a /
Philopoemen,  300b  /  Alexander,  555c  /  Demosthenes, 698b-c / Marcus
Brutus,  815c  15  Tacitus:  Aniials,  bk  hi,  58b-d;  bk  vi,  91b-d /
Histories,  bk i, 189b-190a; bk ii, 232d IS Augustine: City of God, bk v
207b,d-230a,c esp CH I 207d-208c, ch 12 216d-219b, ch 15 220d-221a CWSS-
KEFEKENCES   Plutarch.   "Of   Fate,"  in  Moralia  Augustine.  On  tJie
Predestination  of  the Saints Aquinas. Summa Contra Gentiles, bk hi, ch
64-83, 88-98, 163 Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy, part i, 40-41
Hobbes. a Treatise of Liberty and Necessity

[582b]
25  Montaigne: Essays, 214a-d; 462c-465c passim 43 Federalist: number 2,
31c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 340360 110b-114a,c esp
par  342-343  llOc-Ula,  par  347  lllb-c / Philosophy ofHistory, intro,
156d-190b  esp  158c-162a;  203a-206a,c; part i, 241d-242b; 258b-d; part
ii, 278a-c; 280b281b; 283d-284a,c; part hi, 285b-d; 300a301c; 303c-306a;
part  iv, 315a; 368d-369a,c 50 Marx: Capital, 6c-7d passim; 377c-378d 50
Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,   416c-d;  421d-422c;424d-425b  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b;  bk X, 389a-391c; bk xi,
469a-472b;  bk  xiiiXIV, 563a-590c; bk xiv, 609a-613d; bk xv, 618b-621b;
626d-630a;  epilogue  i,  645a650c;  epilogue ii 675a-696d 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  882c883c  For: The basic opposites of fate, see
Chance  la-ib,  2a; History 43(1); Will 5-53(4), 5c; and for other terms
in  which  the  opposition  between  fate  and  chance is expressed, see
Necessity  AND Contingency 3. The problem of human hberty in relation to
fate,  see  Liberty  4b;  Necessity  and Contingency 53(3); Will 5c. The
implications  of  f3te in theology, or for the relation of human liberty
to  divine  providence,  see  Cause  7c; God ic, 7b; History 5a; Liberty
5a-5c;  Will 7c. The foretelling of f3te or providence, see Prophecy la-
ib;  3nd  for the condemnstion of astrology and divination, see Prophecy
5.  Fatalism  or determinism in the philosophy of nature, see Chance 2a;
Nature  3c—3c(3); Will 5c; World ib. The same doctrine in the philosophy
of history, y^d* History 4a(i)-4a(4); Necessity and Contingency 5f; Will
7b.  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below are works not included in Great
Boo\s  ofthe  Western  World,  but  relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter  deals. These works are divided into two groups: I.
Works  by  authors  represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  J.  S.  Mill.  A  Syste77i  of Logic, bk vi, ch 2 W. James. "The
Dilemma  of Determinism," in The Will to Believe II. Cicero. De Fato (On
Fate)  .  De  Divinatione  {On  Divination) Maimonides. The Guidefor the
Perplexed, part hi, CH 17-19

[583a]
Gersonides.  Commentary  on  the  Book,  ofJob Calvin. Institutes of the
Christian  Religion, bk hi, CH 14-25 Knox. An Answer to the Cavtllattons
ofan  Adversarie  Respecting  the  Doctrine  of  Predestination  SuAREZ.
Disputationes   Metaphysicae,  xix  (lo-ii)  CuDWORTii.  A  Treatise  of
Freewill  J. Butler. The Analogy of Religion, part i, ch 7 J. Edwards. A
Careful  .  . . Enquiry into the Modern . . . Notions of Freedom of Will
Voltaire.  Zadig  —  .  Candide  Goldsmith.  The  Vicar  of Wakefield J.
Priestley and Price. A Free Discussion of the Doctrine ofMaterialism and
Philosophical Necessity

[583b]
Chapter  27: FATE 525 Dr Quincey. On the Knocking at the Gate in Macbeth
Schopenhauer.  Die  beiden  Grundproblcme  der  EthiJi, 1 . Transcendent
Speculations  on  Apparent Design in the Fate of the Individual Emerson.
"Fate," in The Conduct of Life T. Hardy. The Return of the Native . Tess
of  the  D'  Urbervilles  .  Jude  the  Obscure Synge. Riders to the Sea
Lagerlof.  The  Ring  of the Ldwensf{olds Wilder. The Bridge of San Luis
Rey  B.  Russell.  Religion  and  Science,  ch 6 T. S. Eliot. The Family
Reunion

[584a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  great philosophical issues concerning form and matter
have  never  been  resolved.  But  the  terms in which these issues were
stated,  from  their first formulation in antiquity to the 17th or 1 8th
centuries,  have disappeared or at least do not have general currency in
contemporary  discourse.  Kant  is perhaps the last great philosopher to
include  these  terms in his basic vocabulary. The conceptions of matter
and  form, he writes, "lie at the foundation of all other reflection, so
inseparably  are  they  connected  with  every  mode  of  exercising the
understanding.  The  former  denotes  the  determinable  in general, the
second  its  determination." The word "form" is no longer a pivotal term
in  the  analysis  of  change  or motion, nor in the distinction between
being  and  becoming, nor in the consideration of the modes of being and
the  conditions  of  knowledge.  The  word  "matter" is now used without
reference  to  form, where earlier in the tradition all of its principal
meanings  involved  "form" as a correlative or an opposite. Other words,
such as "participation" and "imitation," have also fallen into disuse or
lost  the meanings which derived from their relation to form and matter.
The  problems  which  these  words were used to state and discuss remain
active  in  contemporary thought. There is, for instance, the problem of
the  universal  and the particular, the problem of the immutable and the
mutable,  the  problem  of  the  one  and  the  many, or of sameness and
diversity.  These  problems  appear in the writings of William James and
Bergson,  Dewey and Santayana, Whitehead and Russell. Sometimes there is
even  a  verbal  approximation  to  the  traditional  formulation, as in
Whitehead's   doctrine   of   "eternal   objects"   or   in  Santayana's
consideration  of  the  "realm  of  essence"  and the "realm of matter."
Whatever expressions they use, these thinkers find themselves

[584b]
Chapter  2.8:  FORM  opposed  on issues which represent part, if not the
whole,  of the great traditional controversy between Plato and Aristotle
concerning  form. There is a tendency among the historians of thought to
use  the names of Plato and Aristotle to symbolize a basic opposition in
philosophical  perspectives  and  methods, or even in what William James
calls "intellectual temperaments." Later writers are called "Platonists"
or  "Aristotelians" and doctrines or theories are classified as Platonic
or Aristotelian. It almost seems to be assumed at times that these names
exhaust the typical possibilities: that minds or theories must be one or
the  other,  or  some  sort  of mixture or confusion of the two. If this
tendency  is ever justified, it seems to be warranted with regard to the
problems  of  form.  Here,  if  anywhere,  there  may be poetic truth in
Whitehead's  remark that the history of western thought can be read as a
series  of  footnotes to Plato; though perhaps the observation should be
added  that  Aristotle, the first to comment on Plato, wrote many of the
principal   footnotes.   In   Plotinus   the  two  strains  seem  to  be
intermingled.  The  issue  between  Plato  and Aristotle concerning form
dominates  the  great  metaphysical and theological controversies of the
later  Middle  Ages, and, with some alterations in language and thought,
it  appears  in  the  writings of Hobbes, Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza, and
Locke,  where  it  is  partly  a  continuation of, and partly a reaction
against,  the  mediaeval versions of Platonic and Aristotelian doctrine.
The  most  extreme  reaction  is,  of  course,  to be found in those who
completely  reject  the  term  form  or its equivalents as being without
significance  for the problems of motion, existence, or knowledge. Bacon
retains the term, but radically changes its meaning. "None should 526

[585a]
suppose  from  the  great  part  assigned by us to forms," Bacon writes,
"tliat  we  mean  such forms as the meditations and thoughts of men have
hitherto  been  accustomed  to."  He does not mean either *'the concrete
forms"  or  "any  abstract  forms  of  ideas,"  but rather "the laws and
regulations  of  simple action. . . . The form of heat or form of light,
therefore,  means no more than the law of heat or the law of light." But
Hobbes  and  Locke  tend  to  reject  the term itself—especially when it
occurs  in  the notion of substantial form—as meaningless or misleading.
"We  are  told,"  says  Hobbes, "there be in the world certain essences,
separated   from   bodies,   which  they  call  abstract  essences,  and
substantial  forms. . . . Being once fallen into this error of separated
essences,   [men]   are  thereby  necessarily  involved  in  many  other
absurdities  that follow it. For seeing they will have these forms to be
real,  they  are  obliged to assign them some place''; which they cannot
succeed   in  doing,  according  to  Hobbes,  "because  they  hold  them
incorporeal,  without  all  dimension of quantity, and all men know that
place  is  dimension,  and  not  to  be  filled  but  by  that  which is
corporeal."  With regard to substantial form, Locke declares, "I confess
I  have  no  idea at all, but only of the sound 'form.'" Those "who have
been  taught . . . that it was \host forms which made the distinction of
substances  into their true species and genera, were led yet further out
of  the  way  by  having  their minds set upon fruitless inquiries after
'substantial   forms'   "—a  subject  which  Locke  regards  as  "wholly
unintelligible."  The  general  skepticism  about  this  notion  (or the
distrust of its hollowness) in the 17th and 1 8th centuries is reflected
in  a  bantering  remark by Tristram Shandy's father. In a discussion of
infant  prodigies,  he  refers  to  some boy-wonders who "left off their
substantial  forms  at  nine years old, or sooner, and went on reasoning
without them." Since form and matter are supposed to be correlative, the
denial  to  form  of  meaning or reality leads to materialism, as in the
case of Hobbes— the affirmation of matter alone as a principle or cause.
Materialists  of one sort or another are the opponents of both Plato and
Aristotle,  and  of  Platonists  and  Aristotelians.  That  part  of the
controversy is discussed in the

[585b]
Chapter 28: FORM 527 cliaptcr on Mattf.r. Here we are concerned with the
issues  arising from dilTercnt views of form and its relation to matter.
The  popular  meaning of "form" affords an approach to the subtleties of
the  subject. As ordinarily used, "form" connotes figure or sliape. That
connotation  expresses  one  aspect  of  the  technical  significance of
"form."  A  great  variety  of things, differing materially and in other
respects,  can  have  the  same  figure  or  shape. The same form can be
embodied in an indefinite number of otherwise different individuals. But
figures  or  shapes  are sensible forms, forms perceptible to vision and
touch.  To  identify  form  with  figure  or shape would put an improper
limitation  on  the meaning of form. This is popularly recognized in the
consideration  of  the  form  of a work of art— the structure of an epic
poem or a symphony—which seems to be more a matter of understanding than
of  direct senseperception. Bertrand Russell's definition of the form of
a  proposition effectively illustrates the point involved. The form of a
proposition, he says, is that which remains the same in a statement when
everything  else  is changed. For example, these two statements have the
same grammatical and logical form: {i) John followed James, and (2) Paul
accompanied  Peter. What might be called the matter or subject matter of
the two statements is completely different, but both have the same form,
as may an indefinite number of other statements. This illustration helps
us  to  grasp  the meaning of form, and the distinction between form and
matter,  or  the formal and the material aspects of anything. It is thus
that  we  understand the phrase "formal logic" to signify a study of the
forms  of  thought or discourse, separated from the subject matter being
thought about or discussed. Similarly, abstractionism or surrealism is a
kind  of  formalism in painting which tries to separate visible patterns
or  structures from their representative significance or their reference
to familiar objects. Kant's doctrine of space and time as transcendental
forms  of  intuition  exemplifies  the  meaning of form as pure order or
structure  divorced from sensuous content. "That which in the phenomenon
corresponds to the sensation,

[586a]
528  THE GREAT IDEAS I term its matter^'' he writes; "that which effects
that  the  content  of  the  phenomenon  can  be  arranged under certain
relations,  I  call  its  form.'''  Sometimes  the consideration of form
emphasizes  not its separation from, but its union with matter. The form
dwells   in   the  thing,  constituting  its  nature.  The  sensible  or
intelligible  characteristics of a thing result from the various ways in
which its matter has been formed. It is impossible to say more about the
meaning  oi  form  without  facing at once the great controversy between
Plato  and Aristotle and the difficulties which their theories confront.
Plato does not deny that things— the sensible, material, changing things
of  experience have something like form. Nor does he deny that the ideas
by  which  we understand the natures of things are like forms. Rather he
asks  us to consider that which they are liJ^. In the Phaedo—only one of
the  many dialogues in which the doctrine of forms is discussed—Socrates
argues that "there is such a thing as equality, not of one piece of wood
or  stone with another, but that, over and above this, there is absolute
equality."  Socrates  gets  Simmias to admit that "we know the nature of
this  absolute  essence,"  and  then  asks,  "Whence  did v/e obtain our
knowledge.?"  It could not have been obtained from the pieces of wood or
stone,  Socrates  tries to show, because they "appear at one time equal,
and  at another time unequal," whereas the idea of equality is never the
same as that of inequality. Hence he thinks "we must have known equality
previously  to  the  time  when  we first saw the material equals. . . .
Before  we began to see or hear or perceive in any way, we must have had
a  knowledge of absolute equality, or we could not have referred to that
standard  the  equals  which  are derived from the senses." The equality
which  supplies  the "standard" by which material equals are measured is
the  Form  or  Idea  of equality. What is true in this one case Socrates
thinks  is  true  in  ever)'  other. Whether we consider the "essence of
equality,  beauty,  or  anything  else,"  Socrates  holds, the "Ideas or
essences,  which  in  the  dialectical  process  we define as . . . true
existences . . . are each of them always iM

[586b]
what they are, having the same simple selfexistent and unchanging forms,
not admitting of variation at all, or in any way or at any time.'* Apart
from  the  perishable  things  of the sensible world, and apart from the
ideas  which are involved in our process of learning and thinking, there
exist  the  Forms  or the Ideas themselves— the immutable objects of our
highest  knowi-.  edge.  Because  the same English words are employed in
these  quite  distinct  senses, it is useful to follow the convention of
translators  who  capitahze  the  initial  letter  when "Form" or "Idea"
refers  to  that  which is separate from the characteristics of material
things  and  from  the ideas in our mind.The words "Form" and "Idea" are
interchangeable,  but  the  words  "Idea" and "idea" are not. The latter
refers  to  a  notion  in  the  human  mind,  by which it knows; whereas
"Idea"—as  Plato  uses  the word—signifies the object of knowledge, i.e.
that  which  is  known.  These  differences are further discussed in the
chapter  on  Idea. By imitating the Forms, sensible things, according to
Plato,  have the characteristics we apprehend in them. The ideas we have
when  we  apprehend  the  resemblance  between sensible things and their
Forms  (which  sensible  things  exhibit),  would  seem  to  be indirect
apprehensions  of  the  Forms  themselves. When in the Republic Socrates
discusses  knowledge and opinion, he distinguishes them from one another
according to a division of their objects the realm of intelligible being
on  the  one  hand, and the realm of sensible becoming on the other. The
latter  stands  to  the former as image or copy to reality, and Socrates
finds this relationship repeating itself when he further divides each of
the  two parts. The realm of becoming divides into images or shadows and
into  that "of which this is only the resemblance," namely, "the animals
which  we  see,  and  everything  that  grows  or is made." The realm of
intelligible being he also subdivides into two parts, of which the first
is  as  an  image or reflection of the second, namely, the hypotheses we
form  in  our  minds  and  the  Ideas  or Forms themselves. From this it
appears  that  just  as  we  should  regard  the form of the thing as an
imitation of, or participation in, the separate Form, so should

[587a]
I  we  regard the idea we have (that is, our understanding of the thing)
as  an  approximation  of the Idea. The Ideas are outside the human mind
even as the Forms are separate from their sensible, material imitations.
When  we apprehend things by reason we know the Forms they imitate; when
we apprehend them by our senses we know them as imitations, or as images
of  the  Ideas.  The Platonic theory changes the ordinary meaning of the
word  "imitation."  We  ordinarily  think  of  imitation  as involving a
relation  of  resemblance  between two sensible things, both of which we
are  able  to  perceive;  for example, v/e say that a child imitates his
father's  manner,  or that a portrait resembles the person who posed for
it.  The painter, according to Socrates in the Republic, is not the only
"creator  of  appearances."  He  compares the painter who pictures a bed
with  the carpenter who makes one. Like the bed in the painting, the bed
made by the carpenter is not the real bed. It is not, says Socrates, the
Idea  "which,  according  to  our  view, is the essence of the bed." The
carpenter  "cannot  make  true  existence,  but  only  some semblance of
existence."  As  the  bed  in  ^  the  picture  is  an  imitation of the
particular  bed  made by the carpenter, so the latter is an imitation of
the  Idea— the essential bed-ness which is the model or archetype of all
particular  beds. Shifting to another example, we can say that a statue,
which  resembles a particular man, is the imitation of an imitation, for
the primary imitation lies in the resemblance between the particular man
portrayed  and  the  Form  or  Idea, Man. Just as the statue derives its
distinctive  character  from  the  particular  man  it imitates, so that
particular  man, or any other, derives his manhood or humanity from Man.
Just  as  the particular man imitates Man, so our idea of Man is also an
imitation  of  that Idea. Knowledge, according to Plato, consists in the
imitation  of  Ideas,  even  as  sensible, material things have whatever
being they have by imitation of the true beings, the Forms. Another name
for  the primary type of imitation is "participation." To participate in
is  to partake of. In the dialogue in which Plato has the young Socrates
inquiring into the relation

[587b]
Chapter  28:  FORM  529  between  sensible  particulars and the Ideas or
Forms,  Parmenidcs tells him that "there arc certain ideas oi \\hich all
other  things  partake,  and  from  which  they derive their names; that
similars,   for   example,  become  similar,  because  they  partake  of
similarity;  and  great  things  become  great,  because they partake of
greatness; and that just and beautiful things become just and beautiful,
because  they  partake  of  justice and beauty." The Forms or Ideas are,
Parmenides  suggests,  "patterns  fixed  in nature, and other things are
like  them,  and resemblances of them—what is meant by the participation
of  other things in the ideas, is really assimilation to them." The fact
of  particularity and multiplicity seems to be inseparable from the fact
of  participation.  That in which the many particulars participate must,
on  the  other hand, have universality and imity. The Forms or Ideas are
universals  in  the sense that each is a one which is somehow capable of
being  in  a  many—by  resemblance  or  participation.  Parmenides  asks
Socrates  whether  he thinks that "the whole idea is one, and yet, being
one, is in each one of the many." When Socrates unhesitatingly says Yes,
Parmenides  points  out to him that we then confront the difficulty that
"one  and  the same thing will exist as a whole at the same time in many
separate  individuals" and that "the ideas themselves will be divisible,
and  things  which participate in them will have a part of them only and
not  the  whole idea existing in each of them." Nor can we say, Socrates
is  made  to  realize,  that  "the  one idea is really divisible and yet
remains  one." This difficulty concerning the relation of particulars to
the  Ideas they participate in, is discussed in the chapter on Universal
and  Particular. It is not the only difficulty which Plato himself finds
in  the  theory  of Ideas. Another concerns the individuality of each of
the  indefinite  number  of  particulars  which  copy  a single model or
archetype.  What  makes  the  various copies of the same model different
from  one another? Plato meets this problem by adding a third principle.
To   the   intelligible   patterns  or  archetypes  and  their  sensible
imitations, he adds, in the Timaeus, the principle which is variously

[588a]
530  named,  sometimes  "the  receptacle,"  sometimes "space," sometimes
"matter."  However named, it is the absolutely formless, for "that which
is  to  receive  all  Forms  should  have  no form. . . . The mother and
receptacle  of  all  visible  and  in  any way sensible things ... is an
invisible  and  formless  being  which  receives  all things and in some
mysterious   way   partakes   of   the   intelligible,   and   is   most
incomprehensible."  It  is  this  material  or receiving principle which
somehow  accounts  for the numerical plurality and the particularization
of  the many copies of the one absolute model. When a number of replicas
of  the  same  pattern  are  produced  by impressing a die on a sheet of
plastic  material  at  different  places,  it  is  the difference in the
material  at  the  several  places  which accounts for the plurality and
particularity  of  the  replicas. Yet the one die is responsible for the
character  common  to  them all. The sensible things of any one sort are
not only particular because the Form they imitate is somehow received in
matter; they are also perishable because of that fact. The receptacle is
the  principle  of  generation  or  of change. It is, Timaeus says, "the
natural recipient of all impressions," which is "stirred and informed by
them, and appears different from time to time by reason of them, but the
forms  which  enter  into  and  go out of her are the likenesses of real
existences modelled after their patterns in a wonderful and inexplicable
manner."  Matter,  as  Plato  here  suggests,  is the mother of changing
things,  things  which,  between coming to be and passing away, are what
they  are because of the unchanging Forms. The Form which is received in
matter  for  a time makes the changing thing an imitation, as the matter
in  which the Form is received makes the changing thing a participation.
The  admittedly  mysterious  partaking  of  the  Forms  by  the formless
receptacle  constitutes  the  realm of becoming, in which being and non-
being  are mixed. But the Forms or Ideas themselves, existing apart from
their  sensible  imitations,  are  "uncreated  and indestructible, never
receiving  anything  from  without,  nor  going  out  to  any other, but
invisible  and imperceptible by any sense." They constitute the realm of
pure being. They are the intelligible reality.

[588b]
THE GREAT IDEAS The criticism of the Forms or Ideas which we find in the
writings  of  Aristotle  is  primarily  directed  against their separate
existence. "Plato was not far wrong," Aristotle says, "when he said that
there  are  as  many Forms as there are kinds of natural object"; but he
immediately  adds  the  qualification: "if there are Forms distinct from
the  things  of  this  earth."  It  is  precisely that supposition which
Aristotle  challenges. Aristotle's criticism of Plato stems from his own
notion  of  substance,  and  especially  from his conception of sensible
substances  as composed of matter and form. He uses the word "substance"
to  signify that which exists in and of itself; or, in other words, that
which  exists separately from other things. Hence, when he says that, in
addition to sensible substances, "Plato posited two kinds of substances—
the  Forms  and  the  objects  of  mathematics,"  he  is translating the
affirmation that the Forms have being separately from the sensible world
of  changing  things,  into  an  assertion  that  they  are  substances.
"Socrates  did  not make the universals or the definitions exist apart,"
Aristotle  writes;  but  referring  to  the Platonists, he says, ''they,
however,  gave  them  separate existence, and this was the kind of thing
they  called  Ideas."  What  proof is there, he repeatedly asks, for the
separate  existence  of  the  Forms,  or  universals,  or the objects of
mathematics.?  "Of the various ways in which it is proved that the Forms
exist,"  he  declares,  "none is convincing." Furthermore, he objects to
the  statement  that "all other things come from the Forms"; for "to say
that  they  are  patterns  and  the other things share in them is to use
empty words and poetical metaphors." There is the additional difficulty,
he  thinks,  that "there will be several patterns of the same thing, and
therefore  several  Forms; e.g., 'animal' and 'two-footed' and also 'man
himself will be Forms of man." Aristotle's denial of separate existence,
or  substantiality,  to the Ideas or universals stands side by side with
his affirmation of the place of forms in the being of substances and the
role of universals in the order of knowledge. Furthermore, he limits his
denial  of  the  substantiafity of Ideas to those Forms which seem to be
the archetypes or models of sensible things. Par-

[589a]
Chapter  ticular  physical things— familiar sensible substances, such as
the  stone, the tree, or the man —are not, in his opinion, imitations of
or  participations  in  universal  models  which  exist apart from these
things.  He leaves it an open question whether there are self-subsistent
Forms  or  Ideas  — that is, purely intelligible substances—which do not
function   as   the  models  for  sensible  things  to  imitate.  Stated
positively,  the  Aristotelian  theory consists in two affirmations. The
first   is   that  the  characteristics  of  things  are  determined  by
"indwelling  forms,"  which  have  their being not apart from but in the
things  themselves.  To  illustrate his meaning he turns to the realm of
art.  When we make a brass sphere, he writes, "we bring the form," which
is  a  sphere, "into this particular matter," the brass, and "the result
is  a  brazen  sphere."  There  is  no "sphere apart from the individual
spheres," and no brass apart from the particular lumps of metal that are
brass.  "The  'form'  means  the  *such,' and is not a 'this'—a definite
thing,"  such  as  this  individual  brazen  sphere.  Aristotle analyzes
natural  things  in the same manner. It is from "the indwelling form and
the matter," he says, that "the concrete substance is derived." Men such
as Callias or Socrates, for example, consist of "such and such a form in
this  flesh  and  in  these bones," and "they are different in virtue of
their  matter  (for  that is different) but the same in form." The flesh
and bones of Callias are not the flesh and bones of Socrates; but though
different  as individual men, they are the same as men because they have
the  same  form.  The  second  point is that our understanding of things
involves  the  forms  of things, but now somehow in the intellect rather
than  in the things themselves. In order to know things, Aristotle says,
we must have within us "either the things themselves or their forms. The
former alternative is of course impossible: it is not the stone which is
present  in  the  soul,"  he  maintains, "but its form." The form in the
thing  is  as  individual  as  the thing itself. But in the mind, as the
result  of  the intellect's power to abstract this form from its matter,
the  form becomes a universal; it is then called by Aristotle an "idea,"
"abstraction," or "concept." Forms are universals in the mind

[589b]
28: FORM 5Jl alone. If there were a form existing apart from both matter
and  mind,  it  would  be  neither  an  inchvidual  form nor an abstract
universal.   The  indwcHing  forms,  according  to  Aristotle,  arc  not
universals.  I^xcept  for the possibility of Forms which dwell apart and
bear  no  resemblance at all to sensible things, all forms are either in
matter  or,  abstracted  from matter, in the human mind. These are often
called "material forms" because they are the forms which matter takes or
can take, and which the mind abstracts from matter. Their being consists
in informing or determining matter, just as the being of matter consists
in  the  capacity  to  receive  these  forms and to be determined by The
foregoing  helps to explain Aristotle's use of the word "composite" as a
synonym  for  "substance"  when  he  is  considering particular sensible
things.  The  independently  existing,  individual physical things which
Aristotle  calls  "substances"  are all composite of form and matter. He
sometimes  also calls form and matter "substances," but when he uses the
word  "substance"  strictly and in its primary sense, he applies it only
to  the  concrete  individual.  Form  and  matter are only principles or
constituents  of  the concrete thing— the composite substance. The union
of  form  and matter to constitute physical substances also explains the
Aristotelian  identification  of  form with actuality and of matter with
potentiality; and the relation of form and matter to a third term in the
analysis  of change, namely, privation. As a physical thing changes, its
matter  gives up one form to take on another. Its matter thus represents
its  capacity or potentiality for form. Matter is the formable aspect of
changing  things.  What  things are actually at any moment is due to the
forms  they  possess.  But  they  may have the potentiaUty for acquiring
other  forms,  with  respect  to  which  they  are  in  privation.  "The
mutability  of  mutable  things,"  Augustine  writes,  "is  simply their
capacity  for  all  the forms into which mutable things can be changed."
Change  consists  in a transformation oi matter, which is another way of
saying   that   it   consists   in   the   actualization  of  a  thing's
potentialities.  The  Aristotelian theory of form and matter is a theory
of becoming as well as an

[590a]
552   THE  GREAT  IDEAS  analysis  of  the  being  of  changing  things.
Illustrative  applications  of this theory will be found in the chapters
on  Art,  Cause,  and  Change. Some forms are sensible. Some are shapes,
some  are  qualities,  some  are  quantities.  But  not  all  forms  are
perceptible  by the senses; as, for example, the form which matter takes
when  a plant or animal is generated and which gives the generated thing
its  specific nature. This type of form came to be called a "substantial
form" because it determines the kind of substance which the thing is. In
contrast,  the  forms  which determine the properties or attributes of a
thing  are  called  its  "accidents" or "accidental forms." For example,
size and shape, color and weight, are accidental forms of a man; whereas
that  by  virtue  of which this thing {having a certain size, shape, and
color)  is  a  man,  is  its  substantial  form. Aristotle's distinction
between  substantial  and accidental form affects his analysis of change
and  his  conception  of  matter.  Generation and corruption are for him
substantial change, change in which matter undergoes transformation with
respect to its substantial form. The various types of motion—alteration,
increase  or  decrease, and local motion—are changes which take place in
enduring  substances,  and  with  respect to their accidental forms. The
substratum  of  accidental  change  is  not  formless matter, but matter
having  a  certain  substantial  form;  whereas  in  the coming to be or
passing  away  of  substances, the substratum would seem to be a primary
sort  of  matter,  devoid  of  all  form. As indicated in the chapter on
Matter, this, according to Aristotle, is "the primary substratum of each
thing,  from  which  it  comes  to  be  without qualification, and which
persists in the result." He tries to help us grasp prime matter by using
an  analogy.  "As  the bronze is to the statue, the wood to the bed," he
writes,  "so  is  the  underlying nature to substance"—matter absolutely
formless   to  substantial  form.  Aristotle  sometimes  speaks  of  the
substantial form as a first act or actuafity, and of accidental forms as
second  actualities. Accordingly he also distinguishes between a primary
and  secondary  kind  of  matter—  the  one  absolutely  potential,  and
underlying substantial change; the other

[590b]
partly  actualized  and  partly  potential,  and  involved in accidental
change.  "Primary  matter,"  Aquinas  explains,  "has  substantial being
through  its  form.  ... But when once it exists under one form it is in
potentiality   to  others."  Perhaps  one  more  distinction  should  be
mentioned  because  of  its  significance for later discussions of form.
Regarding living and nonliving things as essentially distinct, Aristotle
differentiates  between  the  forms  constituting  these  two  kinds  of
substances.  As  appears in the chapter on Soul, he uses the word "soul"
to  name  the  substantial  form  of  plants, animals, and men. Both the
Platonic theory of the separate Forms and the Aristotelian theory of the
composition  of  form  and matter raise difficulties which their authors
consider  and  which  become  the  subject  of intense controversy among
Platonists  and  Aristotelians in the Hellenistic and mediaeval periods.
The  Platonic  theory  faces  a question which arises from supposing the
existence  of  an eternal and immutable Form for every appearance in the
sensible  world  of  becoming. If the Idea and the individual are alike,
then  "some  further  idea  of likeness will always be coming to light,"
Parmenides  says  to  Socrates; "and if that be like anything else, then
another;  and  new  ideas  will be always arising, if the idea resembles
that which partakes of it." Because of this difficulty with the doctrine
of  participation,  Parmenides  suggests  that  it  may  be necessary to
conclude  that "the Idea cannot be like the individual or the individual
like  the  Idea."  In  addition,  the  relationships of the Forms to one
another  presents  a difficulty. Is the relation of one Form to another,
Parmenides  asks,  determined  by  the  essence  of each Form, or by the
relationships  among  the sensible particulars that imitate the Forms in
question?  Either  solution  seems  to  be unsatisfactory because of the
further  difficulties which both raise. Yet, after propounding questions
of  this  sort,  and  multiplying  difficulties, Parmenides concludes by
telling  Socrates why the theory of Ideas cannot be given up. "If a man,
fixing  his  attention  on  these and like difficulties," he says, "does
away  with  the Forms of things and will not admit that every individual
thing has

[591a]
its  own determinate Idea which is always one and the same, he will have
nothing  on  which his mind can rest; and so he will utterly destroy the
power of reasoning." The Aristotelian theory has difficulties of its own
with  respect  to the ultimate character of matter apart from all forms.
Completely   formless  matter  would  be  pure  potentiality  and  would
therefore  have  no actual being. It would be completely unintelligible,
since form is the principle of anything's intelligibility. Nevertheless,
something  like  formless  matter  seems  to  be involved in substantial
change,  in  contrast  to  the  substantially formed matter which is the
substratum  of accidental change. The problem of prime matter is related
in  later  speculations  to  the problem of thv; number and order of the
various forms which matter can take. The question is whether matter must
have  a  substantial  form  before  it can have any accidental form; and
whether it can have a second substantial form in addition to a first, or
is  limited  to  having  a single substantial form, all subsequent forms
necessarily  being  accidental.  Aquinas  plainly argues in favor of the
unity  of  substantial  form. "Nothing is absolutely one," he maintains,
"except  by  one  form,  by which a thing has being; because a thing has
both  being  and  unity from the same source, and therefore things which
are  denominated  by  various  forms  are  not  absolutely  one; as, for
instance,  a  white  man.  If,  therefore," Aquinas continues, "man were
living by one form, the vegetative soul, and animal by another form, the
sensitive soul, and man by another form, the intellectual soul, it would
follow  that  man  is  not  absolutely  one.  .  . . We must, therefore,
conclude," he says, "that the intellectual soul, the sensitive soul, and
the  nutritive  soul  are  in man numerically one and the same soul." In
other words, "of one thing there is but one substantial form." It is not
only  "impossible  that there be in man another substantial form besides
the  intellectual soul," but there is also no need of any other, because
"the  intellectual  soul  contains  virtually  whatever  belongs  to the
sensitive  soul  of brute animals and the nutritive soul of plants." The
Aristotelian  theory  also  has difficulties with respect to substantial
forms as objects of

[591b]
Chapter  28: FORM 533 knowledge and defniition. The defniiiion which the
mind Jormulales attempts to state llie essence of the thing dehned. i'hc
formulablc essence ot a thing would seem to Ix* identical with its form.
But  Aristotle  raises  the (jucstion and his lollowers debate at length
whether  the  essence  ol  a  composite  substance is identical with its
substantial  form  or includes its matter as Among his followers Aquinas
maintains  that,  in  defming  the  essence  or  species  of a composite
substance,  the  genus is used to signify the matter and the differentia
the  form.  "Some  held," he writes, "that the form alone belongs to the
species,  while  the  matter  is  part of the individual, and not of the
species.  This  cannot be true, for to the nature of the species belongs
what the definition signifies, and in natural things the definition does
not signify the form only, but the form and the matter. Hence in natural
things  the  matter is part of the species; not, indeed, signate matter,
which is the principle of individuation, but common matter." He explains
in  another  place  that  "matter  is  twofold;  common  and signate, or
individual:  common,  such  as  flesh and bone; individual, such as this
flesh  and  these  bones."  In  forming  the  universal concept man, for
example,  the  intellect  abstracts the notion of the species "from this
flesh  and  these bones, which do not belong to the species as such, but
to  the  individual.  ... But the species of man cannot be abstracted by
the intellect horn flesh and bones.'' As will be seen in the chapters on
One  AND  Many  and  Universal  and  Particular,  the  Platonic  and the
Aristotelian  theories of form are equally involved in the great problem
of  the  universal  and  the  individual.  Even  though  they seem to be
diametrically  opposed on the existence of universals—whether apart from
or  only  in  minds—both  Plato  and  Aristotle  face  the  necessity of
explaining  individuality.  What  makes  the  particular that imitates a
universal  Form  the unique individual it is.? What makes the indwelling
form  of  a  composite  substance  an  individual form, as unique as the
individual substance of which it is the form? We have already noted that
both   Platonists   and   Aristotelians  appeal  to  matter  as  somehow
responsible  for  individuation  or  individuality, but that only raises
further questions. The

[592a]
534  THE GREAT IDEAS Platonists conceive matter as the receptacle of all
Forms, and so in itself absolutely formless. How, then, can it cause the
particularizations which must be accounted for? Since prime matter, like
the  receptacle, is formless, the Aristotelians resort to what they call
"signate  matter" or "individual matter" to explain the individuality of
forms  and  substances;  but  it has been argued that this only begs the
question  rather  than  solves it. The correlative terms form and matter
seem  to occur in modern thought under the guise of certain equivalents;
as, for example, the distinct substances which Descartes calls "thought"
and  "extension" res cogitans and res extensa—or the infinite attributes
of  substance  which  Spinoza  calls "mind" and "body." They appear more
explicitly  in Kant's analysis of knowledge, related as the a priori and
the  a  posteriori  elements  of  experience.  But  it  is  in the great
theological  speculations  of the Middle Ages that the most explicit and
extended  use  of  these  terms  is made, often with new interpretations
placed  on  ancient  theories. The doctrine of spiritual substances, for
example, has a bearing on the theory of selfsubsistent Forms. The angels
are  sometimes  called  "separate  forms"  by  the theologians. They are
conceived  as  immaterial  substances,  and  hence as simple rather than
composite.   But   though   Plotinus  identifies  the  order  of  purely
intelHgible beings with the pure intelligences, the Christian theologian
does  no^identify  the  Platonic  Ideas  with the angels. He regards the
angels  as  intelligences.  They  exist as pure forms, and therefore are
intelligible  as  well  as  intellectual  substances. But they are in no
sense   the   archetypes  or  models  which  sensible  things  resemble.
Nevertheless,  Christian  theology  does  include  that  aspect  of  the
Platonic  theory  which  looks  upon  the Ideas as the eternal models or
patterns.  But, as Aquinas points out, the separately existing Forms are
replaced  by  what Augustine calls "the exemplars existing in the divine
mind."  Aquinas  remarks  on  the fact that "whenever Augustine, who was
imbued  with  the  doctrines  of the Platonists, found in their teaching
anytliing consistent with faith, he adopted it; and

[592b]
those  things which he found contrary to faith he amended." He then goes
on to say that Augustine could not adopt, but had to amend, the teaching
of  the Platonists that "the forms of things subsist of themselves apart
from matter." He did this, not by denying the ideas, "according to which
all things are formed," but by denying that they could exist outside the
divine  mind. The divine ideas are the eternal exemplars and the eternal
types  types,  Aquinas  explains,  insofar as they are the likenesses of
things  and  so  the principles of God's knowledge; exemplars insofar as
they  are  "the  principles  of  the  making  of things" in God's act of
creation.  The  profound  mystery of the creative act which projects the
divine  ideas  into  substantial  or  material  being replaces the older
problem  of how physical things derive their natures by participation in
the Forms. According to the Aristotelian theory, both natural generation
and  artistic  production  involve  the transformation of a pre-existent
matter.  According  to  the  Platonic  myth  of the world's origin, only
changing  things  are created, neither the receptacle nor the Ideas. But
the Christian dogma of creation excludes everything from eternity except
God.  Ideas  are eternal only as inseparable from the divine mind. Being
spiritual  creatures,  the  angels,  or  self-subsistent  forms, are not
eternal.  And in the world of corporeal creatures, matter as well as its
forms must begin to be with the creation of things. Since matter and its
forms  cannot exist in separation from one another, the theologians hold
that  God  cannot  create  them  separately.  God  cannot  be  supposed,
Augustine  says,  "first  to  have  made  formless  matter, and after an
interval  of time, formed what He had first made formless; but," he goes
on,  "as  intelligible  sounds  are made by a speaker, wherein the sound
issues  not  formless  at  first  and afterwards receives a form, but is
uttered already formed; so must God be understood to have made the world
of  formless  matter,  but contemporaneously to have created the world "
God  "concreates"  form  and  matter,  Augustine  holds, "giving form to
matter's   formlessness   without   any  interval  of  time."  Defending
Augustine's interpretation of the passage in Genesis which says that the
earth.

[593a]
which  God  in the beginning created, "was unwho, Hke Aquinas, adopt his
theory  must  also formed and void," Aquinas argues that "if adapt it to
supernatural  conditions when they formless matter preceded in duration,
it  already deal with the problems of substance involved in existed; for
this  is  implied  by duration. ... To the mystery of the Incarnation of
the  second  say,  then, that matter preceded, but without person of the
Trinity  and  the  mystery  of  tranform,  is  to say that being existed
actually,  yet substantiation in the Fucharist. without actuality, which
is  a contradiction in Furthermore, Aristotle's identification of terms.
.  .  . Hence we must assert that primary soul with the substantial form
of  a living thing matter was not created altogether formless." makes it
difficult  to  conceive  the  separate  existBut  neither,  according to
Aquinas, can the ence of the individual human soul. Again an form of any
material  thing be created apart adaptation is required. As indicated in
the from its matter. "Forms and other non-subchapters on Immortality and
Soul,  the  Chrissisting  things, which are said to co-exist rather tian
doctrine  of  personal survival is given an than to exist," he declares,
"ought  to  be  called  Aristotelian  rendering  by  regarding the human
concreated  rather  than  created  things."  soul as a form which is not
completely material. Aristotle's theor}^ of physical substances as Hence
it  is  conceived as capable of self-subsistcomposite of form and matter
raises  certain  ence  when, with deathand thedissolution of the special
difficulties  for  Christian  theology.  Those  composite  nature, it is
separated  from  the  body.  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1. Form in relation to
becoming  or change 536 la. Forms as immutable models or archetypes: the
exemplar  ideas  lb.  Forms  as  indwelling causes or principles id. The
reahzation   of   forms   in   the   sensible  order  (i)  Imitation  or
participation:  the  role  of  the  receptacle (2) Creation, generation,
production: embodiment in matter or substratum 2. The being of forms 538
2.a.  The  existence  of  forms:  separately, in matter, in mind 2b. The
eternity  of  forms, the perpetuity of species: the divine ideas (i) The
union of matter and form: potentiality and actuality (2) The distinction
between  substantial  and  accidental forms (3) The unity of substantial
form:  prime matter in relation to substantial form 2d. Angels and human
souls as self-subsistent forms: the substantiality of thought 3. Form in
relation  to knowledge 3a. Sensible forms, intelligible forms: the forms
of  intuition  and understanding 3^. Form and definition: the formulable
essence;  the  problem of matter in relation to definition 4. The denial
of form as a principle of being, becoming, or knowledge

[593b]
Chapter  28:  FORM 535 PAGE or mind in separation from extension or body
540

[594a]
536  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or passage cited. 1. Form in relation to becoming or change \a. Forms as
immutable  models  or  archetypes: the exemplar ideas 7 Plato: Cratylus,
88a-89a;  113c-114a,c  / Fhaedriis, 125a-b / Symposium, 167b-d / Phaedo,
231b-  232b;  2Alc-2^^c / Republic, bk hi, 333b334b; bk v, 368c-369c; bk
vi,  382a-c;  bk vivii,386c-389c; bkix-x, 426d-429b/ Tifnaeus, 447a-458b
passim,  esp  447b-448b  / Pannenides, 487c-491a / Philebus, 610d-613a /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii, ch 7
[ii3*'24-33]
158d; BK VI, CH 8 [147^5-11] 201a / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch
9 [335^8-24] 437a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987^29-*^i3] 505b-c;
CH   7   [988^34-^5]   506c;  CH  9  [991*19-32]  509c;  bk  VII,  CH  8
[1033^19-1034^7]  556d-557b;  bk  XIII,  CH  4-5  610a-611d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk i, ch 6 [1096^32-1097* 14] 342b-c 11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic,
bk  i,  811a-d  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [181-194] 63b-c 17
Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr hi, ch ii 46b-c; tr hi, ch 17-TR IV, CH 5
49b-51d;  tr  iv,  ch  15  56c-57a  / Third Ennead, tr ix, ch i 136a-d /
Fourth  Ennead, tr ii, ch i 139c-140c; tr ix 205a-207a,c / Ftfth Ennead,
tr ii, ch i 214c-

[594b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upperandlowerhalvesofthepage. Forexample,in53 James
:Pj}'<r/!o/o|-j,116a-119b,  the passage begins in the upper half of page
116  and ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is printed in
two  columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of
the  lefthand  side  of  the  page, the letters c and d to the upper and
lower  halvesof  the  right-hand  side of i\ the page. For example, in 7
Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the
left-hand  side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand
side  of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions
of  a  work  (such  as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included in the
reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are given in cerBible References:
The  references are to book, chapter, and verse. When the King James and
Douay  versions differ in title of books or in the numbering of chapters
or  verses,  the  King  James  version  is  cited  first  and the Douay,
indicated  by  a (D), follows; e.g., Old Testament: Nehemiah, y::\^— {D)
II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's
attention to one or more especially relevant parts of a whole reference;
"passim"  signifies  that  the topic is discussed intermitFor additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  215a;  tr v, ch 4-TR ix, ch 14 230b-251d / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  20-22  278d-280d;  tr  VII,  CH  4-i7 323c-331a 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 9, 3a; bk XII, par 38 108d-109a / City
of  God, bk viii, CH 3, 266a-b; ch 6, 269b-c; bk ix, ch 22 296d-297a; bk
xi, ch 7 326a-c; ch 10, 328c-d; CH 29 339a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch 910 627a-b; bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  15 91b-94a passim; q 18, a 4, rep 2 107d-108c; Q 44, a 3 240b-241a; q
47,  a  i,  rep  2  256a257b;  Q  50, a 3, ans 272a-273b; q 65, a 4, ans
342b-343c;  q  108, a i, ans and rep 2 552c553c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 43d-44c 35 Locke: Hu?nan Understariding, bk hi, ch hi, sect 17
258d-259b; sect 19 259c-260a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, lUh-WSoi; 173b-174a /
Practical   Reason,   352c-353a  /  Judgement,  551a552c  lb.  Forms  as
indwelling causes or principles 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i 259a-268d; bk
ii,  CH I [193^30-^19] 269c-270a; ch 2 [194*12-^15] 270c-271a; bk hi, ch
2
[202*9-11]
279c  /  Heavens,  bk i, ch 8 [277*12-27] 368b-c; bk iv, ch 4 [^12*3-22]
403c-d  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  BK I, CH 3 [318^13-18] 415b-c /
Meta-

[595a]
Ic  to  ld(2)  Chapter  physics,  BK  V,  ch 4 534d-535c; bk vii, cm 7-9
555a-558a  esp  ch  8  556b-557b;  bk xii, ch 2-5 598c-601a 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*^
12-642*24]  162b-165b / Generation ofAnimals, BK I, ch 20 [729''6]-cH 22
[730^:531 269b 271a 19 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica, part i, q 7, a i, ANS
31a-d;  q  9, a 2, rep 3 39c-40d; q 14, a 8, ANS 82c-83b; q 15, a i, ans
91b-92a; q 18, a 7^, ANS 106b-107c; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; q 42, A I,
REP I 224b-225d; q 51, a i, rep 3 275b-276b; q 65, a 4, ans 342b'343c; q
85,  a 2, ans 453d-455b; q 104, a i, ans and rep 1-2 534c-536c; q 105, a
2,  ans  539c-540c;  q 115, AA 1-2 585d-588c; part i-ii, q 5, a 6, rep 2
641a-642a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 4, ans and
rep  i 5a-6a; q 52, a i, ans 15d18a; Q 109, a I, ans 338b-339c; part ii-
ii,  q  23,  A 2, rep 3 483d-484d; q 24, a 11, ans 498b-499c; part hi, q
13, a i, ans 780a-781b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-33] 80a; paradise,
ii  [46-148]  108b-109b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 36d-37a 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  386d-387a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
43d-44c  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 51 111c; bk ii, aph 1-2 137a-c; aph
17  149b-d  35  Locke  :  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxxi, SECT 6
240d-241d;  sect 13 243a-b; ch xxxii, SECT 24 247c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect
15-18  258b-259c;  ch  vi,  sect 2-3 268c-d; ch ix, sect 12 287d-288a 42
Kant:  Judgement,  550a-551a,c;  553c-562a,c; 565b-569a; 581c; 584c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 156d160b Ic. The transcendental or
a  priori  forms  as  constitutive  of order in experience 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a-15c,  23a-33d,  41c-42b, 48d-51d, 53b'55a,
56d59b,   63d-64a,   66d-93c,   94d-96d,   lOOd-lOlb;  112d-113a;  115d;
129c-137a,c;  153c-155a;  162b-163a; 173b; 176d-177a; 186d-187a; 207C'd;
213d-215a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-c; 282b-c; 283b /
Practical  Reason,  308a-b; 319d; 335c-336a; 350b-c / Judgement, 461a-c;
471b-c;  482d;  492c-d;  515d516b;  517b-c; 542c-d; 551a-553c; 562a563b;
570b-572d; 612c-d 53 James : Psychology, 627a-631a; 852a; 859a-882a 1</.
The  realization  of  forms  in  the  sensible order 1</(1) Imitation or
participation:  the role of the receptacle 7 Plato: Euthydetnus, 81a-b /
Phaedrus,  126b-c / Symposium, 167b'd / Phaedo, 242c-243c / Republic, bk
hi,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  368c-371b;  bk  VI,  382a-c;  bk x, 427c-429b /
Timaeus,

[595b]
28:  FORM  537 455c 477a,c esp 4^ScAS8h / Parmenides, 487c491a / Seventh
Letter. 809c 810b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, cm 2
[209^5
17] 288b c / Generation and Corruption, bk 11, ch 9 [^^5^^ -24] 437a-b /
Metaphysics,  hk  i,  ch  6  505b 506b; ch 9 [990^22 -99 1"8] 509a-b; bk
VIII, ch 6
[1045*14-19] 569d 570a;
bk xii, ch 10 [1075^16-20] 606c; BK XIII, cii 4 [io79» i9>3]610d-611a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi, ch 2-3 21d23a; tr vii, ch 2 26c-d; tr
viii,  ch  8  30d-31c;  CH  lo-ii  32a-33d / Second Ennead, tr hi, ch II
46b-c;  CH  18  49c-50a;  tr iv, ch 5 51b-d; tr IX, CH 8 70a-d; ch 10-12
72a-73d;  cii  16,  76a-b  /  Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 1-3 82c-84c; CH 14
89b-d;  tr  v, ch i, lOOd-lOlb; ch 6, 104a; TR VI, ch 8-19 lllc-119a; tr
vii,  ch  ii  126a-d;  tr  viii  129a-136a / Fourth Ennead, tr II, CH I,
140a-c;  tr hi, ch 4-5 143d-144c; ch 15, 150a-b; tr iv, ch 13 164d-165b;
tr  viii, ch 3-TR IX, CH 5 202a-207a,c esp tr ix, ch 2 205C'206a / Fifth
Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  4-13 230b235b; TR VII, ch i 238a-b; tr viii, ch 1-3
239b-241a;  ch 7, 243a-b; tr ix, ch 3 247b-d; ch 11-14 250c-251d / Sixth
Ennead,  tr ii, ch 20-22 278d-280d; tr iv, ch 9-10 301c-302c; tr V, CH 6
307b-c; tr vi 310d-321b; tr vii, CH 4-9 323c-326c; ch 18-23 331b-333c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 65, A 4, ans 342b-343c; q 115, a 3,
rep  2 588c589c 20 Aquinas: Sttmma Theologica, part i-ii, q 52, A I, ans
15d-18a; a 2 18a-19a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 43d-44c 42 Kant:
Pwr^   Reason,   113c-115a   ld{2)   Creation,  generation,  production:
embodiment in matter or substratum 7 Plato: Cratylus, 88a-c 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  i, ch 6-9 264c-268d; BK II, ch i [193^9-^19] 269b-270a; bk
hi, ch 6
[2o6^33]-CH 7
[208*^4] 285b-286c; bk iv, ch 2
288b-289a; ch 9 [217^20-^26] 297a-c / Heavens, bk I, CH 9 [277^26-278^9]
369a-d; bk iv, ch 3 401c-402c; ch 4
[312*3-22] 403c-d
/ Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 7
[324^5-24] 422d-423b
/ Metaphysics, bk i, CH 6 [987^30-988^8] 506a; bk hi, ch 4 [999* 24-^24]
518a-c;  bk  v,  ch  4  534d-535c;  bk  xii,  ch  10 [1075^34-37] 606d 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*12-641^39]
162b-165a  /  Generation  of Animals, bk i, ch 20 [729*6]-ch 22 [730^33]
269b-271a  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 13 271b; BK VII, SECT 23
281b;  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 6-9
51d53b;  TR V 57d-60c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 7 90d-91a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 3, A 2, rep 3 15c-16a; q 7, a i,
ans 31a-d; q 46, A I, rep 6 250a-252d; q 65, a 4, ans 342b-

[596a]
{Id.  The  realization  offorms  in  the sensible order, ld(2) Creation,
generation, production: embodiment in matter or substratum.) 343c; Q 66,
a  i,  ans 343d-345c; q 84, a 3, rep 2 443d-444d; q 90, a 2 481d-482c; q
104,  a  i,  ANS  and  REP 1-2 534c-536c; q 105, a i 538d539c; Q no, A 2
565d-566d;  part  i-ii,  q  20,  A  I,  REP  3 712a-d 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 52, A I, ANS 15d-18a; part ii-ii, q 24, a ii,
ans  498b-499c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b;
vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  xiii [52-84] 126a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, lOOd-
lOlb;   186b-d  /  Judge?nent,  556d-558a;  559b-d;  561c-562a;  565b-d;
566d-567a;  575c-576a; 577c-d 2. The being of forms 2a. The existence of
forms:  separately,  in matter, in mind 7 Plato: Cratylus, 113c-114a,c /
Symposium,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk  v, 368c-373c; bk vi, 385c-386c; bk
ix-x,  426d-429b / Timaeus, 457b-458a / Parmenides, 487c-491a / Sophist,
570a-574c / Philebus, 610d-613a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch ii
[77^5-9] 105d-106a; ch 13 [79^6-10] 108c; ch
18 [81^40-^5] lllb-c; CH 22 [83^23-35] 113c-d; CH 24
[85''i7-22] 117a /
Topics, bk ii, ch 7
[113*24-33]
158d; bk VI, ch 6
[143^11-33]
197b-c; CH 10 [148*13-22] 202b / Physics, bk II, CH I [193^2-5] 269d; ch
2
[193^23-194*6]
270a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [208^19-24]  2^1h-c  /  Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
505b-506b; ch 9 508c511c; BK III, CH 2
[997*34-998*19]
516a-d; ch 4 [999*24-^24] 518a-c; ch 4 [iooi*4]-ch 6
[1002^31] 519d-521d; bk vii, ch 2 [1028^18-28]
551a-b;  ch  8  [1033^19-1034*8]  556d-557b;  ch  13-14 562a-563c; ch 15
[1040*8-^4] 564a-c; ch 16 [1040^28-1041*4] 564d-565a; bk viii, ch 6
[1045*14-19] 569d-570a; bk
ix, ch 8
[1050^
35-1051*2]  576d-577a;  bk  x,  ch  10 586c-d; bk XI, CH I [1059*39-^21]
587b-c; ch 2 588a589a; ch 3
[1061*29-^4] 589c; bk
xii, ch i
[1069*27-37] 598b; CH 3 [1070*4-30] 599b-d;
CH  6  [1071^12-23]  601b-c;  ch  10  [1075^25-33]  606c-d;  BK xiii-xiv
607a-626d  / Soul, bk hi, ch 4 [429*10-29] 661b-c; ch 7 [431^13-19] 664b
11  NicoMACHus:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 811a-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  1-2 26a-d; tr viii, ch 2-3 27c-28c / Third Ennead, tr viii, ch
8-10  132d-136a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  III,  ch  4-5  143d-144c; ch 17
150d-151b  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr iv 226d-228b; tr vii, ch i-tr VIII, ch 3
238a-241a;  tr  ix,  ch  4-14  247d251d  / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 20-22
278d280d;  tr  v, ch 8 307d-308c; tr vi 310d-321b esp ch 4-10 312b-315d,
ch 15-17 318b-320c; tr vii, ch 8-17 325b-331a

[596b]
558  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2/0 2^ 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 9, 3a;
bk  x,  par  19  76a-b;  bk  xi, par 7, 90d / City ofGod, bk viii, ch 6,
269b-c;  bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  4, ANS 16d-17c; q 4, A I, rep 3 20d-21b; q 5, A 3, rep 4 25a-d; q
9, a 2, rep 3 39c-40d; q 13, A I, REP 2 62c-63c; q 14, a i, ans 75d-76c;
A  2,  ANS  76d-77d;  q 15, a i, ans and rep i 91b-92a; q 18, a 4, rep 3
107d-108c;  q  44,  a  i,  rep  3  238b-239a;  a  3 240b-241a; q 65, a 4
342b-343c;  q  84, aa 1-4 440d-446b; q 85, a i, REP 2 451c-453c; q no, a
2,  ans  565d-566d;  q  115,  a  i, ans 585d-587c; A3, rep 2 588c589c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 52, A I, ans 15d-18a; part hi, q
4, a 4, ans and REP 2 733a-734a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv, 269d-271b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 43d-44a 31 Descartes: Meditations, v,
93b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi, sect 11-20 257a-260a;
ch  v-vi 263d-283a passim, esp ch v, sect 9 266a-b, sect 12 266d267a, CH
VI,  SECT  2-3  268c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  6 325a-b; ch vi, sect 4
331d-332b;  CH  IX, SECT I 349a 35 Berkei^ey : Human Knotcledge, sect 12
415b-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23b-d; 34a-b; 36b-c; 45d-46a; 48d-49a;
lOOd-lOlb;   176d-177a;   186b-187a;   211c-213a  /  Judgement,  461a-c;
551a-553c;  556d-558a;  559b-d;  575c-576a;  577c-d;  580b-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 156d157b 53 James: Psychology, 881b 2b.
The  eternity  of  forms,  the perpetuity of species: the divine ideas 7
Plato:  Cratylus,  113a-114a,c  / Phaedrus, 125a-b / Symposium, 167b-d /
Phaedo,  231c232b  /  Timaeus,  447a-d;  457c-d  / Laws, bk IV, 685b-c 8
Aristotle:  Generation  and Corruption, bk ii, CH 10 [336^^25-34] 438d /
Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 6 [987*29-^18] 505b-d; bk hi, ch 2 [997*34- ^12]
516a-b; bk vi, ch i
[1026*7-18] 548a-b;
BK  VII, CH 8 [1033^19-1034*8] 556d-557b; bk XI, CH 2 588a-589a; bk xii,
ch  6  [1071^12-23] 601b-c; bk xiii, ch 4 [1078^7-1079*4] 610a-c / Soul,
BK II, CH 4 [4i5*23-''8] 645c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*33-^5]
341c-d  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  841a-d  17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead,  tr  vii, ch 2-17 322b-331a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
9, 3a; bk XII, par 38 108d-109a / City of God, bk viii, ch j, 266a-b; ch
6, 269b-c; bk ix, ch 22 296d-297a; bk xi, ch 7 326a-c; ch 10, 328c-d; CH
29  339a-b  /  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 14, A 8 82c-83b; q 15 91b-94a; q 16, a 7, rep 2

[597a]
2c  to  lc(?>) Chapter 28: FORM 539 99a-d; o i8, a 4, rep 3 107d 108c; q
44,  a 3 240b-241a; q 47, a i, rep 2 256a 257b; g 57, A I, ANS 295a-d; q
58,  aa  6-7  304c  306b;  o 65, A 4 342b-343c; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 3
442b443c; A 4, rep i 444d-446b; a 5 446c 447c; q 87, A I, ANS 465a-466c;
y  9S,  a  1  516d-517d; Q 108, A I, ANS and rep 2 552c-553c 20 Aquinas:
Siimma  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q  92,  A  I,  ANS 1025c-1032b 31
Descartes:  Meditations, v, 93b d / Objections and Replies, 216d-217c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, prop 17, schol 362c363c; prop 21-23 364a-365a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113c-115a; 173b-174a / Judgement, 551a-552c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b 2c. Form in the composite
being  of  the  individual  thing  2c(l)  The  union of matter and form:
potentiality and actuality 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[193*9-^19]
269b-270a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4 [1014^261015*^11] 535a-b; ch 6
[1016^12-18]
537a-b; CH 8 538b-c; ch 24
[1023^32-^1]
545a;  bk  VII, ch 17 565a-566a,c; bk viii, ch 6 569d570d; bk ix, ch 6-9
573c-577c; bk xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a; ch 10
[1075^34-37]
606d  /  Soul, BK II, CH 1-2 642a-644c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
i,  ch i [640* i2-64i'^39] 162b-165a / Generation ofAnimals, bk I, CH 20
[729^9]-ch 21 [729^21] 269b-270a; ch 21 [730*24]-cH 22
[730^32] 270c-271a; bk
II, CH 3 [737^6-27] 277d-278a; ch 4
[738^^128] 279b-c
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 13 271b 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the
World, 1078a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii, ch 8 30d31c; CH lo-ii
32a-33d/  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a; ch 8-9 52c-53b; tr v
57d-60c  /  Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-19 lllc-119a / Sixth Ennead, tr v,
ch  8  307d-308c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 7 90d91a; BK XII,
par  3-6  99d-100c;  par  8, 101b; par 9, 101c; par 14-16 102b-103a; par
24-26  104c-105b;  par 28-31 105c-107a; par 38-40 108d-110a; bk xin, par
48  124a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, ANS and rep 3
15c-16a;  a 8 19d-20c; q 7, A I, ANS and rep 2 31a-d; a 2, ans and rep 3
31d-32c;  q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  39c-40d; q 14, a i 75d-76c; a 2, rep 1,3
76d-77d;  q 18, a 4, rep 2-3 107d-108c; q 29, a i, rep 4 162a-163b; a 2,
ANS and rep 4-5 163b-164b; q 50, a 2 270a272a; a 5, ans 274b-275a; q 55,
a 2, ans 289d290d; q 62, A 7, rep i 322d-323b; q 66, a i 343d-345c; a 2,
ans  345d-347b;  q  70,  a 3, rep 2 365b-367a; q 76 385c-399b; q 86, a 3
463b-d; q 104, a i, ans 534c-536c; part i-ii, Q 10, A I, rep 2 662d-663d

[597b]
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 4, ANS and HEP I 5a-6a;
part ii-ii, q 24, A 11, ANS 498b 499c; part 111, g 2, a 1, ans and REP 2
710a  711c;  a  2,  ans  711d-712d;  PART  III  suppl,  q H2, a I, REP 2
968a-970c;  g  92,  A  I,  ANS  1025c  1032b  21  Dante: Divine (lowcdy,
paradise, i [127 142] 107c d; II
[46
14SI 108b 109b; vii
[121
148) 116b-c; xiii
[52
84J 126a b; xxix
[13-36J
150b-c  28  (Gilbert: Loadstone, hk ii, 30b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23b; 34a b; 36b-c; 45d46a; 48d-49a; lOOd-lOlb;
186b  187a;  188d189a  2c(2)  The  distinction  between  substantial and
accidental  forms  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q j, a 2, ANS
31d-32c;  g 8, a 2, rep 3 35c-36b; g 29, A 2, ANS and rep 4-5 163b-164b;
g  45,  a  4,  ANS  244d-245c;  g 54, aa 1-3 285a-287b; q 66, A 1, REP 3
343d-345c; g 67, a 3 351b-352a; g 76, A 4 393a-394c; a 6 396a-d; g 77, a
i 399c-401b; a 6, ans 404c-405c; part 1-11, g 7, A 4, REP 3 654b-655a 20
AguiNAs: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, g 49, A 2, ANS 2b-4a; a 4, ans and
rep  i  5a-6a; g 50, A 2 7c-8a; g 52, a i, ans 15d-18a; g 85, A I, rep 4
178b-179b;  part  111, g 2, a 1, ans 710a-711c; a 2, ans 711d-712d; part
hi  suppl,  g  70,  A  I,  ANS  893d-895d;  g 79, a 1, REP4 951b-953b 31
Descartes:  Discourse, part 1, 41d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 11,
ch  xii, sect 3-6 147d-148c; ch xxiii, sect 3 204c-d; CH XXXI, sect 6-13
240d-243b; ch xxxii, SECT 24 247c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 15-19 258b-260a;
ch  vi 268b-283a passim, esp sect i-io 268b-271b, sect 21, 273c, sect 24
274c;  ch  IX,  sect  12-13 287d-288d; ch x, sect 20 296d-297a 42 Kant :
Pure  Reason,  131c-d / Judgement, 580c-d 2r(3) The unity of substantial
form: prime matter in relation to substantial form 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk i, ch 9
[192^3-33]
268a-c / Generation and Corruption, bk 1, ch 3
[3i9*29-''4] 416b-c / Meteorology, bk
iv, ch 12
[389*^22-390*7]
493d-494a  / Metaphysics, bk I, CH 9 [991*26-32] 509c; bk ii, ch 2 [994*
1-6] 512b; bk V, ch 4 [1015*5-11] 535b; bk vii, ch 3
[1029*11-26]
551c-d; ch 8
[1033^1-5]
556c; CH 13
[1039*2-23]
562d-563a; ch 16
[i04o''5-i6] 564c; [1041*5] 565a; bk
viii, ch 4
[1044*15-32] 568d-569a; bk
ix, ch 7 [1049* 24-^1] 575a; bk xii, ch 3
[1069^35-1070*
4] 599a-b;
[1070*9-11] 599b; bk
xiii, ch 5
[1079^31-34] 611c
17  Plotinus:  Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7-9 52a53b; TR V 57d-60c / Third
Ennead, tr vi, ch 7-19 llOd 119a / Fourth Ennead, tr ix 205a207a,c

[598a]
(2c,  Forfn  in  the  composite being of the individual thing. 2c(3) The
unity of substantialform: prime matter in relation to substantial form,)
19  Aquin'as:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 8, REP 3 19d-20c; q 5, a
3,  rep  3  25a-d;  q  7,  A  2,  ans and rep 3 31d-32c; q 8, a 4, rep i
37c-3Sc:  q 14, a 2, rep 3 76d-77d; q 15, a 3, REP 3 93b-94a; q 16, a 7,
rep  2 99a-d; q 47, A I, ANS 256a-257b; q 66, aa 1-2 343d-347b; Q 76, AA
3-4  391a-394c; q 77, a i, rep 2 399c401b; a 2, rep 3 401b-d; q 84, a 3,
rep  2  443d444d;  Q  115,  A  I,  REP 1-2,4 585d-587c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 79, A I, REP 4 951b-953b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect ii 415a-b 2d. Angels and human souls as self-subsistent
forms:  the  substantiality  of  thought  or  mind  in  separation  from
extension  or  body  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr viii, ch 2 27c-d /
Fourth Ennead, tr i, ch i, 139b; tr hi, ch 9-12 146d-149b; ch 18 151b-c;
tr  ix  205a207a,c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr ix, ch 5, 356d357a 18 Augustine:
City  ofGod, bkxxii, ch i 586b, d587b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  7,  a  2,  ans and rep 2 31d-32c; q 8, a 2, rep 2-3 35c-36b; q 50
269a-275a  esp a 2 270a-272a; Q 75 378a-385c esp a 5 382a-383b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c; XXIX [13-36] 150b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  80a-b:  part  hi, 174b-176d; part iv,
250c-251c;  258b-261a;  270c-271b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,
51d-52a;  part  V,  60b-c  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d;  VI  96b-103d /
Objections   and  Replies,  def  x  130d;  prop  iv  133c;  152b,d-156a;
224d-225b;  225d-226a;231a-232d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, prop 10
358a-b;  prop  14,  coROL  2  360a;  part  ii, prop 1-2 373d374a; prop 7
375a-c;  prop  13  377d-378c;  PART  III,  prop  2  396c-398b 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk i [423-431] 102b; BK V
[388-443]
183b-185a;
[469-505]
185b186a;  bk  vi  [320-353] 203a-204a 35 hocKE: Human Understanding, bk
it,  ch  xxiii,  sect 5 205a-b; sect 15-37 208c-214b passim 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  2 413b; sect 26-27 418a-b; sect 89 430b-c; sect
135-142  440a-441c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186b 41 Gibbon : Decline
and  Fall,  136b  42  K.\nt: Pure Reason, 121a-128b; 201b-c; 203d204c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  257c258a; part iv, 360c-d 53
James: Psychology, 221a-226a

[598b]
b 540 THE GREAT IDEAS 2d to 3a 3. Form in relation to knowledge 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a-c / Republic, bk v, 368c-373c; bk
vi,  385c-388a / Timaeus, 457b-458a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch ii
[77^5-9] 105d-106a; ch 22 [83=^23-35] 113c-d /
Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 9 [990* 33-991*18] 508c-509c; bk
xiii, ch 4 [1078^6]- CH 5 [1079^24] 610a-611c / Soul, bk hi, ch 4
[429*13-28] 661b-c
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 811a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xi,  ch  7 326a-c; CH29 339a-b 19 XQviy^.Ks: Summa Theologica, part i, q
7, a 2, rep 2 31d-32c; q 13, a i. rep 2 62c-63c; q 14, A I, ans 75d-76c;
a  2  76d-77d;  q  15,  a  i,  ans  and  REP 1,3 91b-92a; q 19, a i, ans
108d-109c; Q 34, a I, REP 3 185b-187b; q 86, a 3 463b-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-60] 80b-c
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxi, SECT 6-13 240d-243b; bk
iii, ch vi 268b283a passim; ch ix, sect 12 287d-288a; bk iv, ch iv, sect
5-8  324d-325c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c; 173b / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   of   Morals,  282b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  308a46  Hegel:
Philosophy  ofRight,  pref,  7a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
693d694c  53  James:  Pj;)'(r/!o/o^;',  859a-860b  ^a.  Sensible  forms,
intelligible  forms:  the  forms of intuition and understanding 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a126c / Symposium, 167a-d / Phaedo,
228a-232b / Republic, bk hi, 333b-334b; bk v, 370d373c; BK VI, 383d-388a
/  Timaeus,  447a-d;  455c-458a  /  Theaetetus,  534c-536a  8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[79*6-10] 108c / Topics, BK II, CH 7 [113*23-33]
158d / Soul, BK III, CH 2
[425^17-26] 657d658a; ch 4 661b-662c; ch 8 664b-d / Memory
and Reminiscence, ch i
[450*26-451*19] 691a692b
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 19 76a-b; BK XII, par 5 lOOa-b /
City of God, bk viii, CH 6, 269b-c; bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a; bkxii, ch 7
346c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, a 2, REP2 31d-32c;Q
13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 14, a i, ANS 75d-76c; a 8, .o;s 82c-83b; q 15, a
i,  ans andREP i,3 91b-92a:Qi7,A3,ANsl02d-103c;Q 18, A 3, ANS 106b-107c;
q  19,  a  i, ans 108d109c; Q 34, A I, REP 3 185b-187b; q 50, a 2, REP 2
270a-272a;  q  84  440b-451b;  q  85, aa 1-2 451c-455b; a 5 457d-458d 20
Aquinas: Sunima Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, A 3, REP I 61c-62b; part hi
suppl,  q  92, a i, ans 1025c-1032b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49d 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 9-10 270d-271b

[599a]
b  3^/0  4  CnAi»Ti:R 28: FORNf 541 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a lOSa.c csp
14a  15c, 23a-33d, 41c-42b, 48d 55a, 56d 59b. 61a 64a, 65d 6&d, 68a 93c,
94d  96d,  lOOd  101b;  112d113a;  115d;  135a  137a,c; 153c 155a; 173b;
207c-d;  213d-215a  /  Fund. Priti. Metaphysic of Morals, 282b-c; 283b /
Practieal  Reason,  308a b; 319d; 335c-336a; 350b c / Judgement, 461a-c;
471b  c;  517b  c;  542c-d;  552b-c; 562a-b; 603d-604c; 612c-d 53 James:
Psychology,  420a-b;  628b  631a  db.  The  problem  of  the  universal:
knowledge  of  the  individual  7 Plato: Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedo,
228a232b / Republic, bk v, 370d-373c / Parmenides, 487c-491a / Philehus,
610d-613a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2^6-37] 6c-7a /
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, ch ii [77*5-9] 105d106a; CH 24 [85*31-^22]
116c-117a  /  Topics,  bk  II,  CH  7  [113*23-33]  158d  /  Sophistical
Refutations,  CH  22  [178^37-179*10]  246c  /  Physics,  bk  VII,  CH 3
[247^1-7]  330b  / Metaphysics, bk i, CH 6 505b-506b; ch 9 508c-511c; bk
hi, ch 3
[999*6-14] 517d; CH 4 [999*24-^24] 518a-c; bk
VII, CH 8 [1033^19-1034*8] 556d-557b; ch 10
[1035^28-32] 559b; CH 11 [1037*5-9] 560c; ch
13-15 562a-564c; bk xiii, ch 4-5 610a-611d; ch 10 618c-619a,c / Soul, bk
hi,  ch  4  [429*1829] 661c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6 341b-342c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 3, a 2, rep 3 15c-16a; a 3, ans
16a-d;  q  4, a 3, ans 22b-23b; q 11, a 3, ans 49a'C; q 13, a 9, ans and
REP  2  71b-72c;  q 14, a 11 84c-85c; q 16, a 7, REP 2 99a-d; q 39, a 3,
ans  204c-205c;  q 50, a 2, ans 270a-272a; a 4, ans 273b-274b; q 57, A 2
295d-297a; q 76, a 2, ans 388c-391a; q 85, A 7, REP 3 459c-460b; q 86, a
i  461c-462a; A 3 463b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, A2,
ANs711d-712d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-333b esp 333a35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch hi, sect 6-20 255c-260a; ch v-vi
263d-283a  passim,  esp  CH  V, sect 9 266a-b, ch vi, sect 32 277c-278b,
sect  36-37  279a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  iv, sect 5-8 324d-325c; ch vi, sect 4
331d-332b;  CH  VII,  SECT  9  338d-339b  35 Berkeley: Human Knoivledge,
intro,   sect   6-19  405d-410c  esp  sect  15-16  409a-d  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  341b-342b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  211c-218d / Judgement,
573a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158b-c;  part  iv,
360c-361a  53  James: Psychology, 308a-312a 3c. Form and definition: the
formulable  essence;  the  problem of matter in relation to definition 7
Plato: Phaedrus, 134b-c / Meno, 174b-179b / Seve?ith Letter, 809c-810b

[599b]
8  Aristoili:: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ^ 10 123c 128d; cm i^ 131b
133c / Physics, hk ii, (Ml I
[193*30
*'i9l 269c 270a / Generation and Corruption, bk i, cm 2
[^i7''i7
27J  413b / Meteorology, bk iv, cm 12 493d 494d / \tetaphysics, hk 1, ch
6 505b 506b; en 7 •^51 506c; BK II, cii 2
[994*^16-271
513a-b; bk v, ch 2 [1013*27-28] 533b; bk vi, ch i
[io25*'2H-io26*6J 547d 548a;
bk vii, ch 4-6 552b-555a; ch 10-15 558a 564c; bk viii, ch 1-3 566a-568d;
ch 6 569d 570d; bk xii, ch 9
[1074^37 -i()75'^2) 605c; hk
xiii, ch 4-5 610a 61 Id / Soul, hk i, ch i 631a-632d; BK II, CH 1-3 642a
645b passim; bk hi, ch 4
[429^10-23] 661d-662a;
ch 6
[4^o*'26-3i]
663b  c  9  ARisnriLi::  Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch i [641* 14-31] 163d
164a;  ch 2-4 165d-168c esp ch 3 166a-167d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  3,  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 13, a 12, rep 2
74c-75b;  q  17, a 3, ans 102d-103c; q 18, A 4, rep 3 107d-108c; q 29, a
i,  rep 4 162a163b; q 50, A 4 273b-274b; q 75, a 4, ans 381b-382a; q 85,
a  i,  rep  2  451c-453c; part i-ii, q I, A 3, ANS 611b-612a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 55, A 4, ANS and rep 1-2 28c-29d; part
ii-ii,  q  4,  A  I,  ANS 402a-403d; part hi, q 2, a 5, ans 715a-716b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, def 4 355b; prop 8, scHOL 2, 357a-d; part ii,
prop 37 386b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii 204a-214b;
ch  xxxi, sect 6-13 240d-243b; cii xxxii, SECT 24 247c-d; bk hi, ch iii,
sect  1220  257b-260a;  ch  v-vi  263d-283a  passim;  ch  IX, SECT 11-17
287d-290a;  ch x, sect 17-21 295d-297b; ch xi, sect 19-20 304b-d; bk iv,
CH  IV,  SECT  5-8  324d-325c;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16  331d-336d passim 35
Berkeley:  Human Knoivledge, sect i 413a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 342a
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 176c; 184d-185a 4. The denial of
form  as a principle of being, becoming, or knowledge 7 Plato: Cratylus,
113c-114a,c  /  Sophist,  567a568a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4
[1007*20-  ^18]  526c-527a; ch 5 528c-530c passim; bk xi, CH 6 590d-592b
23  Hobbes:  Letiathan,  part i, 49d; part iv, 269b-271a 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  51  111c; BK II, APH 1-2 137a-c; aph 17 149b-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, en viii, SECT 2 133c; CH XXXI, sect
6-13 240d-243b passim, esp sect 6 240d-241d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 10 271b;
sect 24 274c; ch x, sect 20 296d-297a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 422a-b

[600a]
542  THE  GPIEAT  IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES composite substances, see Being
yh(2).

[600b]
1  For:  Other  discussions of the Forms or Ideas as immutable models or
archetypes,  see Change 15a; Eternity 4c; Idea la, 6b. Other discussions
of forms as indwelling causes or principles in mutable things, see Cause
la;  Change  2a; Matter la; and for the consideration of form and matter
as  co-principles of Discussions of matter or the receptacle in relation
to  form,  see  Change 2-2b; Matter i-ib; Space i a ; World 4b ; and for
the  consideration  of  matter  apart  from  form,  see Matter 2,3a. The
controversy  over  the  separate  existence of the Forms, the objects of
mathematics, and universals, see Being 7d(2)-7d(3); Mathematics 2b; Same
and Other 2a; Universal AND Particular 2a—2c; and for the problem of the
cause  of  individuality, see Matter ic; Universal and Particular 3. The
existence  of  forms in the mind as concepts abstracted from matter, see
Idea  2g;  Matter  4d; Memory and Imagination 6c(i); Sense 5a; Universal
and   Particular   4c.   Other   considerations   of  the  a  priori  or
transcendental  forms  of  intuition,  see  Sense ic; Space 4a; Time 6c.
Comparisons  of  creation, generation, and production as each relates to
form  and  matter,  see  Art  2b-2c; Matter 3d; World 4e(i). Other terms
related  to  the distinction of form and matter or to the kinds of form,
see  Being  7b,  7c(i)-7c(3); Nature ia(2); Universal and Particular 6a.
The  theological  doctrine  of  the  angels  as self-subsistent forms or
simple  substances, see Angel 2, 3b-3c; Being 7b(2); for the theological
doctrine  of the forms as eternal exemplars or types in the mind of God,
see  God <^i\ Idea le; and for the theory of the soul as the substantial
form  of a living thing, see Life and Death i; Man 3a; Soul ib. Form and
matter  in  relation  to definition, see Being 8c; Definition 6a; Matter
4b;  Nature  ia(2).  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are  works not
included  in  Great  Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea
and  topics  with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into
two groups: II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the  date, place, and other facts concerning the pubUcation of the works
cited, consult the Bibhography of Additional Readings, which follows the
last   chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  loHN  OF  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus
Philosophicus  Tho-  ^' misticus, Philosophia Naturalis, part i, qq 3-4,
Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence  6, 9, 11 . Quaestiones Disputatae, De
Anima Malebranche. De la recherche de la verite . On Spiritual Creatures
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol  i,  Kant. De Mundi
Sensibilis {Inaugural Dissertation)^ bk i-iii sect IV LoTZE. Metaphysics
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  vi,  par  353-363 ^^' Bradley.
Appearance  and  Reality  Duns Scutus. Opus Oxoniense, bk i, dist 7 (24)
Descoqs.   Essai   critique   sur  Vhylemorphisme  Crescas.  Or  Adonai,
propositions  io-ii,  16  Santayana.  The  Realm of Essence Bruno. De la
causa,  principio,  e  uno Whitehead. Process and Reality, part ii, ch i
Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, v (4), xii (3), Forest. La structure
metaphysique du concret

[601a]
Chapter   'i.<^:   GOD   INTRODUCTION  WITH  the  exception  of  certain
mathematicians  and  physicists,  all the authors of the great books are
represented in this chapter. In sheer quantity of references, as well as
in  variety,  it  is  the  largest  chapter. The reason is obvious. More
consequences  for  thought  and  action  follow  from the affirmation or
denial  of God than from answering any other basic question. They follow
for  those who regard the question as ans^^'erable only by faith or only
by  reason,  and  even  for  those  who  insist upon suspending judgment
entirely.  In addition to the primary question of God's existence, there
are  all  the  problems  of the divine nature and of the relation of the
world and man to the gods or God. The solutions of these problems cannot
help  influencing  man's  conception of the world in which he lives, the
position that he occupies in it, and the life to which he is called. The
whole  tenor  of  human life is certainly affected by whether men regard
themselves  as  the  supreme  beings  in  the  universe or acknowledge a
superior—a  superhuman  being whom they conceive as an object of fear or
love,  a  force  to  be  defied  or a Lord to be obeyed. Among those who
acknowledge  a  divinity,  it  matters  greatly  whether  the  divine is
represented  merely  by  the concept of God— the object of philosophical
speculation—or  by  the  living  God whom men worship in all the acts of
piety   which  comprise  the  rituals  of  religion.  The  most  radical
differences  in  man's  conception  of  his  own  nature follow from the
exclusion  of  divinity as its source or model on the one hand, and from
the  various  ways  in which man is seen as participating in divinity on
the  other.  Many  fundamental themes and issues are therefore common to
this chapter and to the chapter on Man. 543

[601b]
Some  of  the  topics  in this chapter are primarily philosophical. They
belong   to  the  subject  matter  of  rational  speculation  or  poetic
imagination  in  all  the  great  epochs  of  our culture, regardless of
differences  in  religious belief. Other topics, however, are peculiarly
restricted  to  matters  of  faith  or  religion.  With  respect to such
matters, dogmatic differences, or differences in articles of faith, must
be  explicitly  recognized. The materials here assembled must therefore,
in  some  instances,  be divided according to their origin from pagan or
from  Jewish  and  Christian  sources.  Though  no  great books from the
Mohammedan  tradition  are  included  in  this set, the fact that Gibbon
discusses  the  Moslem  faith  and  compares its teachings with those of
Judaism  and Christianity explains the inclusion of Mohammedanism in one
group of topics. That is the group which deals with the doctrines common
to  these  three  religions,  as  distinguished from the tenets on which
Judaism  and  Christianity differ dogmatically. The existence of certain
common  beUefs in the western tradition enables us to begin, as it seems
advisable to do, with the conception of God that is shared by the living
religions  of western culture today. In our civilization, what is denied
by  an  atheist who says there is no God ? Not idols or images which men
may  seek  to  placate.  Not philosophical constructions or mythological
figures.  Certainly  not  the universe itself, either as an infinite and
everlasting  whole, or as finite and temporal, but equally mysterious in
its  ultimate  incomprehensibihty to the human mind. In our civiUzation,
the  atheist denies the existence of a supernatural being, the object of
rehgious  belief and worship among Jews, Christians, and Mohammedans. He
denies the single, personal God Who created the world out of

[602a]
544  THE  GREAT  IDEAS nothing, Who transcends this created universe and
sustains  it by His immanent power, Who has made laws for the government
of  all  things and cares for each particular by His providence, and Who
created  man in His own image, revealed Himself and His will to men, and
metes  out eternal rewards and punishments to the children of Adam, whom
Fie  also  helps  by His grace. In this religious conception of God, one
term  must be saved from misinterpretation. The word * 'personal" should
not  be  read  v/ith  anthropomorphic  imagery,  though its meaning does
entitle  man  as  well as God to be called a person rather than a thing.
"Although  the  term  person  is  not found applied to God in Scripture,
either  in the Old or New Testament," Aquinas writes, "nevertheless what
the  term  signifies  is  found  to be affirmed of God in many places of
Scripture; as that He is the supreme self-subsisting being, and the most
perfectly  intelligent  being."  Boethius  had  defined  a person as "an
individual  substance of a rational nature," or, as Locke later said, "a
thinking  intelligent being." In applying the term person to God, in the
meaning  which Boethius had given it, Aquinas comments on the difference
in  its  meaning  when  it  is applied to men. God can be said to have a
rational  nature,  he  writes,  only  "if  reason  be taken to mean, not
discursive thought, but, in a general sense, an intelligent nature . . .
God cannot be called an individual in the sense in which physical things
are,  but only in the sense of uniqueness. ^'Substance can be applied to
God
[only] in the sense of signifying
selfsubsistence."  Aquinas  does not conclude from this that "person" is
said  improperly  of  God, but rather that when God is called "personal"
the  meaning  is  applied  "in  a  more excellent way," for God does not
possess,  God  is,  an intelhgence. We shall use this idea of a personal
God,  the  reality of which the contemporary atheist denies, in order to
distinguish  divergent  conceptions  in  other  doctrines. Then we shall
examine  more  closely  what  is  involved  in  this idea itself. In the
western  tradition, the various pagan religions— reflected especially in
the poems and

[602b]
histories of Greek and Roman antiquity—were all polytheistic. The number
of their gods, Montaigne estimates, "amounts to six-andthirty thousand."
Augustine  offers  one  explanation  of  why  there  were  so many. "The
ancients," he writes, "being deceived either by their own conjectures or
by  demons,  supposed that many gods must be invited to take an interest
in  human  affairs,  and  assigned  to  each  a  separate function and a
separate  department  to  one  the body, to another the soul; and in the
body itself, to one the head, to another the neck, and each of the other
members  to one of the gods; and in like manner, in the soul, to one god
the  natural  capacity  was  assigned,  to another education, to another
anger, to another lust; and so the various affairs of Hfe were assigned—
cattle  to  one,  corn  to another, wine to another, oil to another, the
woods  to  another,  money  to  another, navigation to another, wars and
victories  to  another,  marriages  to  another, births and fecundity to
another,  and other things to other gods." That polytheism, no less than
monotheism,  conceives  the  divine  as  personal,  appears  in  Plato's
Apology.  When  Socrates  is  accused  of  atheism,  he asks whether the
indictment  means that he does not "acknowledge the gods which the state
acknowledges,  but  some  other  new divinities or spiritual agencies in
their  stead."  Meletus  answers  that  he thinks Socrates is a complete
atheist  who  recognizes  no  gods  at  all. To this Socrates replies by
suggesting  that  his enemies must be confusing him with Anaxagoras, who
had  blasphemed  against Apollo by calling the sun "a red hot stone." As
for  himself,  he  offers evidence to show that he believes in divine or
spiritual  agencies "new or old, no matter"; and "if I believe in divine
beings,"  he  asks,  "how  can I help believing in spirits or demigods?"
Like  the  one  God  of Judaism and Christianity, the many gods of pagan
antiquity  have  immortal life, but they are not without origin. Zeus is
the  son  of  Kronos, and he has many offspring, both gods and demigods,
who  perform  different  functions  and  are not of equal station in the
Olympian hierarchy. The realm of the divine includes such figures as the
Titans and the Cyclops, who are neither gods nor men; and demigods, like
Heracles, who are offspring

[603a]
of  divine  and  human mating. These deities exercise superhuman powers,
but none is completely omnipotent or omniscient, not even Kronos or Zeus
who  cannot  escape  the  decrees of Fate. Moreover, with the exception,
perhaps,  of that of Zeus, the power of one divinity is often challenged
and  thwarted  by  another. This aspect of polytheism and its bearing on
the  intervention of the gods in the affairs of men arc discussed in the
chapter  on  Fate.  The  extent  to  which  we  think  of  the pagans as
idolatrous  because  they made graven images of their gods m human form,
or  regard the pagan conceptions of the gods as anthropomorphic, depends
on  our interpretation of religious symbolism. Plato for one thinks that
many  of the poets' descriptions of the gods and their activities should
be  dismissed as unworthy, precisely because they debase the gods to the
human  level.  According  to  Gibbon,  a Greek or Roman philosopher "who
considered  the system of polytheism as a composition of human fraud and
error,  could  disguise  a smile of contempt under the mask of devotion,
without  apprehending  that  either  the mockery or the compliance would
expose him to the resentment of any invisible, or, as he conceived them,
imaginary powers." But the early Christians, he points out, saw the many
gods  of antiquity "in a much more odious and formidable light" and held
them  to  be  "the  authors,  the patrons, and the objects of idolatry."
Those   who   take  symbols  with  flat  literalism  might  also  attack
Christianity  as  anthropomorphic and idolatrous; in fact they have. The
defense  of  Christianity against this charge does not avail in the case
of Roman emperor-worship, which consisted not in the humanization of the
divine  for  the sake of symbolic representation, but in the deification
of  the  merely human for political purposes. Although there are radical
differences,  there  are  also  certain  fundamental  agreements between
paganism  and Judaeo-Christianity regarding the nature of the divine. As
we  have  already  noted,  the  deities are conceived personallv, not in
terms of impersonal, brute forces. Conceived as beings with intelligence
and  will, the gods concern themselves with earthly society; they aid or
oppose man's plans

[603b]
Chapter 29: GOD 545 ami efforts; they reward men for fidelity and virtue
or  punish  them  for  impiety  and  sin.  Despite all other differences
between  paganism  and  Christianity,  these  agreements are substantial
enough  to  pro\ide  many  common  threads  of  theological  speculation
throughout   our  tradition,  especially  with  regard  to  the  abiding
practical  problems  of  how  man  shall view himself and his destiny in
relation  to the divine or the supernatural. We have therefore attempted
to  place  passages from the great books of pagan antiquity under ever^-
heading  except those which are specifically restricted to the dogmas of
Judaism   and   Christianity—even   under   headings  which  are  worded
monotheistically,  since  even  here  there is continuitv of thought and
expression  from  Homer  and  Virgil  to  Dante  and Milton; from Plato,
Aristotle, and Plotinus to Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, and Kant; from
Lucretius  to  Newton and DarThe doctrines known as deism and pantheism,
like unquahfied atheism, are as much opposed to the religious beliefs of
polytheism  as  to  the faith of Judaism and Christianity. Of these two,
pantheism  is  much  nearer  atheism,  for  it denies the existence of a
transcendent  supernatural  being  or  beings.  God  is  Nature.  God is
immanent  in  the  world  and,  in  the  extreme  form of pantheism, not
transcendent  in  any  way.  Certain  historic doctrines which are often
regarded  as  forms  or  kinds of pantheism seem to be less extreme than
this,  for  they do not conceive the physical universe as exhausting the
infinite  being of God. The world, for all its vastness and variety, may
only represent an aspect of the divine nature. According to Spinoza, the
attributes of extension and thought, in terms of which we understand the
world  or  nature  as  being  of  the divine substance, are merely those
aspects  of God which are known to us, for the divine substance consists
"of  infinite  attributes,  each  one  of  which  expresses  eternal and
infinite  essence."  In  the  conception  of  Plotinus,  the whole world
represents only a partial emanation from the divine source. Yet thinkers
like  Plotinus  and Spinoza so conceive the relation of the world to God
that—as in the strictest pantheism— the religious doctrines of creation,
providence, and

[604a]
546 THE GREAT IDEAS salvation are either rejected or profoundly altered.
In the ancient world, the teaching of the Stoic philosophers expresses a
kind of pantheism. "There is one universe made up of all things," Marcus
Aurelius  writes,  "and  one  God  who  pervades  all  things,  and  one
substance,  and  one  law, one common reason in all intelligent animals,
and  one  truth."  He speaks of the "common nature," which is apparently
divine,  and  of which "every particular nature is a part, as the nature
of  the  leaf  is  a  part of the nature of the plant." But, although he
stresses  the oneness and divinity of all things, Aurelius also at times
uses  language  which  seems  to refer to a god who dwells apart from as
well  as in the world, as, for example, when he debates whether the gods
have  any  concern with human affairs. Another type of ancient pantheism
appears  in the thought of Plotinus, for whom all things have being only
insofar  as they participate in, even as they emanate from, the power of
The  One,  or  Primal  Source. "God is sovranly present through all," he
writes.  "We  cannot  think  of something of God here and something else
there,  nor  of  all  of  God  gathered  at  some  one spot: there is an
instantaneous  presence  everywhere, nothing containing and nothing left
void,  everything  therefore  fully  held  by  the divine." The relation
between  The One and every other thing is compared to the number series.
"Just  as there is, primarily or secondarily, some form or idea from the
monad in each of the successive numbers— the latter still participating,
though unequally, in the unit—so the series of beings following upon The
First  bear, each, some form or idea derived from that source. In Number
the  participation estabUshes Quantity; in the realm of Being, the trace
of  The  One  establishes reality: existence is a trace of The One." But
although  The  One  is  in all things, and all things depend upon it for
their  very existence. The One itself has no need of them. It is in this
sens^  that Plotinus says that "The One is all things and no one of them
.  .  .  Holding  all though itself nowhere held— it is omnipresent, for
where  its  presence  failed something would elude its hold. At the same
time, in the sense that it is nowhere held, it is not present: thus

[604b]
it   is  both  present  and  not  present;  not  present  as  not  being
circumscribed   by  anything;  yet  as  being  utterly  unattached,  not
inhibited  from  presence  at any point." Thus all things partake of The
One  in  absolute  dependence.  But  The  One,  considered in itself, is
absolutely transcendent. Plotinus even denies it the name of God or Good
or  Being,  saying  it  is  beyond  these.  Whether  or not Spinoza is a
pantheist,  has long been debated by his commentators. An explicit, even
an  extreme  form  of  pantheism  would  seem  to  be  expressed  in the
proposition  that  "whatever  is,  is  in  God, and nothing can be or be
conceived  without  God."  But  while  the  one and only substance which
exists  is  at once nature and God, Spinoza identifies God only with the
nature  he  calls  ''natura naturans.'' God is not reduced to the nature
that  falls  within man's limited experience or understanding the nature
he  calls ''natura naturataT "By natura naturans,'' he explains, "we are
to  understand  that which is in itself and is conceived through itself,
or  those  attributes  of  substance  which express eternal and infinite
essence,  that  is  to  say, God in so far as He is considered as a free
cause. But by natura naturata I understand everything which follows from
the  necessity  of the nature of God, or of any one of God's attributes,
that  is to say, all the modes of God's attributes in so far as they are
considered  as things which are in God and which without God can neither
be  nor  can be conceived." God is the infinite and eternal substance of
all  finite  existences,  an  absolute and unchanging one underlying the
finite  modes  in  which  it  variably  manifests itself. Though God for
Spinoza is transcendent in the sense of vastly exceeding the world known
to  man,  in  no  sense  does  God exist apart from the whole of nature.
Spinoza's  view  thus sharply departs from that of an orthodox Jewish or
Christian  theologian. When the latter says that God is transcendent, he
means  that  God exists apart, infinitely removed from the whole created
universe.  When  the  latte-  speaks  of  God  as being immanent in that
universe, he carefully specifies that it is not by His substance, but by
the  power  of  His  action  and  knowledge.  But Spinoza calls God "the
immanent, and not the transitive, cause of

[605a]
Chaptf.r  29:  GOD  all things," for the reason that ''outside God there
can be no substance, that is to say, outside Him nothing can exist which
is  in  itself."  These  divergent  conceptions  of Ciod's immanence and
transcendence—  so  relevant  to  the  question  of  who  is or is not a
pantheist  are  further  discussed  in the chapters on Nature and World.
Unlike  pantheism,  deism  affirms gods or a God, personal intelligences
existing  apart  from  this world; but, as in the teaching of Lucretius,
deism  sometimes  goes  to the extreme of believing in absentee gods who
neither  intervene  in  the  order of nature nor concern themselves with
human affairs. "The nature of the gods," Lucretius writes, "must ever in
itself  of necessity enjoy immortality together with supreme repose, far
removed  and  withdrawn from our concerns; since exempt from every pain,
exempt  from all dangers, strong in its own resources, not wanting aught
of  us,  ft  is  neither gained by favors nor moved by anger." Such gods
neither  create the world nor govern it; above all they do not reward or
)  punish  man, and so they do not have to be feared or propitiated. "To
say  that  for  the  sake  of  men  they have willed to set in order the
glorious nature of the world and therefore it is meet to praise the work
of  the  gods  immortal, and that it is an unholy thing ever to shake by
any force from its fixed seats that which by the forethought of the gods
in  ancient  days  has  been  estabUshed  on everlasting foundations for
mankind,  or  to assail it by speech and utterly overturn it from top to
bottom;  and  to  invent  and  add other figments of the kind ... is all
sheer folly. For what advantage can our gratitude bestow on immortal and
blessed beings that for our sakes they should take in hand to administer
aught?"  Divinity  seems  to  have  moral significance to Lucretius only
insofar  as  the  gods exemplify the happy life; and religion is immoral
because  its  superstitions  concerning divine motives and meddling make
men  servile  and  miserable.  When the deism of Lucretius is contrasted
with  the  more  famiUar modern forms of that doctrine, the influence of
Christianity is seen. The modern deist affirms the supremacy of one

[605b]
547  God, the infinite and eternal Creator of this world, Whose laws are
the  laws  of  nature  which  are laid down from the beginning and which
govern  all  created things. Rousseau speaks ot this as "the religion of
man"  and even identifies it with Christianity— "not the Christianity of
today,  but  that  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  entirely  difierent." He
describes  this religion as that "which has neither temples, nor altars,
nor  rites,  and  is confined to the purely internal cult of the supreme
God  and the eternal obligations of morality." Not all deists, certainly
not  those  of  tlie  17th and early i8th centuries, go to the Lucretian
extreme  of  picturing an uninterested and mop ally neutral God. Many of
them  believe  in  an  after-life. But modern deism did tend toward this
extreme.  By  Kant's  time  it  had  even  ceased  to look upon God as a
personal  intelligence.  Kant therefore takes great pains to distinguish
deism  from  theism.  The  deist, according to Kant, "admits that we can
cognize  by  pure  reason alone the existence of a supreme being, but at
the  same  time  maintains  that  our conception of this being is purely
transcendental,  and that all we can say of it is, that it possesses all
reality,  without  being able to define it more closely." The theist, on
the  other  hand, "asserts that reason is capable of presenting us, from
the  analogy with nature, with a more definite conception of this being,
and  that its operations, as the cause of all things, are the results of
intelligence  and  free  Kant  even  maintains that "we might, in strict
rigor, deny to the deist any belief in God at all, and regard him merely
as  a  maintainer  of  the  existence  of  a primal being or thing — the
supreme  cause  of  all other things." In any case, deism seems to be an
essentially un-Jewish and un-Christian or anti-Jewish and anti-Christian
doctrine,  for  it  denies  God's supernatural revelation of Himself; it
denies  miracles and every other manifestation of supernatural agency in
the  course  of  nature  or  the  life of man; it denies the efficacy of
prayer  and  sacrament.  In  short,  it  rejects  the  institutions  and
practices,  as  well as the faith and hope, of any religion which claims
supernatural  foundation  and  supernatural  warrant  for its dogmas and
rituals. Deism, which "consists simply in the worship

[606a]
548  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  of  a  God  considered  as  great, powerful, and
eternal,"  is,  in  Pascal's  opinion,  "almost  as far removed from the
Christian religion as atheism, which is its exact opposite." What Pascal
and  Kant  call  "deism" and Rousseau "the religion of man," others like
Hume  call "natural religion." His Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion
provide  a  classic  statement  of  rationaHsm,  which  is  the  same as
naturalism,  in  religion; though, as the chapter on Religion indicates,
it  may  be  questioned  whether the word "religion" can be meaningfully
used  for  a  doctrine  which  claims  no  knowledge  beyond that of the
philosopher,  and  no guidance for human life beyond the precepts of the
moralist.  The  systematic  exposition  of man's knowledge of God is the
science  of  theology.  In addition to considering all things— the whole
world  and  human life—in relation to God, theology treats especially of
God's  existence,  essence,  and attributes. Throughout the range of its
subject  matter  and  problems,  theology may be of two sorts: it may be
either  natural knowledge, obtained by ordinary processes of observation
and  reasoning; or knowledge which is supernatural in the sense of being
based  on divine revelation. This is the traditional distinction between
natural and sacred or, as it is sometimes called, dogmatic theology. The
one  belongs to the domain of reason; it is the work of the philosopher.
The  other  belongs  to  the  domain  of  faith,  and is the work of the
theologian  who  seeks  to  understand his faith. These distinctions are
discussed  in the chapters on Theology, Metaphysics, and Wisdom. Here we
are  concerned  with  different  attitudes  toward  the problem of man's
knowledge  of  God.  The  deist,  as  we have seen, rejects supernatural
revelation  and  faith;  theology,  like rehgion, is held to be entirely
natural,  a  work  of reason. The agnostic makes the opposite denial. He
denies  that  anything supernatural can be known by reason. It cannot be
proved  or, for that mat-ter, disproved. The evidences of nature and the
hght  of  reason  do not permit valid inferences or arguments concerning
God  or  creation, providence or immortality. It is usually with respect
to God's existence that the agnostic most emphatically declares

[606b]
reason's   incompetence   to   demonstrate.  He  often  accompanies  the
declaration  with  elaborate  criticisms  of  the arguments which may be
offered  by  others.  This is not always the case, however. For example,
the  great  Jewish  theologian,  Moses  Maimonides,  thinks  that  God's
existence  can  be  proved by reason entirely apart from faith; but with
regard to the essence or attributes of God, his position seems to be one
which  might  be called agnostic. When men "ascribe essential attributes
to  God,"  Maimonides  declares,  "these  so-called essential attributes
should  not  have any similarity to the attributes of other things, just
as  there  is no similarity between the essence of God and that of other
beings."  Since  the meaning of such positive attributes as good or wise
is derived from our knowledge of things, they do not provide us with any
knowledge of God's essence, for no comparison obtains between things and
God.  Hence  Maimonides asserts that "the negative attributes of God are
the true attributes." They tell us not what God is, but what God is not.
Even  though  Maimonides holds that "existence and essence are perfectly
identical"  in  God,  he  also insists that "we comprehend only the fact
that He exists, not His essence. . . . All we understand," he goes on to
say, in addition to "the fact that He exists," is the fact that "He is a
Being  to whom none of his creatures is similar." This fact is confirmed
in  all  the  negative attributes such as eternal (meaning nontemporal),
infinite,  or  incorporeal;  even as it is falsified by all the positive
attributes,  expressed by such names as "good" or "living" or "knowing,"
insofar  as they imply a comparison between God and creatures. When they
cannot  be  interpreted  negatively, they can be tolerated as metaphors,
but  they  must not be taken as expressing an understanding "of the true
essence  of  God,"  concerning  which Maimonides maintains, "there is no
possibility  of  obtaining  a  knowledge." Aquinas takes issue with such
agnosticism  about  the  divine nature in his discussion of the names of
God.  Although he says that "we cannot know what God is, but rather what
He  is  not,"  Aquinas  disagrees  with  Maimonides that all names which
express some knowledge of God's essence must be interpreted negatively

[607a]
or treated as metaphors. He denies tiial "when we say God lives, we mean
merely  that  Ciod  is  not  like an inanimate thing" as "was tauglit by
Rabbi  Moses."  On  the contrary, he holds that "these names signify the
divine substance . . . although they fall short of representing Him. . .
.  For  these  names express God, so far as our intellects know Him. Now
since  our  intellect  knows  God from creatures, it knows Him as far as
creatures  represent  Him." Tlierefore, Aquinas concludes, "when we say,
God  is  good, the meaning is not, God is the cause of goodness, or, God
is not evil: but the meaning is, Whatever good we attribute to creatures
preexists  in God, and in a higher way." ^ If Maimonides were right that
the  names  which  are  said  positively  of  both God and creatures are
"applied  ... in a purely equivocal sense" (e.g., having literal meaning
when  said  of  creatures but being only metaphorical when said of God),
then, according to Aquinas, it would follow that "from creatures nothing
at  all could be known or demonstrated about God." Those who say, on the
other  hand,  that  "the  things  attributed  to  God  and creatures are
univocal"  {i.e.,  are  said  in  exactly  the  same  sense),  claim  to
comprehend  more  than man can know of the divine essence. When the term
wise "is applied to God," Aquinas writes, "it leaves the thing signified
as  uncomprehended and as exceeding the signification of the name. Hence
it  is evident that this term wise is not applied in the same way to God
and to man. The same applies to other terms. Hence no name is predicated
univocally  of  God  and  creatures" but rather all positives names "are
said  of  God and creatures in an analogous sense." A further discussion
of the names of God will be found in the chapter on Sign and Symbol; and
the  consideration  of  the  analogical, the univocal, and the equivocal
will also be found there as well as in the chapter on Same and Other. We
have  dealt with these matters here only for the sake of describing that
degree  of  agnosticism, according to which Maimonides, by contrast with
Aquinas, is an agnostic. But agnosticism usually goes further and denies
that  man  can have any natural knowledge of God—either of His existence
or of His essence.

[607b]
CiiAi'Ti  :u  29:  GOD  549  So  understood,  agnosticism  need  not  be
incompatible with religion, unless a given religion holds, as an article
of  faith itself, that the existence of CJod can be proved by reason. In
fact,  the agnostic may be a religious man who accepts divine revelation
and  regards  faith as divinely inspired. Montaigne's Apologyfor Raimond
de  Sebonde illustrates this position. Sebonde had written a treatise on
natural  theology,  which  to  Montaigne  seems  "hardy and bold; for he
undertakes,  by  human  and  natural  reasons to establish and make good
against the atheists all the articles of the Christian religion." Though
Montaigne  says  of  his  work, "I do not think it possible to do better
upon  that subject," and though he entertains the conjecture that it may
have  been "drawn from St. Thomas Aquinas, for, in truth, that mind full
of  infinite  learning and admirable subtlety, was alone capable of such
imaginations";  nevertheless,  Montaigne  does  "not  believe that means
purely  human  are,  in  any  sort,  capable  of doing it." According to
Montaigne, "it is faith alone that vividly and certainly comprehends the
deep  mysteries  of  our  religion."  In  his  view, reason by itself is
incapable  of proving anything, much less anything about God. "Our human
reasons,"  he  writes, "are but sterile and undigested matter; the grace
of  God  is  its form; it is that which gives it fashion and value." The
fight  and  value  in  Sebonde's arguments come from the fact that faith
supervenes  "to  tint  and  illustrate" them, and "renders them firm and
Such  arguments, Montaigne says, may serve as "direction and first guide
to a learner" and may even "render him capable of the grace of God"; but
for  himself,  skeptical  of  all  arguments, the way of faith alone can
provide "a certain constancy of opinion. . . . Thus have I, by the grace
of   God,  preserved  myself  entire,  without  anxiety  or  trouble  of
conscience,  in the ancient belief of our religion, amidst so many sects
and  divisions  as  our  age  has produced." Far from being religious as
Montaigne  was,  the  agnostic  may  be a skeptic about faith as well as
reason. He may look upon faith either as superstition or as the exercise
of the will to believe with regard to the unknowable and the

[608a]
550  THE GREAT IDEAS unintelligible—almost wishful thinking. He may even
go  so  far  as to treat religion as if it were pathological. Freud, for
example,  regards  religion  as  an illusion to be explained in terms of
man's  need to create gods in his own image— to find a surrogate for the
father,  on  whom his infantile dependence can be projected. Freud finds
confirmation for this in the fact that in the religions of the west, God
"is  openly  called Father. Psychoanalysis," he goes on, "concludes that
he  really  is  the  father,  clothed  in  the grandeur in which he once
appeared  to  the  small  child."  Though  the  grown  man "has long ago
realized  that his father is a being with strictly limited powers and by
no  means  endowed with every desirable attribute," Freud thinks that he
nevertheless  "looks  back to the memoryimage of the overrated father of
his  childhood,  exalts  it into a Deity, and brings it into the present
and  into  reality.  The emotional strength of this memory-image and the
lasting  nature of his need for protection"— for, as Freud explains, "in
relation  to  the  external  world  he  is  still a child"— "are the two
supports  of  his  belief in God." At the other extreme from agnosticism
is,  as  the  name  implies,  gnosticism.  Like deism, it dispenses with
faith,  but  it  exceeds  traditional  deism  in the claims it makes for
reason's  power  to  penetrate  the  divine mysteries. Between exclusive
reliance  on  faith and an exaltation of reason to the point where there
is  no need for God to reveal anything, a middle ground is held by those
who  acknowledge  the  contributions of both faith and reason. Those who
try  to harmonize the two usually distinguish between the spheres proper
to  each,  and  formulate  some  principle  according  to which they are
related to each other in an orderly fashion. Whatever is purely a matter
of faith, Aquinas says, is assented to solely because "it is revealed by
God."  The  articles  of Christian faith are typified by "the Trinity of
Persons  in  Almighty  God, the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and the
like."  With  regard  to  such  matters,  which  Aquinas  thinks  belong
primarily  to  faith,  some  auxiliary  use can be made of reason, "not,
indeed,  to prove faith," he explains, but to make clear the things that
follow from it. Certain

[608b]
matters,  such  as  God's  existence  and  attributes,  he classifies as
belonging  to  "the  preambles to faith" because they fall, in his view,
within reason's power to demonstrate, unaided by faith. Yet even here he
does  not  assign  the affirmation of the truth to reason alone. Just as
"it  was  necessary  for  the salvation of man that certain truths which
exceed  human  reason should be made known to him by divine revelation,"
so  even  with  regard to "those truths about God which human reason can
investigate,"  Aquinas  thinks it was also necessary that "man be taught
by a divine revelation. For the truth about God, such as reason can know
it,  would  only be known by a few, and that after a long time, and with
the  admixture  of many errors." Because "human reason is very deficient
in  things  concerning  God" "a sign of which is that philosophers . . .
have  fallen  into  many errors and have disagreed among themselves"—men
would  have no knowledge of God "free from doubt and uncertainty" unless
all  divine  truths  were  "delivered to them by the way of faith, being
told  to  them, as it were, by God Himself Who cannot lie." In different
ways  faith  supports  reason  and  reason helps faith. On matters which
belong  to both reason and faith, faith provides a greater certitude. On
matters  strictly  of faith, reason provides some understanding, however
remote  and  inadequate, of the mysteries of religion. "The use of human
reason  in religion," Bacon writes, "is of two sorts: the former, in the
conception  and apprehension of the mysteries of God to us revealed; the
other,   in  the  inferring  and  deriving  of  doctrine  and  direction
thereupon.  ...  In  the former we see God vouchsafeth to descend to our
capacity,  in the expressing of his mysteries in sort as may be sensible
unto  us;  and  doth  grift  his  revelations and holy doctrine upon the
notions  of  our  reason  and  applieth  his  inspiration  to  open  our
understanding,  as  the form of the key to the ward of the lock. For the
latter, there is allowed us an use of reason and argument, secondary and
respective,  although  not original and absolute. For after the articles
and  principles  of religion are placed and exempted from examination of
reason,  it is then permitted unto us to make derivations and inferences
from and ac-

[609a]
cording  to  the analogy of them, for our Ixilcr direction." In addition
to all discursive knowledge of God, whether it be by faith or by reason,
there  is  the totally incommunicable and intimate acquaintance with the
supernatural  which  the  mystic  claims  for  his  vision in moments of
religious  ecstasy or which is promised to the blessed as their heavenly
beatitude.  When,  at  the  culmination of Paradise, Dante sees God, "my
vision,"  he  declares,  "was greater than our speech." Knowing that his
"speech  will  fall  more  short  . . . than that of an infant who still
bathes  his  tongue at the breast," he tries nevertheless to communicate
in  words  "one  single spark of Thy glory for the folk to come." In the
presence  of  God,  he writes, his mind, "wholly rapt, was gazing fixed,
motionless,  and  intent,  and  ever with gazing grew enkindled. In that
Light  one  becomes such that it is impossible he should ever consent to
turn  himself  from  it  for  other sight; because the Good which is the
object  of  the  will  is all collected in it, and outside of it that is
defective  which  is  perfect there." The arguments for the existence of
the  gods  or  of one God constitute one of the greatest attempts of the
human  mind to go beyond the sensible or phenomenal world of experience.
The  attempt  has been made in every age and by minds of quite different
persuasions   in  religious  belief  or  philosophical  outlook.  It  is
possible, nevertheless, to classify the arguments into two or three main
types.  Within the domain of pure or speculative reason there seem to be
two  ways of approaching the problem of God's existence. One is in terms
of  the  conception of God as an infinite, perfect, and necessary being,
whose non-existence is therefore inconceivable. According to Anselm, God
cannot be conceived in any other way than as "a being than which nothing
greater  can  be conceived." But since "the fool hath said in his heart,
there  is  no  God,"  how  shall  he be made to know that the God, which
exists  in  his  understanding  at  the  moment  when he denies His real
existence,  also really exists outside his understanding? "For it is one
thing  for  an  object  to  be  in  the  understanding,  and  another to
understand that the

[609b]
Chapter   29:  GOD  551  object  exists."  Hence  Anselm  considers  the
consequence of supposing that God exists in the understanding alone. "If
that,  than  which nothing greater can be conceived," he argues, "exists
in tlie understanding alone, the very being, tlian which nothing greater
can  be conceived, is one than which a greater can be conceived"— for to
exist  in reality as well as in the understanding is to have more being.
But  this  leads  to  "an irreconcilable contradiction," since "if that,
than  which  nothing  greater  can be conceived, can be conceived not to
exist,  it  is  not  that  than which nothing greater can be conceived."
Therefore  Anselm concludes that a being "than which nothing greater can
be conceived" must exist "both in the understanding and reality." Anselm
summarizes  his argument by saying that "no one who understands what God
is,  can  conceive  that God does not exist." Since the non-existence of
God  is inconceivable, God must exist. Descartes gives the same argument
a  slightly  different statement in terms of the inseparability of God's
essence  from  God's  existence.  "Being accustomed," he writes, "in all
other  things  to  make  a  distinction between existence and essence, I
easily  persuade  myself  that  the  existence can be separated from the
essence  of  God,  and  that  we  can  thus conceive God as not actually
existing.  But,  nevertheless, when I think of it with more attention, I
clearly  see that existence can no more be separated from the essence of
God  than  can  its having its three angles equal to two right angles be
separated  from  the essence of a rectilinear triangle, or the idea of a
mountain  from  the  idea  of  a  valley  ; and so there is not any less
repugnance  to our conceiving a God (that is, a Being supremely perfect)
to  whom  existence  is  lacking  (that  is  to  say,  to whom a certain
perfection  is  lacking),  than  to  conceive of a mountain which has no
valley."  Spinoza  defines  a  "cause  of  itself as "that whose essence
involves  existence;  or  that  whose  nature cannot be conceived unless
existing."   Since   in   his  conception  of  substance,  substance  is
necessarily  infinite,  it  is  also cause of itself. Hence he concludes
that  "God  or  substance  .  .  .  necessarily exists"; for "if this be
denied, conceive if it be possible that God does not

[610a]
552  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  exist. Then it follows that His essence does not
involve  existence.  But  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  God  necessarily
exists."  This  mode  of  argument,  which  takes  still other forms, is
traditionally called the "ontological argument" or the ""a priori proof"
of God's existence. Its critics sometimes deny that it is an argument or
proof  in  any sense at all. Aquinas, for example, interprets Anselm not
as proving God's existence, but rather as asserting that God's existence
is self-evident. Those who say that the proposition "God does not exist"
is  self-contradictory,  are  saying  that the opposite proposition "God
exists"  must be selfevident. Aquinas does not deny that the proposition
"God  exists"  is  intrinsically  self-evident.  On  this  point he goes
further  than  Anselm,  Descartes,  and  Spinoza.  Where  they say God's
essence  involves His existence, Aquinas asserts that in God essence and
existence are identical. When Moses asks God, "If they should say to me.
What  is His name? what shall I say to them.?" the Lord says unto Moses,
"I  AM  THAT  I AM," and adds, "Say to the children of Israel: HE WHO IS
hath  sent me to you." This name—HE WHO IS—Aquinas holds to be "the most
proper  name  of God" because it signifies that "the being of God is His
very  essence."  For  this  reason  he  thinks that the proposition "God
exists"  is  self-evident  in  itself.  Its  subject  and  predicate are
immediately related. Nevertheless, Aquinas holds that the proposition is
not self-evident to us "because we do not know the essence of God." Even
supposing,  he  writes,  "that  everyone  understands  this  name God as
signifying   something  than  which  nothing  greater  can  be  thought,
nevertheless, it does not therefore follow that he understands that what
the  name  signifies  exists actually, but only that it exists mentally.
Nor can it be argued that it actually exists, unless it be admitted that
there  actually  exists  something  than  which  nothing  greater can be
thought;  and  this precisely is not admitted by those who hold that God
does not exist." The writer of the First Set of Objections to Descartes'
Meditations  maintains that the criticism advanced by Aquinas applies to
Descartes as well as to Anselm. Whether stated in

[610b]
terms  of  the  conception of an absolutely perfect being or in terms of
essence and existence, the argument is invalid, he thinks, which asserts
that  God  actually  exists  because His non-existence is inconceivable.
Kant's  later  criticism  of  the  ontological  argument takes a similar
course.  A  proposition may be logically necessary without being true in
fact.  "The conception of an absolutely necessary being," he writes, "is
a  mere  idea,  the  objective  reality  of  which  is  far  from  being
established  by  the  mere  fact  that it is a need of reason. . . . The
unconditioned  necessity  of  a  judgment  does  not  form  the absolute
necessity of a thing." From the fact that "existence belongs necessarily
to the object of the conception," we cannot conclude that "the existence
of  the  thing ... is therefore absolutely necessary merely," Kant says,
"because  its  existence  has  been  cogitated  in the conception. . . .
Whatever  be the content of our conception of an object, it is necessary
to  go beyond it, if we wish to predicate existence of the object. . . .
The  celebrated ontological or Cartesian argument for the existence of a
supreme  being  is  therefore insufficient." The second main approach to
the  problem  of  God's existence lies in the sort of proof which, Locke
thinks,  "our own existence and the sensible parts of the universe offer
so  clearly  and cogently to our thoughts." He refrains from criticizing
the argument from "the idea of a most perfect being," but he does insist
that  we  should  not  "take some men's having that idea of God in their
minds . . . for the only proof of a Deity." He for one prefers to follow
the  counsel  of St. Paul, that "the invisible things of God are clearly
seen from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that
are  made,  even  his  eternal power and Godhead." We have, according to
Locke,  an  intuitive  knowledge of our own existence. We know, he says,
that  "nonentity  cannot  produce  any  real  being";  and  so "from the
consideration   of  ourselves,  pnd  what  we  infallibly  find  in  our
constitution,  our  reason leads us to the knowledge of this certain and
evident  truth That there is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing
Bei?2g.''

[611a]
Without  labelling  it  a  proof  of  God's  existence, Augustine in his
Confessions  presents  a  similar  argument—  from the visible creation.
"Behold,"  he  says,  "the heavens and the earth are; they proclaim that
they  were  created;  for they change and vary. . . . They proclaim also
that  they  made not themselves: 'therefore we are, because we have been
made; wc were not therefore, before we were, so as to make ourselves'. .
.  .  Thou  therefore,  Lord,  madcst them." This second approach to the
existence  of  God  by  reasoning  from  the  tacts of experience or the
evidences of nature is called the "^ posteriori proof." In the tradition
of  the great books, it has been formulated in many different ways. What
is  common  to  all  of  them is the principle of causality, in terms of
which  the  known  existence  of  certain  effects is made the basis for
inferring  the  existence  of  a  unique  cause—a first cause, a highest
cause,  an  uncaused  cause. Aristotle, for example, in the last book of
his  Physics,  argues from the fact of motion or change to the existence
of an unmoved mover. He sums up his elaborate reasoning on this point in
the  following  statement. "We established the fact that everything that
is  in  motion  is  moved  by  something,  and that the movent is either
unmoved  or  in motion, and that, if it is in motion, it is moved either
by  itself  or by something else and so on throughout the series: and so
we  proceeded  to  the  position  that the first principle that directly
causes things that are in motion to be moved is that which moves itself,
and the first principle of the whole series is the unmoved." Aristotle's
argument,  unlike  that  of  Augustine or Locke, does not presuppose the
creation of the world, at least not in the sense of the world's having a
beginning.  On the contrary, he holds the world and its motions to be as
eternal  as  their  unmoved  mover. "It is impossible," he writes in the
Metaphysics,  "that movement should either have come into being or cease
to  be."  Precisely  because  he thinks the world's motions are eternal,
Aristotle  holds that the prime mover, in addition to being everlasting,
must be immutable. This for him means "a principle whose very essence is
actuaUty."  Only  a  substance  without  any  potency, only one which is
purely actual, can be an absolutely immutable, eternal being.

[611b]
Chapter  29:  GOD  553  Whatever  has  any potentiality in its nature is
capable  ot  not existing, if everything were of this sort, nothing that
now  is  "need  be,  for  it is possible for all things to be capable of
existing,  but not yet to exist." Hence, in still another way, Aristotle
seems  to  reach  the  conclusion that a purely actual being must exist;
and,  furthermore,  he  seems  to  identify this being with a living and
thinking  God. "Life also belongs to God," he writes; "for the actuality
of  thought is life, and God is that actuality; and God's self-dependent
actuality  is  life  most good and eternal." Where Aristotle argues from
motion  and  potentiality  to a prime mover and a pure actuality, Newton
gives  the  a  posteriori  proof  another  statement by arguing from the
design  of  the  universe to God as its designer or architect. "The most
wise and excellent contrivances of things, and final causes" seem to him
the  best  way  of  knowing God. "Blind metaphysical necessity, which is
certainly  the  same  always and everywhere, could produce no variety in
things.  All  that  diversity  of natural things which we find suited to
different  times  and  places could arise from nothing but the ideas and
will  of  a  Being  necessarily  existing."  In similar fashion Berkeley
maintains  that  "if  we  attentively  consider the constant regularity,
order, and concatenation of natural things, the surprising magnificence,
beauty,  and perfection "of the larger, and the exquisite contrivance of
the  smaller  parts of the creation, together with the exact harmony and
correspondence  of  the  whole, but, above all, the never enough admired
laws  of  pain  and pleasure, and the instincts or natural inclinations,
appetites,  and  passions  of  animals;  I  say if we consider all these
things,  and  at  the  same time attend to the meaning and import of the
attributes,  one,  eternal, infinitely wise, good, and perfect, we shall
clearly perceive that they belong to the . . . Spirit, who 'works all in
all,'  and  'by  whom all things consist.'" This seems to him so certain
that  he adds, "we may even assert that the existence of God is far more
evidently  perceived  than  the  existence  of  men."  But, according to
Berkeley,  all  the  visible things of nature exist only as ideas in our
minds,  ideas  which, unlike our own memories or imaginations, we do not
ourselves produce. "Every-

[612a]
554  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  thing we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive by
sense,"  he writes, must have some other cause than our own will, and is
therefore  "a  sign  or  effect of the power of God." To the "unthinking
herd"  who  claim that "they cannot see God," Berkeley replies that "God
...  is  intimately  present  to  our  minds, producing in them all that
variety  of  ideas  or  sensations  which  continually  affect  us." The
existence  of  any idea in us is for Berkeley ground for asserting God's
existence  and  power  as  its  cause.  But for Descartes one idea alone
becomes  the  basis of such an inference. He supplements his a priori or
ontological  argument with what he calls an ''a posteriori demonstration
of  God's  existence  from  the mere fact that the idea of God exists in
us." That he is himself imperfect, Descartes knows from the fact that he
doubts.  Even  when  doubting  leads  to  knowledge,  his  knowledge  is
imperfect, "an infallible token" of which, he says, is the fact that "my
knowledge increases little by little." But the idea which he has of God,
he  declares,  is that of an absolutely perfect being, "in whom there is
nothing  merely  potential,  but  in  whom  all  is  present  really and
actually."  On  the  principle  that  there  cannot  be  more reality or
perfection in the effect than in the cause, Descartes concludes that his
own  imperfect  mind cannot be the cause of the idea of a perfect being.
"The  idea  that  I  possess of a being more perfect than I," he writes,
"must necessarily have been placed in me by a being which is really more
perfect."  The  radical imperfection of man, and indeed of all creation,
offers  Augustine  still  another  proof  for  God's existence, which he
attributes  to  the  "Platonists."  "They  have  seen," he writes, "that
whatever is changeable is not the most high God, and therefore they have
transcended  every  soul  and  all  changeable  spirits  in  seeking the
supreme.  They  have seen also that, in every changeable thing, the form
which  makes  it  that  which it is, whatever be its mode or nature, can
only  be  through  Him  who  truly  is,  because He is unchangeable. And
therefore,  whether we consider the whole body of the world, its figure,
qualities,  and  orderly  movement, and also all the bodies which are in
it; or whether we consider all life, either that

[612b]
which  nourishes  and  maintains,  as  the life of trees; or that which,
besides  this,  has also sensation, as the life of beasts; or that which
adds  to  all these intelligence, as the life of man; or that which does
not   need   the  support  of  nutriment,  but  only  maintains,  feels,
understands,  as  the  life  of  angels— all can only be through Him who
absolutely  is.  For  to  Him  it is not one thing to be, and another to
live,  as  though He could be, not living; nor is it to Him one thing to
live,   and  another  to  understand,  as  though  He  could  live,  not
understanding;  nor  is it to Him one thing to understand, another to be
blessed, as though He could understand and not be blessed. But to Him to
live,  to  understand,  to  be blessed, are to be. They have understood,
from  this  unchangeableness  and  this simplicity, that all things must
have  been  made  by  Him,  and  that He could Himself have been made by
none." The variety of arguments we have so far examined seems to fit the
"five  ways" in which, according to Aquinas, the existence of God can be
proved  a  posteriori.  "The first and most manifest way is the argument
from  motion," which Aquinas attributes to Aristotle. "The second way is
from  the  nature of an efficient cause." Berkeley's argument or Locke's
would  seem,  in  some  respects,  to  offer  a  version of this mode of
reasoning.  "The third way is taken from possibility and necessity," and
seems   to   develop  the  argument  from  potentiality  in  Aristotle's
Metaphysics,   and   to   contain  the  inference  from  mutability  and
contingency  which  is  implicit  in  the  argument  attributed  to  the
Platonists  by Augustine. "The fourth way is taken from the gradation to
be  found  in things." Proceeding from the existence of the imperfect to
absolute   perfection,  it  resembles  in  principle  the  reasoning  of
Descartes  concerning  the  perfection  in  the  cause  relative  to the
perfection in the effect. "The fifth way is taken from the governance of
the  world"—from the fact that everything acts for an end—and so is like
the  argument which Newton offers from final causes and the existence of
order  in  the universe. These "five ways" may or may not be regarded as
an exhaustive list of the a posteriori proofs. It may even be questioned
whether the five ways are logically distinct and independ-

[613a]
ent.  Aquinas  himself  says  that "in speculative matters the medium of
demonstration, which demonstrates the conclusion perfectly, is only one;
whereas  probable  means  of  proof  are  many."  Since he considers the
argument  for  God's existence to be a certain, not a probable proof, it
would  seem  to  follow that, in strict logic, only one principle can be
involved  in  that  proof. As already suggested, the principle—common to
all   the   various  ways  in  which  such  a  posteriori  reasoning  is
expressed—seems  to  be  the principal of causality. This appears in the
argument  from  the  existence  of contingent beings, which cannot cause
their own being, to the existence of a being which needs no cause of its
being,  because  its  very  essence  is  to  exist.  This may be the one
argument  for  God's existence or, if one among many, it may be the core
of  all the others. It has the distinction at least of conceiving God as
the  cause  of being, rather than of motion or of hierarchy and order in
the  world.  According  to the statement of Aquinas that *' being is the
proper effect of God," it establishes God as the unique and direct cause
of  the  being  possessed by every finite thing. This formulation of the
proof   is   more  fully  examined  in  the  chapter  on  Necessity  and
Contingency; and its relation to the question of whether the world had a
beginning  or  is  eternal,  and  if  eternal,  whether it is created or
uncreated,  will  be seen in the chapters on Cause, Eternity, and World.
The  validity  of  the a posteriori argument for God's existence— in one
form  or  another—  is  questioned  by  those  who think that the causal
principle  cannot  be  applied  beyond experience, or who think that our
knowledge  of  cause  and  effect  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant such
inferences.  "The existence of any being can only be proved by arguments
from  its  cause  or  its effect," Hume writes; "and these arguments are
founded  entirely on experience. ... It is only experience which teaches
us  the  nature  and bounds of cause and effect, and enables us to infer
the  existence  of  one  object  from  that of another." But Hume doubts
"whether it be possible for a cause to be known only by its

[613b]
;  Chapter 29: GOD 555 eflecl ... or to be of so singular and particular
a  nature as to have no parallel and no similarity with any oilier cause
or object, that has ever fallen under our observation. ... If experience
and  observation  and  analogy  be, indeed, the only guides which we can
reasonably  follow  in inferences of this nature," as Hume thinks is the
case,  then  it  follows that "both the effect and the cause must bear a
similarity and resemblance to other effects and causes which we know. "I
leave  it  to your own reflection," he adds, "to pursue the consequences
of  this  principle."  One  seems  obvious  enough; namely, that Ciod —a
unique  and  unparalleled  cause— cannot be proved by reasoning from our
experience  of  effects  and  their  causes.  Hume  himself  draws  this
conclusion  when  he  declares that theology, insofar as it is concerned
with the existence of a Deity, has "its best and most solid foundation,"
not in reason or experience, but in ''faith and divine revelation." Like
Hume, Kant thinks that our notions of cause and effect cannot be applied
outside  experience  or to anything beyond the realm of sensible nature.
But  he  offers  an  additional  reason  for  denying  validity to all a
posteriori  reasoning  concerning God's existence. "It imposes upon us,"
he  says,  "an old argument in a new dress, and appeals to the agreement
of  two  witnesses, the one with the credentials of pure reason, and the
other with those of empiricism while, in fact, it is only the former who
has changed his dress and voice." The principle of the argument from the
contingency  of  the  world  or  its  parts  Kant states as follows: "If
something  exists,  an  absolutely necessary being must fikewise exist."
One  premise  in the argument, namely, that contingent things exist, has
its  foundation  in  experience  and  therefore  Kant  admits  that  the
reasoning  "is  not completely a priori or ontological." But in order to
complete  the  proof, he thinks it must be shown that an ensrealissimum^
or  most perfect being, is the same as an absolutely necessary being, in
order  for  the  obtained  conclusion  (a  necessary being exists) to be
translated  into  the  conclusion  desired  {God  exists). That ''an ens
realissimum   must   possess   the   additional  attribute  of  absolute
necessity"—or, in other words, that a perfect being is identical

[614a]
556  THE GREAT IDEAS with one which necessarily exists— is, according to
Kant,  ''exactly what was maintained in the ontological argument." Hence
he  maintains  that  the argument from contingency is invalid because it
cannot  avoid  including  what  is  for  Kant the invalid premise of the
ontological  argument  as "the real ground of its disguised and illusory
reasoning."  The  controversy  concerning  the  proof of God's existence
raises issues in logic, in metaphysics and physics, and in the theory of
knowledge.  Philosophers  are  opposed  on  the question whether a valid
demonstration  is  possible. Those who think it possible differ from one
another  on  the way in which the proof should be constructed. Those who
think  it  impossible do not always go to the opposite extreme of making
the affirmation of God's existence a matter of faith; or of denying with
the  skeptic  that  we can have any light on the question at all. Pascal
and Kant, for example, reject the theoretic arguments as inconclusive or
untenable,  but they do not think the problem is totally insoluble. They
offer   instead   practical  grounds  or  reasons  for  accepting  God's
existence.  "The  metaphysical  proofs  of  God  are  so remote from the
reasoning  of  men," Pascal asserts, **and so compUcated, that they make
little impression." He will "not undertake," he tells us in his Pensees,
"to  prove  by  natural reasons . . . the existence of God." In his view
"there  are  only  three  kinds  of persons: those who serve God, having
found Him; others who are occupied in seeking Him, not having found Him;
while  the  remainder live without seeking Him, and without having found
Him."  Since he regards the first as "reasonable and happy," the last as
"foolish  and unhappy," he addresses himself to the middle group whom he
regards  as  "unhappy  and reasonable." He asks them to consider whether
God is or is not. "Reason can decide nothing here," he says. If a choice
is  to be made by reason, it must be in the form of a wager. "Which will
you  choose  then  ? Let us see. Since you must choose, let us see which
interests you least. You have two things to lose, the true and the good;
and  two  things to stake, your reason and your will, your knowledge and
your happiness; and your

[614b]
nature  has two things to shun, error and misery. Your reason is no more
shocked in choosing one rather than another, since you must of necessity
choose. This is one point settled. But your happiness ? Let us weigh the
gain  and  the  loss  in wagering that God is. Let us estimate these two
chances. If you gain, you gain all, if you lose, you lose nothing. Wager
then,  without  hesitation,  that  He  is."  We are incapable of knowing
either  that  God  is  or  what God is, according to Pascal, because "if
there  is a God, He is infinitely incomprehensible" and "has no affinity
to  us."  Nevertheless,  proceeding on the practical level of the wager,
reason  may  lead  to  Christian faith, yet not in such a way as to give
adequate  reasons  for that belief, since Christians "profess a religion
for which they cannot give a reason." Kant also makes the affirmation of
God a matter of faith, but for him it is a "purely rational faith, since
pure  reason ... is the sole source from which it springs." He defines a
matter  offaith  as  any  object  which  cannot  be  known  through  the
speculative  use  of reason, but which "must be thought a priori, either
as consequences or as grounds, if pure practical reason is to be used as
duty  commands  . . . Such is the summum bonum,'' he says, "which has to
be  realized  in  the  world  through freedom . . . This effect which is
commanded, together with the only conditions on which its possibility is
conceivable  by  us, namely, the existence of God and the immortality of
the  soul, are matters offaith and are of all objects the only ones that
can  be so called." For Kant, then, the existence of God is a "postulate
of  pure  practical  reason  ...  as  the  necessary  condition  of  the
possibility  of  the summum bonumT The moral law commands us to seek the
highest good, with perfect happiness as its concomitant; but Kant thinks
that "there is not the slightest ground in the moral law for a necessary
connexion  between  morality and proportionate happiness in a being that
belongs  to the world as a part of it." Since man is a part of the world
or  nature,  and  dependent  on it, "he cannot by his will be a cause of
this  nature,  nor by his own power make it thoroughly harmonize, as far
as  his happiness is concerned, with his practical principles." The only
possible solution hes in "the existence of a

[615a]
cause  of  all  nature,  distinct from nature itself, and containing the
principle  of  this connexion, namely, of the exact harmony of happiness
with  moraUty."  That is why, Kant explains, "it is morally necessary to
assume  the  existence of God." In the tradition of the great books, the
common ground shared by reason and faith is marked by the convergence of
the  contributions  made  by  pagan,  Jew,  and  Christian—and by poets,
philosophers, and theologians— to the problem of God's existence and the
understanding  of  the  divine  nature,  the  essence  of  God  and  His
attributes.   Certain   attributes   of   God,   such   as   simplicity,
immateriality,  eternity,  infinity,  perfection, and glory, are usually
regarded  as  so  many  different  ways in which the human understanding
apprehends  the  divine  nature in itself. Other attributes, such as the
divine causality, omnipotence, omnipresence, omniscience, love, justice,
and  mercy,  are  usually  taken  as ways of considering God's nature in
relation  to  the world or to creatures. But to divide the attributes in
this  way,  as  is  done in the Outline of Topics, is to make a division
which  cannot  be fully justified except in terms of convenience for our
understanding.  God's  will,  for example, no less than God's intellect,
can  be considered in relation to Himself. God's intellect, no less than
God's  will,  can  have  the  world  for its object. So, too, the divine
goodness  can be considered with reference to things, even as God's love
can be considered with reference to Himself. The difficulties we meet in
classifying  or  ordering  the  attributes of God confirm the opinion of
almost   all  theologians,  that  our  understanding  is  inadequate  to
comprehend the essence of God. The fact that we employ a multiplicity of
attributes to represent to ourselves what in itself is an absolute unity
is another indication of the same point. The one attribute of simplicity
would  seem  to  deny  us  the  right to name others, unless we take the
plurality  of  attributes to signify something about man's understanding
of God rather than a real complexity in the divine nature. "He that will
attribute to God," Hobbes writes, "nothing but what is warranted by

[615b]
Chapter  29:  GOD  557  natural  reason, must either use such ncg.'ili\c
attributes, as infinite, eternal, incomprehensible', or superlatives, as
most high, most great, and the like; or indefinite, as good, just, holy,
creator;  and  in  such  sense, as if he meant not to declare what He is
Tfor that were to circumscribe Him within the limits of our fiuicy), but
how  much we admire Him, and how ready wc would be to obey Him; which is
a  sign  of  humility  and of a will to honor Him as much as we can: for
there  is but one name to signify our conception of His nature, and that
is,  I  AM:  and but one name of His relation to us, and that is GOD; in
which is contained Father, King, and Lord." Even when they are discussed
by  the  philosophers  and  reflected  on  by the poets, certain matters
belong  especially  to  theology  because  they constitute the dogmas of
religion— articles of religious faith based solely on divine revelation,
not  discovered  by  human  inquiry or speculation. That God created the
world  out  of  nothing  and  of  His  free  will;  that the world had a
beginning  and  will have an end are, for example, dogmas of traditional
Judaism  and  Christianity.  Philosophers may argue about the freedom or
necessity  of  the creative act, or about the possibility of a beginning
or  an  end  to time and the world, but Jewish and Christian theologians
find in Sacred Scripture the warrant for believing that which may not be
thoroughly intelligible to reason, much less demonstrable by it. What is
true  of  creation  applies  generally to the religious belief in divine
providence  and  the  positive commandments of God, to the gift of grace
which  God bestows upon men, and to the performance of miracles. Judaism
and Christianity share certain dogmas, though the degree to which Jewish
and  Christian  theologians  commonly  understand what is apparently the
same  dogma  varies  from  great similarity of interpretation (as in the
case  of  creation  and  providence)  to  differences  so great (as, for
example,  with regard to grace) that there may be some doubt whether the
dogm^a  in  question is really the same. The line of demarcation between
these  faiths  would seem to be more easily determined than their common
ground;  yet even here such matters as the resurrection of the body—even
when we take differences of interpretation into account —may be regarded
as a dogma shared by both.

[616a]
558  THE  GREAT IDEAS The basic differences between Jewish and Christian
theology  center,  of  course,  on  the  issue between a unitarian and a
trinitarian  conception  of the Godhead, with immediate consequences for
disbeUef  or  beUef  in  Christ  as  the  incarnate second person of the
Trinity—  the  Word  become  flesh.  This  in  turn has consequences for
doctrines of salvation, and of the nature and mission of the church, its
rituals  and  its  sacraments.  Even within Christianity, however, there
have  been  and  still  are  serious  doctrinal differences on all these
matters. The most fundamental heresies and schisms of early Christianity
concerned  the  understanding  of  the  Trinity and the Incarnation. The
great  modern  schism  which divided Christendom arose from issues about
the  sacraments,  the  organization and practices of the church, and the
conditions  of  salvation.  It would seem to be just as easy to say what
beliefs  are  common  to religious Jews and Christians, as to articulate
the  faith  common  to  all  sects  of Christianity. If all varieties of
Protestant doctrine are included, little remains in common except belief
in  the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob— creator and provider, governor
and  judge,  dispenser  of  rewards and punishments. One book stands out
from all the rest because, in our tradition, it is—as the use of "Bible"
for  its  proper  name  imphes the book about God and man. For those who
have  faith.  Holy Writ or Sacred Scripture is the revealed Word of God.
Its  division  into  Old  and  New  Testaments  represents  the historic
relation of the Jewish and Christian religions. Without prejudice to the
issue  between  belief  and  unbelief, or between Jewish and ChrisI. The
polytheistic  conception  of  the  supernatural order la. The nature and
existence  of  the gods lb. The hierarchy of the gods: their relation to
one another of men

[616b]
tian faith, we have attempted to organize the references to specifically
religious  doctrines concerning God and His creatures according to their
origin  and  foundation in either the Old or in the New Testament, or in
both.  On  certain  points,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  line  of
distinction  can  be  clearly drawn. For example, the doctrines of God's
covenant with Israel, of the Chosen People, of the Temple and the Torah,
are  indisputably  drawn  from  the  Old  Testament;  and  from  the New
Testament  come  such  dogmas  as those concerning Christ's divinity and
humanity,  the  Virgin Birth, the Church as the mystical body of Christ,
and  the  seven  sacraments.  Under  all  these topics we have assembled
passages from the Bible, interpretations of them by the theologians, and
materials  from  the  great  books of poetry and history, philosophy and
science.  Since  the  criterion  of  relevance here is the reflection of
sacred  or  religious  doctrine  in  secular literature, the writings of
pagan  antiquity  are  necessarily excluded, though they are included in
the  more  philosophical  topics  of theology, such as the existence and
nature of one God. Despite its length, this chapter by no means exhausts
the  discussion  of  God  in  the  great  books. The long list of Cross-
References,  which  follows  the  seventy-  three  topics comprising the
Reference  section  of this chapter, indicates the various ways in which
the  idea of God occurs in the topics of other chapters. The reader will
find  that  list useful not only as an indication of the topics in other
chapters  which elaborate on or extend the discussion of matters treated
here,  but also as a guide to other Introductions in v/hich he is likely
to find the conception of God a relevant part of the examination of some
other great idea. OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 56. 562 ic. The intervention of
the gods in the affairs of men: their judgment of the deserts

[617a]
2a.  The  revelation  of  one  God 2c. Criticisms of the proofs of God's
existence: agnosticism 3. Man's relation to God or the gods 3^. The fear
of  God  or the gods 3^. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods 4^.
The  identity  of essence and existence in God: the necessity of a being
whose 4^. The unity and simplicity of the divine nature 4^. The eternity
and  immutability  of  God  /\h.  The  happiness and glory of God 5. The
divine nature in relation to the world or creatures eye yi. God as first
and  as  exemplar cause: the relation of divine to natural causation 5^.
The  transcendence  of  God:  the  divine  aseity  5^.  God's  love: the
diffusion  of  the divine goodness 6. Man's knowledge of God 583 6a. The
names  of God: the metaphorical and symbolic representations of God; the
6b.  Natural  knowledge : the use of analogies; the evidences ofnature ;
the light of reason

[617b]
Chapter   29:   GOD   559  PA(^E  essence  involves  its  existence  cyj
anthropomorphic conception of God 584

[618a]
560  THE  GREAT IDEAS (i) God as teacher: inspiration and revelation (4)
The beatific vision ya. Creation *jb. Providence 7^. The resurrection of
the body •jh. The Last Judgment and the end of the world 8 J. The Chosen
People:  Jew and gentile 8^. God's Covenant with Israel: circumcision as
sign  of  the  Covenant  8^.  The  Temple:  the  Ark  of  the  Torah  9.
Specifically  Christian  dogmas  concerning  the divine nature and human
destiny 9dt. The Trinity (i) The divinity of Christ (3) Mary, the Mother
of God <)f. The second coming of Christ 12. The denial of a revealed and
providential  God:  the  pos'tion  of  the deist 13. God as a conception
invented  by  man:  its  emotional  basis 14. The worship of false gods:
deification and idolatry

[618b]
PAGE  6c.  Supernatural  knowledge  585  (2)  The light of faith 586 (3)
Mystical  experience  587  and His relation to the world and man 588 jc.
Divine  government  and law 589 'jd. Grace 590 7^. Miracles 591 7/*. The
Book of Life 592 8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and His
people  593  8r. The Law: its observance as a condition of righteousness
and blessedness 594 8<?. The messianic hope 595 ^b. The Incarnation: the
God-man  596 (2) The humanity of Christ 597 9^. The Church: the mystical
body of Christ; the Apostolate 598 9<?. The sacraments 599 the pantheist
600

[619a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the vohnne and pa^c numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homkr:  Iliud, hk ii [265 2«^] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  vohrnie  in  the set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one column, the letters a and b refer to the upperand lower
halves  of the page. Forexamplc, in 53 jAMiisiP^vfAo/o^^, 116a 119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the page,
the  letters  c  and  d  to  the upperand lower halves of the right-hand
sideof  the  page.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References: The references are to book, chapter, and verse. Wlien
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The polytheistic conception of
the supernatural order \a. The nature and existence of the gods 4 Homer:
Iliad, bk v
[330-351]
33c-d;
[814909] 38b-39a,c
/ Odyssey, bk viii
[266-366]
224d-225d  5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon [158-183]
53d-54a  5  SovnocL-Es:  Oedipus  at  ColonuslGoy-^iJ^]  120a / Antigone
[780-792]  138a  5  Euripides  ://<?/(?;2  [1137-1150] 309a / Bacchantes
3^0a-352a,c  esp  [272-327]  342b-c  / Heracles Mad [815-874] 371d-372c;
[1302-1353] 376c-d / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [354-391] 414a-b;
[570-575] 416a
5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[263428] 491a-493d, [813-833] 498c-d, [1462-1477]
506c / Birds 542a-563d esp
[684-736] 551b552a, [1492-1765] 560c-563d / Plutus [87-93]
630a  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, lOa-lld; 31a-b; 48c; bk ii, 58b-60d;
75a-b;  79d-80c;  86c;  BK  III,  95a-c;  bk  iv,  134a; 140c-d 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  91c-d  /  Phaedrus,  124c-125b  /  Symposium,  152b;  153b-c;
159d-161a;  163a164c  /  Euthyphro, 193a-c / Apology, 204c205c; 209a-b /
Republic, bk ii, 313d-314d;

[619b]
Chapter  29:  GOD  561 bk ii-iii, 320c-328a / Timaeus, 451d-452b; 465d /
Statesman,  587a-589c  /  Laws, bk vii, 730a-d; bk x, 757d-769d; bk xii,
787d-788a 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 3
[27o''i-26]
361c-362a; bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a / Metaphysics, bk III, CH 4
[1000*8-18] 518d-519a;
BK XII, CH 8 [1074^1-14] 604d-605a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1178^8-23]
433b-c / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 23
[i397*'i2-i4]
645d;
[1398*15-17] 646c;
[i398'^27-28] 647b;
[1399^5-8] 648a-b; bk
hi, ch 18
[1419*6-13]
673d-674a   12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [646-651]  23b;
[1090-1104] 29a; bk hi [14-24] 30b; bk V [146-173] 63a-b; [306-310] 65a;
[1161-1193]  76b-c;  BK VI [56-78] 81a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  3  108b-c;  ch  12, 118d-119b; bk hi, ch 13, 188b-189a; bk IV, CH 4,
227d-228a:  ch  ii,  240d-241a  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 11
258a-b  14  Plutarch: Pericles, 140d / Coriolanus, 191d192b / Pelopidas,
239d-240c  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d-60a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr v, ch 2-3 101c102c; CH 6 103b-104a; ch 8-10 105a-106b / Fifth Ennead,
tr i, ch 7, 212b-c; tr viii, ch 3, 241a; ch 10 244c-245a / Sixth Ennead^
tr viii, ch I 342d-343c; ch 3 344a-b

[620a]
(  1  .  The  polytheistic conception of the supernatural order, la. The
nature  and  existence  of  the gods.) 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i-x
129a-322a,c  passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  5-9 234d-241b 19 Aquinas: Sumjna
Theologica,  part i, q ii, A 3, REP I 49a-c; q 63, a 7, ans 331c-332b; Q
115,  A 3, REP I 588c-589c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 79a-b; 79d-80a;
81a-b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / Lycidas 27b32a / Comus 33a-56b
/ Paradise Lost, bk i
[331-621] 100b-107a / Samson Agofiistes [896902] 359a / Areopagitica, 384b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch hi, SECT 15 116c-d 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xi, div 103-110, 498b-501b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  152a-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  12b-c; 98a-c;345b347a;
461b-c; 584a; 600d-601a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226a-227a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part i, 224a-b; 237a-239c; 244c-245a; 251b-257c;
part  ii,  263d-265c; 268b-271c; part hi, 290b-292a lb. The hierarchy of
the  gods:  their relation to one another 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [493-611]
8a-9a,c; bk viii
[1-52] 51a-c; BK XV [184-217] 105d-106b; bk
xviii  [356-367] 133d; BK XIX [74-144] 137d138c; BK XX [1-160] 142a-143d
/ Odyssey, bk i
[11-79]
183a-d; bk v
[1-147] 208a-209c; bk
XIII [125-158] 256b-d 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[22-28]
lb;
[524-600]
7c-8d;
[882-894] 12b;
[1008-1073]
13d-14a,c / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon
[158-183] 53d-54a
/  Eumenides  81a-91d  5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad [1302-1353] 376c-d /
Iphigenia Among the Tauri
[1234-1283]
422b-c 5 Aristophanes: Peace [403-426] 530d / Birds 542a-563d esp
[684-736]
551b-552a,
[11951266]
557c-558b,
[1494-1693]
560c-562d / Plutus
[111-146] 630b-d
6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 21d'22a; bk ii, 58a-60d; 79d-80c; 82d-83b;
bk  iv,  134a;  155c156a;  bk  viii,  269a  7  Plato:  Cratylus, 91c-d /
Phaedrus,  124d-125a  /  Symposium,  152b; 153b-c; 159d-161a; 163a164c /
Euthyphro,  193a-c  /  Timaeus,  452b  /  Laws,  BK  IV,  683b; bk viii,
731d-732a  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4 [1000^- i8]518d-519a 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i2'2,:2}^ig-2.'j]
446a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3, 108b; ch 14, 121a-b 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [1-156] 103a-107a; bk X
[1-117] 302a-305a; [606-632] 318b-319b

[620b]
562 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to \c 14 Plutarch: Pelopidas, 239d-240b / Pompey^
525b 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 293b-294a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead,
tr  ix, ch 9, 71b-c / Third Ennead, tr v, ch 6 103b-104a / Fifth Ennead,
tr  i,  ch  7,  212b-c  18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 17
645d-646a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  22,  A  3, ANS
130d-131c;  q 63, a 7, ans 331c-332b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
46a-47c  22 Chaucer: Troilus afid Cressida, bkiii, stanza 1-7 54b-55b 27
Shakespeare:  Tempest,  act  iv,  sc  i  [60-133]  542b-543a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 20b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [331-621]
100b107a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 435b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 12b-d; 59c-60a* 346b-d; 461b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory,
part  i, 224a-b; 228a-b; 252a-253c; part ii, 262b-c Ic. The intervention
of  the gods in the affairs of men: their judgment of the deserts of men
4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk i [33-317] 3b6b,
[493-611] 8a-9a,c, bk iv [1-140] 24a-25b,
bk  V [311-519] 33b-35c, [711-909] 37b-39a,c, BK VIII 51a-56d, bk xiv-xv
98a-llld, bk xvi
[431-461] 117a-b,
[843-867] 121c-d, bk xviii
[356-367] 133d, BK XIX [74-144] 137d-138c, bk
xx-xxi  142a-154d, bk xxiv [507-551] 176c177a / Odyssey 183a-322d esp bk
ii 188a-192d, bk IX [16-38] 229a-b,
[67-81] 229d-230a, bk
XVIII
[124-150]
285b-c,  bk  xx  296a-300a,c,  BK  XXIV [438-548] 321c-322d 5 Aeschylus:
Suppliant Maidens
[79-175]
2a3a;  [1008-1073] 13d-14a,c / Persians [535-547] 20d; [738-842] 23a-24b
/  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c  esp [790-801] 35d-36a / Prometheus
Bound 40a-51d esp
[227-243] 42c,
[436-502]
44c-45a,  [564-891]  45d-49c  /  Agamemnon 52a69d esp [355-475] 55d-57b,
[1200-1222]  64d65a,  [1485-1488]  67d,  [1559-1570]  68c  /  Choephoroe
70a-80d  esp  [269-314]  72d-73a, [10211076] 80a-d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5
Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[1297-1415] lllb-112b
/ Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[229-253]
116b-c,
[939-1015]
123a-d,  [1448-1666] 127b-129b / Antigone 131a142d esp [100-162] 132a-c,
[1348-1353] 142d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[394-459]
146c-147a,
[733-783] 149b-d/£:/f<r/rfl 156a-169a,c esp [516576] 160a-c / Trachiniae 170a-181a,c esp [94140] 171a-b, [247-306] 172b-d, [1275-1278] 181c
/  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [169-200]  183d184a,  [446-452]  186a,
[1408-1471] 194d-195a,c 5 Euripides: Rhesus 203a-211d esp
[594-674]
208b-209a,
[890-996]
210d-211d / Medea
[1415-1419] 224c / Hippolytus 225a-236d esp

[621a]
Ic/o 2a Chapter 29: GOD 563
[1-55]
225a-c,
[520-568I 229c d.
[1202-1466)
234d-236d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c csp
[1-76]
237a-238a,
[1159-1163]
247c / Ileracladae
[750-1055]
254d-257a,c / Suppliants 258a269a,c esp
[113-283]
259a-260d,
[118^-12^4]
268c-269a,c / Trojan Women 270a-281a,c csp
[1-97] 270a-271a, [914-10^2] 277d-278d / Ion
282a-297d esp [1-81] 282a-d,[ 429-451 ] 286bc
[1470-1622]
296a-297d  /  Helen  298a-314a,c esp [1-67] 298a-d, [711-715] 304d-305a,
[16441692]  313d-314a,c  /  Andromache [1225-1288] 325c-326a,c / Electra
327a-339a,c  esp [12331359] 338b-339a,c / Bacchantes 340a-352ax / Hecuba
[488-500]  357a  /  Heracles  Mad  365a377d  esp [1260-1390] 376a-377b /
Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d esp
[1-87]
378a-379a,
[930-959]
386c,
[1758-1763] 393d
/ Orestes 394a-410d esp [317-357] 397a-b,
[1625-1693]
410b-d/ Iphigenia Among the 7j«r/411a-424d esp
[1-41]
411a-b,
[939-986] 419b-d,
[14351499] 424a-d /
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  esp  [1185-1194] 435d-436a, [1526-1629]
439a-d   5  Aristophanes  :  Peace  526a-541d  esp  [195-220]  528b-c  /
Thesmophoriazusae [655-687] 607c608a / Plutus 629a-642d esp
[86-92]
630a,
[489-498] 634c-d, [653-747] 637a-d
6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 7b-10a esp 9d-10a; 20b-22a; bk ii, 54d-55a;
77a-b;  78d-79c;  bk  III,  98b-c;  BK  IV,  124d-125a;  144c-d;  150bd;
151b-153d; 155b-c; 158d-159d esp 159d; BK VI, 190c-d; 198b-d; 199d-200a;
200c201a;  201d-202c;  205c-d;  211b-d;  bk  vii,  216d-217c  esp  217c;
218b-220a;  224d-225a; 226d-227a; 239c-240d; 246b-247a; 250a-d; BK VIII,
262b-c;  266a-d;  269c-270a;  270c271a; 274b-c; 276b-d; 279d-280a; 283d;
284d-285a;  bk ix, 302c; 308a-c; 309d-310a 6 Thu CYDIDES : Peloponnesian
War, BKJ,355h-c; 378a-b; bk ii, 407a-b; 415d-416c; bk v, 506b-c; BK VII,
559d-560a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Symposium, 152d-153b / Apology,
211d  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  313b-314d;  322a-324c; bk vi, 378a-b; bk x,
436c-437a;  437c-438c / Critias 478a-485d / Statesman, 587a-589c / Laws,
bk  iv,  679a-b;  681b-683b;  bk  ix,  757a;  bk  x,  765d-768d; bk XII,
787d-788a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[1099^9-18]
345a;  bk  x,  ch 8 [1179^23-33] 434a / Rhetoric, bk II, CH 5 [1383^3-8]
629d; ch 17 [1391^30- ^3] 638d 10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease, 154a-155d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[10901104] 29a; bk v [1194-1240] 76d-77b; bk vi
[43-79] 80d-81b; [379-422] 85b-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 12 118d-120b; CH 22, 128a-b; bk ii,
ch  8 146a-147c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 17 255d256d; bk ii,
sect  3  257a-b;  bk  hi, sect ii 262a-b; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; bk vi,
sect 40-46 277d-278d; bk x, sect 5 296d; bk xii, sect 5 307d-308a

[621b]
13 \'iKf;iL: Aeneid 103a 379a csp bk i (22^-417) 109a 114b,
[657 722]
121a 123a, hk ii
[162200] 128b 129b.
(5H8 6^^) 140b 142a. hk 111
[84-1201 149b 150b. hk iv (90-128] 169b 170b,
(17^278) 171b 174b, HK v
[604-699]
202b205b,
[779-871]
207b-210a, bk vi (42 loi] 212a 213b, bk vii
[286-600]
243b 252b, hk viii [^69 45:}] 269a-271a, (6o8-7^i|275a 278b. bk IX
[1-24]
279a-b,
[77-122]
281a 282a,
[638-663]
296a-297a, bk x
[1-117]
302a305a, [606-688] 318b-321a, hk xi
[5^2
596] 342b 344b, (762-867] 349a-351b, bk xii (134160] 357b-358a,
[405-440] 365a-b,
[766-886]
374b-377b  14  Pluiarch:  Romulus,  27d-29c  / Numa Pompilius, 50d-51c ;
57b-58a  /  Solon,  68a / Camillus, 104b-d; 107b-d / Fabius, 142d-143b /
Coriolanus,  185b-186a;  188d-191b  /  Aristidcs,  268a273c  / LySander,
365a-366a / Sulla, 370c371b / Lucullus, 404d-405a/ Alexander, 553b554b /
Caesar,  602c-604d esp 604b-d / Phocion, 615b-d / Cato the Younger, 639d
/  Demosthenes, 698a-699a / Dion, 781 d- 782a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
59d-60a;  bk vi, 91b-d; BK xvi, 179d; 183d / Histories, bk i, 189d-190a;
bk  ii, 235a-c; bk iv, 284b; 292c294a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix,
ch  9,  71a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 22, A 3, ans 130d-131c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xiv
[43-72]
20a-b; paradise, iv [49-63] 111b; viii
[1-12]
116d  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 30-35 5a-b; bk hi,
stanza 89 66a / Knight's Tale 174a-211a esp
[1303-1333]
181b-182a,
[2663-2699]
203b-204a,
[3099-3108]
211a / Merchant's Tale [10,093-230] 335a-337a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i,  81b-c  27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act iv, sc i [33-39] 269d; [69-74]
270b; sc 11 [38-50] 270d-271a; sc VI
[35-40] 273d; act
v, sc hi
[166-174]
281a / Antony and Cleopatra, act ii, sc i [1-8] 317d / Cymbeline, act v,
sc  iv  [1-151]  481a482c;  sc  v  [425-485]  488b-d 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract, bk iv, 435a-436a 47 Goethe: Eaust, part ii
[8582-8590]
209a;
[8610-8637]
209b-210a  2. The existence of one God 2a. The revelation of one God Old
Testament:  Genesis,  17:1-14  /  Exodus,  3  esp  3:6,  3:14-16; 6:1-8;
19:9-20:6 esp 20:1-6; 20:18-22 / Deuteronomy, 4:39; 5:1-10; 6 esp 6:4-5;
32:1-47  esp  32:36-43 / / Kings, 8:22-62 esp 8:23, 8:60— (D) /// Kings,
8:22-62  esp  8:23,  8:60  / / Chronicles, 16:7-36— (D) I Paralipomenon,
16:7-36  /  Psalms,  18  esp  18:30-32  —  (D) Psalms, 17 esp 17:31-33 /
Isaiah, 37:1520; 43-45 passim, esp 43:3, 43:10-13, 44:6,

[622a]
564  THE GREAT IDEAS (2. The existence of one God. 2a. The revelation of
one  God.)  44:8,  44:24,  45:5-7,  45:18, 45:21-22; 48:12 — (D) Isaias,
37:15-20;  43-45  passim, esp 43:3, 43:10-13, 44:6, 44:8, 44:24, 45:5-7,
45:18,  45:21-22; 48:12 / Jeremiah, 10 esp 10:6, 10:10— (D) Jeremias, 10
esp  10:6,  10:10 / Daniel, 6 esp 6:20, 6:26-2j / Hosea, 13:4— {D) Osee,
13:4  /Joel,  2:27  /  Zechariah,  14:9 — {D) Zacharias, 14:9 / Malachi,
2:10—  (D)  Malachias, 2:10 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 12:1^— (D) OT,
Boo/{ of Wisdom, 12:13 / Ecdesiasticus, i:8_(D) OT, Ecdesiasticus, i:S /
II  Maccabees,  1:24-29—  (Z)) OT, II Machabees, 1 :2^-2g New Testament:
Matthew,  23:9  /  Marl{,  12:2834  /  John,  1:1-2; 10:30; 17:3 / Acts,
17:22-29  /  Romans, 1:14-32 / I Corinthians, 8:4-6; 12:4-6 / Ephesians,
4:5-6  /  /  Timothy, 2:5-6; 4:10; 6:14-16 / I John, 5:5-9 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk vii, par 16 48c49a / City of God, bk viii, ch ii, 272c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 12 627c-d; ch 32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 2, A 2, REP I lld-12c; Q II, A 3, contrary and REP
I 49a-c; q 13, a ii, contrary 73c-74b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 74, a 10, REP 3 136c-137c; q 102, a 5, rep i 283c292c; PART ii-
ii,  Q  I,  A 5, REP 3 383b-384b; a 8, ans and rep i 387a-388c 21 Dante:
Divijie  Comedy, paradise, xxiv [115147] 143d-144a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 38a; 41b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[267-318]
238a-239a; bk xii
[106-151]
321b-322b;
[223-248] 324a-b / Samson Agonistes [472-478]
350a  33  Pascal:  Pefisees,  242-290  217b-225a;  428 244b; 557 272b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 245d247b passim 2b. The evidences
and proofs of God's existence New Testament: Romans, 1:14-32 esp 1:18-21
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  x,  758b-765c  8  Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch i
326a-327b;  BK  viii,  ch  1-6 334a-346b; ch 10 [267^21-^27] 354d-355d /
Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2 512b513b; bk IX, ch 8 575b-577a; bk xii, ch 6-7
601b-603b; ch 8
[1074^33-^1] 604d;
ch 10
[io75'*35-io76''5] 606d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 6 nOc-112b; CH 12 118d-120b; ch 16
121d-122d  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i, par 10 3b-c; bk V, par I
27a-b;  bk  vii, par 16-23 48c-50c; bk x, par 8-38 73b-81a; bk xi, par 6
90c-d  /  City  of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c; bk x, ch 14 307c-308a /
Christian Doctrine, bk i, CH 8 626c-627a

[622b]
2b  to  Ic  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica^ part i, q 2 10c-14a esp a 3
12c-14a;  q  3, a 4, rep 2 16d17c; Q 8 34c-38c; q 11, a 3 49a-c; q 19, a
5,  REP 3 112d-113c; Q 44, A I, rep i 238b-239a; q 65 339a-343c esp a i,
rep  3 339b-340b; q 75, A I, rep I 378b-379c; q 79, a 4, ans 417a418c; Q
104, AA 1-2 534c-537b; part i-ii, q i, A2 610b-611b 22 Chaucer: Knight's
Tale  [3005-3016]  209a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 78d-79a; 79d-80a
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learniiig, 38a; 41b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  iv  51b-54b  /  Meditations,  71d-72a;  iii  81d-89a;  v 93a-96a /
Objections  and  Replies,  108a-115a,c passim; 120c-123a; 126b-127c; def
viii 130d; postulate V 131b-c; AXIOM I 131d; axiom ix-x 132b; PROP i-iii
132b-133a;  137d-138a; 158b162a; 168d-169a; 211c-212a; 213a-d; 21 7d218a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def i 355a; def 3,6 355b; prop 7 356c; prop
ii  358b-359b;  prop 14, DEMONST and corol i 359d-360a; prop 20, DEMONST
and  corol I 363d-364a 32 M11.TON : Psahn 136 8a-10a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
242-244  217b-218a;  469  256a;  557  272b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi,
general  schol, 369b-370a / Optics, bk hi, 528b-529a; 542a543a passim 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xvii, sect 17 172b-c; sect 20,
173a;  bk  iv,  ch  x, sect I-II 349c-352a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
pref,  404a;  SECT  6-7  414b-c;  sect  25-33  417d-419a  esp SECT 29-33
418c-419a;  sect  146-156  442a444d passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect xi 497b503c passim 37 Fielding: To?n Jones, 187d-188a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 143a-b
[tliesis];
177b192d;  236b-240b  esp  239a-240b  /  Practical  Reason,  SSSa-SS^d /
Judgement,  593c-d;  607d609b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  401a-b  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 280 94d-95a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3431-3468]  84a-b  51 Tolstoy: War arid Peace, bk v, 196b-d; 217c-d 2c.
Criticisms  of  the  proofs  of God's existence: agnosticism 19 Aquinas:
Sumjna  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a r, REP 2 lOd-lld; A 2 lld-12c 31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies, llOa-llla; 112d-114c; 137d-138a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  242 217b-218a; 428 244b; 543 1:66a; 547-549 266b-267a
35  JHume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi 497b503c passim, esp div 115
503b-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 33a-d; 143a-145c; 152a153c; 177b-192d esp
177b-179c, 190a-192d;

[623a]
Id  to  3b  Chapter  29:  GOD 565 200c-203d esp 202a 203b; 205a 208d csp
208a-b;  218d 223d; 234c 240b csp 239a c; 241d-242c / Practical Rta son,
291a-292c;  348b349b;  ZSlh-3S2c/  Intro.  MetaphysU  ofMorals, 384a,c /
Judgement,  567b;  568c  570a; 588a613a,c esp 588a-593d. 596c 599b, 600d
603d,  607d-613a,c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pari hi, par 280
94d-95a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  593c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v,  120d-121c;  UK  x,  292d  293a;  bk xi, 337a346a esp
341c-342c  2ci.  The postulatioo of God: practical grounds for belief 33
Pascal:   Pensees,   184-241  205a-217b  esp  23:5,  214b-216a;  425-427
243b-244b;  430  245a247b;  436-438 251a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236b-243c
esp   239a-240b,   241d-242c  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-292a;  314c-d;
344c-349b esp 345a-c; 351b-352c; 353a-354d / Science of Right, 432c-433a
/ Judgement, 588a-607c esp 593d-596c, 606d607c; 608c-611d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  120b-121c;  bk  xi,  313c-314a  53  James:
Psychology,  653a  3.  Man's relation to God or the gods ia. The fear of
God or the gods Old Testament: Leviticus, 19:14,32; 25:17 / Deuteronomy,
6:1-2,12-15; 8:6; 10:12-13,2022; 31:10-13 / Joshua, 24:14-16— (D) Josue,
24:14-16  / // Samuel, 23:3— (D) // Ki7igs, 23:3 / Nehemiah, 5:7-13— (D)
//  Esdras,  5:7-13 /Job, 28:12-28 / Psalms, 2:10-12; 19:9; 25:12-14; 34
esp  34:9-11;  111:5,10; 112; 128— (D) Psalms, 2:10-13; 18:10; 24:12-14:
33  esp 33:10-12; 110:5,10; hi; 127 / Proverbs, 1:7, 22-33; 2:3-5; 8:13;
9:10;  10:27;  14:26-27;  15:16,33; 16:6; 19:23; 22:4; 23:17-18; 24:21 /
Ecclesiastes,  5:2-7; 8:10-13; 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 8:11-14; 11=1-5; 33=6—
(D)  Isaias,  8:11-14;  11:1-5;  33:6  /  Jeremiah,  2:19; 5:19-31— (£))
Jeremias,  2:19;  5:19-31  /  Jonah,  1:1-16—  (D)  Jonas,  I Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  1-2;  10:19-24; 15:1, 13; 19:20-24; 23:18-28; 25:10-12;
34:13-17;  40:26-27  {D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  1-2;  10:2327;  15:1,13;
19:18-21;  23:25-38;  25:13-16;  34:14-20; 40:26-28 New Testament: Acts,
10:34-35  /  Colossians, y.2.2. I I Peter, 2:17 / Revelation, i^:6-y—{D)
Apocalypse, 14:6-7 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk v
[282-312] 210d-211a;
BK  XVIII [124-150] 285b-c 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [419-500] 6a7b
/ Agamemnon
[901-954]
61c-62b / Choephoroe
[269-301]
72d-73a;
[885-1076]
78d80d / Eumenides [490-565] 86b-87a

[623b]
b  5  Sophocles: Ofr///>wy Mr ATm^ [86^ 910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus
[25S  291]  116c d; fr4481485] 127b-c / Klectra [221 250] 157d 158a 5 Ki
kii'idks:  Orestes  [251  -:^i6|  396c 397a 6 Hi-RoDorus: History, hk m.
78d;   MKVi,211b  c;  BK  VII,  216d  218a;  218c  220a  6  TniJCYDiDEs:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  rr,  400d401a  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk ix, 757a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62
158)  ld-3a;  bk  in [1-93] 30a 31b; [978-102^] 42d43b; BK V [1161-1240]
76b  77b;  bk  vi [4^ <)=>,] 80d-81c 13 V'irgil: Aeneid, bk iv [259-282]
174a-b;  bk  VII [445-459] 248b-249a 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 123c- 124a /
Nicias,  435b-d  /  Crassus, 445d-446b / Alexander, 575a-576a / Phocion,
615b-d   15   Tacitus:   Histories,   bk  iv,  292c-294a  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk v, par 2 27b-c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c;
bk  11, CH 7 638d-639c 19 Aquinas: Surnma Thcologica, part i-ii, q 42, A
I,  ANS  801c-802a:  a  3, rep i 802d-803c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 67, A 4, rep 2 84d-85d; q 68, a 4, rep 4 91b-92c q 69, A 3,
rep 3 98c-100c; q 99, a 6 250a-251a part ii-ii, q 7, a i 415c-416b; q 19
465a-474d  Q  22,  A  2  481d-482c; q 25, a i, rep i 501b 502a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[100-1:56]
5a-b;  purgatory,  xiii  [103-129]  73a-b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
79d-80a;  82b-c;  90b-d  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 267b-c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii [561-566] 331b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 262
221a  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 155-156 444b-d 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  278b-c  /  Science of Right, 432c-433a /
Judgement,  502d-503a;  504b-505a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 458a46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  11, 264c; PART III, 304b 54 Freud: Group
Psychology,  688a-b  3^. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods Old
Testament:  Genesis,  4  :4-9;  1  1  :i-9  / Exodus, 5; 7-12; 14:10-15;
16:1-30  /  Numbers, 11; 14; 20:1-13; 21:4-9 / Deuteronomy, 1:26-46; 9 /
Joshua,  22—  (D)  Josue, 22 / / Samuel, 12:1415; 15:22-23— (D) / Kings,
12:14-15;  15:2223  /  U Kings, 19:22-23— (Z)) IV Kings, 19:2223 / Job I
Psalms,  2;  5:8-10;  22:1-2;  44;  74; 79:12; 107:10-12— (D) Psalms, 2;
5:9-11;  21:2-3;  43;  73;  78:12;  106:10-12  / Proverbs, 14:31; 17:5 /
Isaiah,  1:2-4;  3=8-9:  30-31;  3^-  37;  45:9; 48:1-9; 59:1-15; 63:10;
65:2-7—  (D)  Isaias, 1:2-4; 3:8-9: 30-31: 36-37; 45:9; 48:1-9; 59:1-15;
63:10; 65:2-7 /Jeremiah passim— (£)) Jeranias passim / Lamentations^

[624a]
(3.  Man's  relation to God or the gods. ib. The reproach or defiance of
God  or  the  gods.)  i:i8;  3:42 / Ezel{iel, 2:3; 5:5-8; 12-15; ^75 20;
22-23;  28—  (D)  Ezechiel,  2:3;  5:5-8;  12-15;  17;  20;  22-23; 28 /
Hosea—{D)  Osee I Jonah— {D) Jonas Apocrypha: Judith, 5; 7:20-8:27— (£))
OT,  Judith,  5;  7:11-8:27 / Wisdom of Solomon, 12:12— (D) OT, Boof^ of
Wisdom, 12:12 New Testament: Matthew, 27:46 / M^r^, 15:34 / Acts, 9:1-6;
11:17 / Romans, 8:7; 9:19-21 / James, 4 :4 4 Homer: ///W, bk i
[1-120] 3a-4b;
[428-487]
7c-8a; bk v [431-549] 34c-35d; bk xxi [114148] 149b-c;
[200-382] 150b-152a
/  Odyssey,  BK  IX  [475-535]  234a-d  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant Maidens
[151-175] 2d3a;
[882-894] 12b
/ Persians
[679-842]
22a24b / Agamemnon [901-954] 61c-62b;
[12001222] 64d-65a
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King [S6^-gio] 107b-c / Antigone [988-1090]
139c-140b / Ajax 143a155a,c esp [1-133] 143a-144c, [430-459] 146d147a,
[748-783]" 149c-d
/ Electra
[516-576]
160a-c  /  Trachiniae  [1264-1278]  181c  / Philoctetes [446-452] 186a 5
Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[1-55]
225a-c  / Heracleidae 248a-257a,c / Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp [113-283]
259b-260d / Trojan Women [1-98] 270a-271a / Ion 282a-297d esp
[429-451]
286b-c / Helen
[255-305]
300c-d / Andromache
[994-1045] 323c-324a
/  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  / Heracles Mad 365a-377d esp [339-347] 368a,
[750-760] 371c,
[1258-1347]
376a-d / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [570-575] 416a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[263-428] 491a-493d;
[813-833]
498c-d;
[1462-1477]
506c / Birds 542a-563d / Thesmophoriazusae
[655-687]
607c-608a  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 20d-22a; 39a-b; BK II, 77a-b; bk
hi,  95a-c; bk iv, 140c-d; 151b152a; bk vii, 222c-d; 226d-227a; bk vtii,
283d  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 400d401a 7 Plato: Laws, bk
ix,  757a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b;  CH 12
118d-120b;  ch  27,  132c-133a;  bk hi, ch 22, 195c-d; 198a-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  i [i-ii] 103a; bk xii [500508] 367b 14 Plutarch: Agesilaus,
483a-b  /  Dion,  801b-c  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv, 292c-294a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 78, a I, contrary 152b-153b; q
84,  a  2,  ans and REP 2 175b-176a; part ii-ii, qq 13-14 444b452a; part
hi, q 64, a 6, ans 874d-875d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[100-136]
5a-b;  xi  [16-90]  15b-16a;  xiv [1-72] 19c-20b; XXV [1-15] 36b-c; xxxi
[82-96] 46d-47a

[624b]
y 566 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 3c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1303-1333]
181b182a / MonJ(s Tale [14,149-188] 437a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, lOb-llb
27  Shakespeare:  King Lear, act iv, sc i [30-37] 269d 32 Milton: Samson
Agonistes
[667-709]
354a355a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-34a; 123a-b; 370b-371b; 380a-381a
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 121d-127b passim 3c. The love
of  God  or  the gods Old Testament: Exodus, 20:5-6 / Deuteronomy 6:4-9;
7:9-11;  10:12-11:1;  11:13-25; 13:1-3; 19:9; 30:6,15-20 / Joshua, 22:5;
23:11—  (D) Josue, 22:5; 23:11 / Psalms, 5:11-12; 18:1-2; 31:23; 42:1-2;
63; 97:10; 116:1; 119:132; 145:20— (Z)) Psalms, 5:12-13; 17:2-3; 41:2-3;
62; 96:10; 114:1; 118:132; 144:20 / Isaiah, 26:8-9; 56:6-7— (Z)) 26:8-9;
56:6-7   /   Jeremiah,   2:1-3—   122:6;   30:24;  121:6;  Isaias,  (Z))
Jeremias,2:i-7,  Apocrypha:  Tobit, 13:12-18— (D) OT, Tobias, 13:14-23 /
Ecclesiasticus,   2:15-16;   13:14;  25:1112—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,
2:18-19;  13:18;  25:14-16  New Testament: Matthew, 10:37-38; 22:35-38 /
Marf{,  12:28-33  / Luke, 7:37-47; 10:25-27; 11:42 /John, 5:40-42; 8:42;
14:15-31; 16:2627; 17:23-26; 21:15-17 / Acts, 20:22-24; 21:715 / Romans,
5:5;  8:28-39  /  ^  Corinthians,  2:9;  8:1-3; 13:1-14:1; 16:14,22 / //
Corinthians,   5:14-15   /   Ephesians,   1:3-6;   3:14-21;  6:24  /  //
Thessalonians,  y.'^/  1  Timothy,  i:^/  II  Timothy,  1:13-14; 3:1-5 /
Jafnes,  1:12; 2:5 / /P(?/<?r, 1:7-8 / I John, 2:5,15-17; 3:17; 4:7-5:3/
77 /o/r;2, 6/ Jude, 20-21 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xiii
[217-351]
257b258c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16, 158b-d; ch 22, 168d; BK
IV,  ch  i,  219a-b  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect 13 258c 16
Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 510a-b 16 Kepler:
Harmonies  of the World, 1050b; 1080a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i,
par 5-6 2b-c; par 28 7d-8a; bk ii, par 15 12b-c; bk hi, par 15 17a-b; bk
iv,  par  15-19 23a-24b; bk v, par 1-2 27a-c; bk vii, par 6 44d-45a; par
23  50b-c:  bk  VIII,  par  9  55a-c; bk ix, par 3 62a-b; bk x, par 8-40
73b-81c;  bk  xi,  par 1-4 89b-90b; bk XII, par 10 lOlc; par 23 104b-c /
City  of  God,  BK  X,  CH  I 298b,d-299d; ch 3 300b-301a; bk XIV, ch 28
397a-d  /  Christian Doctrine, bk i, CH 3-5 625b-626a; ch 10 627b; ch 15
628b-c;  CH  22-23  629b-630c; ch 26-27 631b-d; ch 2930 632a-633b; ch 33
633d-634b; ch 35 634c-d; ch 37-40 635b-636a,c; bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c; ch
38, 654c; ch 41 656a-c; bk hi, ch 10-24 661c-666d passim

[625a]
3c to 3d Chapter 29: GOD 567 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q :^,
a  i,  REP  5  14b-15b;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and rep 4 36b 37c; Q 60, A 5
313b-314c; q 82, a ^, ans and rep 3 433c-434c; o 95, a 4, ans 509b-510a;
part  i-ii,  q I, a 8 615a-c; q 2, a i, rep ^ 615d616c; Q 26, A ^, rep 4
735c-736b; q 28, a 2, contrary 741a-742a; a 4, ans 742d-743c; Q 35, a 5,
REP  I  775d-777a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-n, q 65, a 5, ANS
and rep i 74c-75a; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; Q 68, A 2, ANS 89c-90c; a 8, rep 2
95c-96c:  q  69, a 4, ans lOOc-lOlc; q 70, a 3, ans 103b104d; Q 73, A 4,
rep  3  122b-123a;  a  5,  ans  123a-d;  q  77,  a 4, contrary and rep i
148b149a;  q 78, a 2, rep i 153b-154a; q 84, a i, REP I 174b-175a: q 88,
a  2,  rep i 194b-195b; A 6, rep 2 198a-d; q 89, a i, rep 3 199a-c; a 2,
ans  199c-200d; q 99, a i, rep 2 245c-246b; q 100, A 6, REP I 257c-258c;
a  10  262b-263b;  a  II, REP I 263c-264d; q 102, a i, rep i 270c271b; q
109,  A  3340c-341b;  partii-ii,  q  i, a i, REP 3 380b-381a; a 3, rep i
381d-382c;  q  3,  A  2, REP I 401a-d; q 7, a 2 416b-d; q 19, a 4, REP 3
467c-468b;  a  12,  ans  473d-474d;  q  22, A 2, ans 481d-482c; qq 23-27
482c-527b;  q 180, a I, ans and rep 2 607d-608c; a 2, rep i 608c-609c; a
7,  ans  614d-616a;  q  182, a 2, ans 621d-623a; a 4, rep i 623d-624d; q
184,  a  2,  ans  629d-630d;  a  3,  ans  and rep 3 630d632c; A 7, rep 2
636a-637a;  q 185, a 2, rep i 641c-643a; a 4, ans 644a-645c; q 186, a 2,
rep 2 651d-652d; a 7, rep 2 658d-660a; q 187, a 2, ans 665a-666a; q 188,
a  2,  ans  675d-677a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory, xv [4081]
75d-76a; xvii
[9i]-xvni
[75]
79b-80c; paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d; iii 109b-110c; v
[1-12] 112a-b; vi [112-126] 114d-115a; xx [94138] 137d-138a; xxi [52-102] 138d-139b; xxvi
[1-81]
145d-146c; xxxii
[i39]-xxxiii
[145]
156a-157d  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza 263-267
154b-155a  / Second Nun's Ta/f 463b471b / Parsons Tale, par 6, 497a; par
21  509a-b;  par  31  517b-518b  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 240d 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 210d-211a 27 Shakespeare: Henry VIII, act iii, sc ii
[435457] 573c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  iii,  88d-89a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  227b-228a  31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part v, prop 14-16 456b-c; prop 18-20 456d-458a; prop
32-34  460b-d;  prop  36-37  461a-c  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk xii
[561-566]  331b  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 430
245a-247b; 463 255a; 468 255b-256a; 471 256a-b; 476 256b-257a; 479 237b;
482483  258a-b;  485  258b;  487-489  258b-259a; 491 259a; 544 266a; 821
331b-332a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch vii, sect 5-6 132c-d

[625b]
42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of\forals,27Sb279d / Practical Reason,
321b  329a  csp  326b327a  43 Mill: Vtilitarianism , 4 58a b 47 (Joethe:
Paust,  part i (117H 1185] 29b 48 Melville; Moby Dicl{, 318b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, bk xv, 631a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi,
54a-b;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim; bk vi, 164d165a; bk xi,313c 314d 3</.
Obedience  to  God  or  the  gods  Old  Testament: Genesis, 2:i<y-iy; 3;
22:1-18 csp 22:18; 26:4-5 / Exodus, 3:4-4:17; 24:1-8 / Deuteronomy, 4-11
passim;  2']-y^ passim / Joshua, 22; 24:1-28— (D) josue, 22; 24:1-28 / /
Samuel,  12:14-15;  15  esp  15:22-23—  (D)  /  Kings,  12:14-15; 15 esp
15:22-23  /  /  Kings,  8:54-62—  (D) /// Kings, 8:54-62 / I Chronicles,
28:9—  (D) / Paralipomenon, 28:9 / Ezra, 7:23 — {D) I Esdras, 7:23 / Job
/  Ecclesiastes,  y.i;  12:13— (D) Ecclesiastes, 4:17; 12:13 / Isaiah, I
:i9-20— (D) Isaias, i : 19-20 /Jeremiah passim, esp 3, 7, II, 35, 42-44—
(Dj  Jeremias  passim,  esp  3, 7, II, 35, 42-44 / Daniel, y.zy / Micah,
6:8-(D)  Micheas,  6:8  New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:io;y:2i;  12:46-50;
26:36-39  /  Mar/(,  14:32-36 / Lul^e, 22:40-45 / John, 5:30; 18:10-11 /
Acts,  5:29-32;  21  :8-i5  /  Romans,  5:19  / // Corinthians, 10:5-6 /
Philippians,  2:1-18  esp  2:7-8  /  // Thessalonians, 1:7-9 / Hebretvs,
5:8-9;  11:8  4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [188-222] 5a-b 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant
Maidens [410-434] 6a-b / Choephoroe
[269-301]
72d-73a;
[885-1076]
78d-80d  /  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a  5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[S6^-gio]  107b-c  /  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [374-378] 134b. [443465]
134d-135a,  [1351-1353]  l^2d / Ajax [666676] 148d / Electra 156a-169a,c
esp
[23-37]
156b 5 Euripides: Suppliants [513-563] 262d-263b / Helen
[1644-1692]
313d-314a,c  / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [67-122] 411d-412b 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i, 39c-d; bk ii, 55a; bk IV, 124d-125a; i26d-127a; 150b-d;
151b152a;  bk  vi,  201d-202c;  bk  vii,  218c-220a;  BK  IX,  308a-c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 355b-c; 382c-d 7 Plato: Apology,
206b-d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b683b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch
16-17, 158a161a; BK III, ch 24, 204c-d; 208d-210a; bk iv, CH I 213a-223d
passim,  csp  218b-219a;  ch  3  224b-d; ch 7, 234b; ch 12, 242d-243c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk hi, sect 13 262c; BK V, sect 27 272d; bk vi,
sect  10  274b-c; bk IX, sect I 291a-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bkiii [84-120]
149b-150b;  bk  IV  [259-282)  174a-b;  [356-361]  176b-177a 15 Tacitus:
Histories, bk iv, 292c-294a

[626a]
568 THE GREAT IDEAS (3. Man's relation to God or the gods. ^d. Obedience
to  God  or  the gods.) 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 15 628b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  19, A 5, REP 2 705d-707a; a 6, ans and rep 2 707a708a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 88, a i, rep 2 193a-194b; q 96,
a  4  233a-d;  q  97,  a  3,  rep I 237b-238b; part ii-ii, q 2, a 9, ans
398c-399b; q 4, a 7, rep 3 407d-409a; q 33, A 7, REP 5 556a-557d; q 186,
a  7,  rep  3  658d-660a;  part hi, q 7, a 3, rep 2 747b' 748a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, hi
[i]-v
[87] 109b-113a; vii [19-120] 115b-116b
22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [5240-5253] 249b / Cler}(s Tale 296a-318a
esp [9018-9038] 316b-317a / Tale of Melibeus, par 17 407b408a / Parson's
Tale,  par  24  511a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part i, 82b-d; part ii,
137b-138b;  154b-155c;  159d-160a;  162a; part HI, 199b-204a; 240a-241a;
244d-246a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213a-215a;  233a-234a;  238c-239c 26
Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [7795]  120b-c 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk iv
[411-439] 161b-162a,
[720-749] 168a-b, bk v
[506-543]
186a-187a, bk vi
[164-188] 199b200a,
bk VII
[449-518]
227a-228b, bk vih
[311-333] 239a-b, [630-643] 246a, bk ix [366375] 255b, [647-654] 261b, bk x [ioi3]-bk xi
[44]
296b-300a, bk xi
[133-161] 302a-b, bk
XII
[386-410]
327b-328a,
[561-566] 331b /
Samson  Agonistes  [373-419]  347b-348b  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b  33
Pascal:  Pensees,  460  254b; 476 256b-257a; 482 258a; 489,491 259a; 531
264b; 539 265b 35 Locke: Toleration, 15d-16a; 16c / Civil Government, ch
II,  sect 6 26b-c / Human Understanding, bk I, CH II, sect 5-6 105a-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i, 2a-b; bk XII, 85d-86a 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 259b-260a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 321b-329a; 345c-d
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / judgement, 504b-505a;
509a-c;  593a-d;  611a-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 296b-d 44 Bosw ELI.: Johnson,
394a 48 Melville: Mo^jv Dic{, 30a-36b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  hi,  64c67a;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim; bk vii, 177b-180a 54 Freud:
General Introduction, 582a / Civilization and Its DiscoJitents, 776b 3e.
The  worship  of  God  or  the gods: prayer, propitiation, sacrifice Old
Testament:  Genesis,  4:3-7;  15:7-21;  22:118  / Exodus passim, esp 12,
13:11-16,  15:1-21,  23:18-19  /  Leviticus  passim,  esp 2, 4-7, 16-17,
22:1-24:9, 27:1-34 / Numbers, 5-8; 15; 18-19;

[626b]
28-30  /  Deuteronomy,  10-12; 14:22-17:1 / Joshua, 22:10-34— (D) Josue,
22:10-34  / / Samuel, 15 esp 15:22-23— (D) / Kings, 15 esp 15 :22-23 / /
Kiiigs,  8 ; 18 :2i-39— (D) /// Kings, 8; 18:21-39 / // Chronicles, 5-8;
29-31—  (Z))  //  Paralipomenon,  5-8; 29-31 / Nehemiah, 10:2939— (D) II
Esdras,  10:29-39 / Psalms / Proverbs, 15:8; 21:3 / Isaiah, 1:11-20; 58—
(D)  Isaias,  1:11-20;  58  /  Lame7itations,  5  /  EzeJ^iel, 43:18-27;
45:13-46:24—  (D)  Ezechiel, 43:1827; 45:13-46:24 / Hosea, 6 esp Osee, 6
esp 6:6; 8 / Joel, 2:12-18 / Amos, 4 / Micah, 6:6-8-(D) Micheas, 6:6-8 /
Malachi,  1:6-14—  (D)  Malachias,  1:6-14  Apocrypha: Tobit, i^—{D) OT,
Tobias,  13  /  Rest  of  Esther,  13:12-14—  (D) OT, Esther, 13:12-14 /
Ecclesiasticus,  18:22-23; 35— (Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:22-23; 35 New
Testament:  Matthew,  6:1-18; 9:9-13; 26:36-44 / Mar\, 9:14-29 esp 9:29;
12:32-33 — {D) Mar\, 9:13-28 esp 9:28; 12:32-33 / Luke, 11:1-13; 18:1-14
I  John,  17  /  Colossians,  4:2-4  / I Thessalonians, '^:iy / Hebrews,
10:122;  13 :i5-i6 / Revelation, 5— (D) Apocalypse, 5 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
i
[428-487]
7c-8a; bk ii
[394-431]
14a-b; bk ix
[485-526]
62a-b  /  Odyssey,  bk  hi  [1-68] 193a-d 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[1-175] la-3a;
[525-600]
7c-8d;
[1018-1073]
13d-14a,c  /  Seven Against Thebes [80-320] 28a-30d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the King [151-215] 100c101a; [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus
[465-509] 118b-d / Electra [516-576] 160a-c /
Philoctetes
[i 440-1 444] 195a,c
5  Euripides: Trojan Women [1277-1283] 280d / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp
[200-209] 341c,
[337-433] 342c-343b / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a439d
5 Aristophanes: Peace
[173-195]
528a;
[9221126] 536c-539a / Birds 542a-563d
6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 6a; lOa-lld; 20 d22a; 31a-c; 40d-41b; 48c;
bk  ii,  57b-60a;  79a-c;  86c;  bk  hi,  95a-c; bk iv, 126d-127a; 134a;
140c-d; 142b-c; 155c-156a; 156d-157a; bk V, 175d-176a; bk vi, 196d-197a;
199d200a;  200d;  205c-d;  bk  vii,  226c; 235a; 248b-c; 250b-d; bk vhi,
267a; 270b-c; 282b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 407a-b; bk
vi,  517d-518a  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  127c-128a / Symposium, 156d-157a /
Euthyphro, 197d-198c / Phaedo, 251d / Republic, bk i, 295a-d; 297a-b; bk
n, 313d-314d; bk iv, 345d-346a / Timaeus, 447a / Laws, bk iv, 683a-b; bk
vii,  721a-c;  bk  viii, 731d-732d; bk x, 768d-769c; bk xii, 791d-792a 8
Aristotle:  .Topics,  bk  i, ch ii [i05'*2-6] 148c / Heavens, bk i, ch i
[268-^12-15] 359a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 12 347a-b; bk iv, CH 2
[1122^18-23]  369c; bk viii, ch 9 [1160*1929] 412b-c / Politics, bk vii,
ch 9 [1329^26-34] 533d

[627a]
Se to 3/ Chapter 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things^ bk i
[1-4^]
la-d;
[80-101] 2a-b; bk
11 [589-660] 22c 23b; BK III [41-58] 30c-d; BK V
[i 194-1240] 76d77b; BKvi [68-79] Slab
12   Ei'icTETUs:   Discourses,   bk  i,  ch  i6  121d122d  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  7 269d; BK IX, SECT 40 295b; bk xii, sect 14
308c 13 X'irgil: Eclogues, v
[62-80]
18a-b  /  Atneid  103a-379a  passim,  esp bk ii [108-125] 127a-b, bk III
[84-120] 149b-150b, [543-550] 162a, bk IV
[54-67]
168b-169a,
[19S-221]
172b-173a, BK VI
[42-76]
212a-213a, bk viii
[558
584] 274a-b, BK IX
[621-631]
295b-296a, bk xi
[783-798] 349b
14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  passim  /  Numa  Pompilius 49a-61d esp
56d-57b  /  Camillus,  104b-d;  107b-d / Fabius, 142d-143b / Coriolanus,
185b-186a  / Aemilius Paulus, 214b-d / Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Marcellus,
247c-249d  / Lucullus, 404d-405a / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Alexander, 541a-d
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk hi, 59d-60c; bk xii, 112d-113a / Histories, bk
ii,  214d-215a;  bk  iv,  282d-283b;  292c-294a;  bk  v, 296a 16 Kepler:
Harmonies   of  the  World,  1009a;  1011a;  1050b;  1080a-b;  1085b  18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par i la-b; bk XIII, par I llOd-llla /
City  of  God, bk vh, ch 27-31 259c-262a; bk x 298b,d-322a,c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 6 626a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
30, I A I, rep I 749a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, A
3  247a-248a; a 4, rep 2 248a-d; qq 101-103 265d-304a; part ii-ii, q 30,
a  4,  rep i 536a-d; Q 32, A 2, ANS 541a-542c; qq 179-189 606a700d esp Q
181,  A 3, REP 3 618c-619b, q 182, A 2, REP 3 621d-623a, q 186, a 4, ans
655c656b,  a  5, REP 5 656c-657d, a 6, rep 2 657d658d, Q 188, A I, rep I
674d-675d;  part  hi, QQ 21-22 823d-833a; q 25 839c-845a; q 60, a 5, ANS
850b-851b;  q 62, a 5, ans 862b-863a; Q 63, a 2, ANS 865c-866c; a 4, rep
1,3  867d868b; A 5, ANS 868c-869b; a 6, ans 869b870b; PART III suppL, qq
71-72  900d-922b;  Q 99, A 3, REP 2 1081d-1083a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory,  hi  [133145]  57b-c;  IV [127-135] 58d; vi [25-48] 61a-b; XI
[1-36] 68d-69a; paradise, v [13-84] 112b113a; XIV
[67-108]
127c-128a; xx
[31-138]
137a-138a passim; xxxiii
[1-45] 156b-c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v, stanza 263-267 154b-155a /
Knight's Tale [2209-2437] 196b-200a / Summoner's Tale
[7455-7529]
288a-289a / Franklins Tale [11,176-206] 353b354a; [11,340-398] 356b-357a
/  Prioress's  Tale  391a-395b  /  Parsons  Tale,  par 93-94 547b548a 23
Hobbes:  Let'iathan,  part  i, 80c; 81c-d; part n, 154d-155a; 161b-163d;
part hi, 182d-183b; part iv, 261a-c

[627b]
b  29: GOD 569 24 Rahf.i.ms: Cargantua and Pantagruel, bk 11, 117c-118a;
hk iv. 265b c 25 MoNTAiGNi:: Essays, 91b c; 152b 156d; 246b d; 300c d 26
vShakkspf.are:  Henry V, act iv, sc viii [96Ml) 561c d 27 Sn akesim-ark:
Hcmlel,  act  hi,  sc  hi  [36-96J  53d 54b 31 Simno/.a: Ethics, part i,
appendix,  369b  371  d passim 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [185-197]
139b;  BK IV [720 735] 168a-b; bk v [136-208) 178a179b; BK VII [550-640]
229a-231a; bk x [10S6]- BK XI
[71] 298a-300b / Areopagitica, 402a-b
33  Pascal:  Pensecs,  431  247b;  476 256b-257a; 487-489 258b-259a; 491
259a; 499 260b; 504 261a; 513-514 262a-263a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3b-5c;
10c-15a  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 41, 468a37 Fielding:
Tom  ]ones,  187d-188a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxv, 209a-b;
209d-210a; 211a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  59c-60a; 81d-82a; 93b-c; 98a; 121a-b; 180d-182c esp
181b-c;  184d-185d;  208a-211a  passim,  esp  209a; 327d328b; 349c-350b;
356d-358a;  457b,d-467d passim; 547a-b; 583d-584b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  llOb-c;  195a-198d;  207a-208c;  226a-228a;  232c-233c  42  Ka^t:
Judgement, 504b-505a; 509a-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 307d-309a 44 Bos\\-Ei.i.:
Johnson,  52c-53a; 394a; 481d-482d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
i,  224a225a;  227c-228a;  234d-235c;  245b-247b;  253c-254b;  part  hi,
291d-292b; part iv, 322a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3587-3619] 87b-88a;
PART  II  [8568-8603] 208b-209b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-36b; 39a- b;
130b-131a;  370b-371b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 122b-c; bk VII,
281d-282a;  bk  viii,  323b;  bk  ix, 373b377b; bk x, 435c-436c; bk xii,
544b-545a; 553c-554a; bk xiii, 585b-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  v,  127b-137c passim; bk vi, 164d-165a; 167b-c 53 James: Psychology,
203a-204b  3/.  The  imitation of God or the gods: the divine element in
human  nature;  the  deification  of  men;  man  as the image of God Old
Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27; 3 esp 3:4-5, 3:22; 5:1-2; 9:6 / Exodus, 7:1
/  J^et'iticus,  11:44-45;  19:2;  20:7-8  / Psalms, 82:6-7— (D) Psalms,
81:6-7  /  Isaiah,  40:10-31; 42:8; 46— (D) Isaias, 40:10-31; 42:8; 46 /
Ezel^iel,  16:1719;  28:1-19—  (D) Ezechiel, 16:17-19; 28:1-19 / Daniel,
6:7-9  Apocrypha:  Judith,  3:8;  5:23-6:4—  (D)  OT,  Judith,  3:12-13;
5:27-6:4 / Wisdom of Solomon,

[628a]
(3.  Man's  relation to God or the gods. 3/. The imitation of God or the
gods: the divine element in human nature; the deification of men; man as
the  image of God.) 2.'.2y, 13-15— {D) OT, Boof^ of Wisdom, 2:27,; 13-15
/  Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3 New Testament:
/0A72,  10:34-35 / Acts, 12:2123; 14:7-18; 17:27-29; 28:3-6 / i?ow^;2i-,
1:1432  /  /  Corinthians,  11  :7;  15:49  /  //  Corinthians,  3:18  /
Colossians, 3:8-10 / // Thessalonians, 2:3-4 / James, y-^ / I Peter, i :
15-16  /  //  Peter,  1:3-4  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 7a-b; 12d-13b;
14a-d;  bk ii, 79d-80a; bk iv, 140c-141a; bk v, 168d-169a; 183d-184a; bk
vii,  217c;  235b-c  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  127c-128a  / Ion, 144b-145c /
Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-328a  / Timaeus, 452c-d ; 466a-b ; 476a-b /
Theaetetus,  530b-531a  /  Laws,  bk  IV,  681b-683b;  bk v, 686d-687c 8
Aristotle : Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982^28983^11] 501a-b; bk xii, ch 7
[1072^14-29]
602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[415^22-^8] 645c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[1099^9-18]
345a;  ch  12  347a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [1145^15-33] 395a-b; bk x, ch 8
[1178^8-27] 433b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[1-54]
61a-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 6 110c-112b; CH 9
114c-116b;  ch  13-14  120b121c; CH 17 122d-124a esp 123d; bk ii, ch 7-8
145b-147c;  ch  14,  153d-154c;  bk  hi,  ch  13,  188b-d; bk iv, ch ii,
240d-241a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; sect 13 258c;
bk hi, sect 12-13 262b-c; bk v, sect 27 272d; bk xii, sect 2-3 307b-d 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[283-290]
llOb-llla;
[586-593] 119a-b
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  27d-29c  /  Numa  Pompilius, 50d-51c; 52b-53c /
Alexander,  541a542a; 553b-554b / Dion, 784d-785a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
i,  4c-d;  bk  iv,  73b-d;  80c-d / Histories, bk iv, 285d-286a; 287b 16
Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 849a-b / Harmonies of the World, 1038a; 1048a 17
Plotinus  :  First  Ennead,  tr  ii 6b-10a / Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15
74d-75b  / Fourth Ennead, TR III, ch 12, 148d 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  ii,  par 14 12a-b; BK IV, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4
36a-b;  bk  xiii,  par 32 119a-b / City of God, BK VIII, CH 8 270a-d; bk
xi, ch 26-28 336d-338d; bk xii, ch 23 357d-358a / Christian Doctrine, bk
i, ch 22 629b-630a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a I, REP 2
14b-15b; q 14, a 2, rep 3 76d'77d; Q 26, A 4 151c-152a,c; q 27, a i, axs
153b154b;  Q  59, A I, contrary 306c-307b; q 72, A I, rep 3 368b-369d; q
77, a 2, ans and rep I 401b-d; Q 88, a 3, rep 3 472c-473a; q 91, a

[628b]
570 THE GREAT IDEAS 3//o4 4, rep 1-2 487d-488c; q 92, a 2, ans 489d490c;
Q 93 492a-501c; q 106, a i, rep 3 545d546d; PART i-ii, Q I, A 8, 615a-c;
q  2,  a  4,  rep  I 618a-d; q 3, a 5, rep i 626b-627a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55,  A  2,  REP  3  27a-d; q 87, a 8, rep 2
191d-192d;  Q  93,  A  3  217b-218a;  a 6, ans 219d-220d; q no, A 4, ans
350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  a  9,  rep 3 398c-399b; q 10, a ii, ans
435d-436b;  Q 19, A 3, rep I 466d-467c; q 31, a 3, rep 2 538b-539c; part
hi,  q  4,  a  i,  rep  2 730d731d; PART III SUPPL, Q 71, A 12, CONTRARY
914c-915c;  q 75, a i, rep 4 935b-937a; q 91, A 2, CONTRARY 1017c-1020c;
Q  92,  A  3,  REP 9 1034b-1037c; q 93, a i, rep i 1037d-1039a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi [8590] 77d; XXV
[58-78] 92a; paradise, v
[1924] 112b; VII
[64-84] 115d-116a;
xiii
[52-78]
126a-b  22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,189-192] 353b354a 23 Hobbes:
Let'iathan,  part i, 82b-c; part iv, 263a-d 25 Montaigne: fi^avi-, 215a;
233b-234a;  248a-c;  256c-d; 294a-b; 541d-543a,c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act  ii,  sc ii [314-322] 43d; ACT IV, sc iv [33-66] 59a-c 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  428b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning, 41b-d;
80b81a  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 214a-d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk ii [345-353] 118b119a; BK VII
[150-173]
220b-221a;
[519-528]
228b; BK XI
[466-522] 309b-310b / Areopagitica, 384a
33  Pascal: Pensees, 430-431 245a-247b; 434-435 248a-251a; 485 258b; 537
265b;  555  270a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch ii, sect 6 26b-c 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  187d-188a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 12b-c;
28b-d;  547a-c  41  Gibbon:  Declifie  and  Fall, 136b; 379b-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, additions, 90, 130d / Philosophy of History, intro,
168b-d;   PART  I,  224a-228a;  234d-235c;  245a;  part  ii,  266d-267a;
268b-271c  esp  270c-271c;  part  hi,  306a-d;  308a-b; part iv, 339b-d;
349c-350c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[614-736]
17a-19b;
[1566-1569]
38a  48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 84b-85a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
525c-526b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 121d-122c; bk xi,
313c-314d;  345a-c  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  692a-693a esp 693a /
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 778d-779a; 790d 4. The divine nature
in  itself:  the  divine attributes 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 126a / Symposium,
167b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1178^8-23]
433 b-c

[629a]
4J to ^b Chaftkr 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 8, 146a; bk III, CH
13,  188b  c 17 Plotinus : ¥ifth Ennead, tr i-vi 208a-237d passim/ 5/ArM
Enriead, tr vii-ix 321b 360d passim 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
4  2a;  bk  IV,  par  29 26b; bk vii, par 1-8, 43b 45d / City of God, bk
VIII,  CH  6  268d-269c 19 Aquinas: Surmna T/ieologica, part i, qq 3-1 i
14a-50b;  q  84,  a  2, ans 442b-443c 21 Dante: Difine Comedy, paradise,
xxxiii
[76-145]
157a-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 162a-163b; part IV, 271b-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52b-d  /  Meditations,  iii 81d-89a /
Objections  and Replies, PROP III 132d-133a; 211c-212a; 232b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  csp  def  4,6  355b, prop 5 356b, prop 8-13
356d-359d,  PROP  14,  COROL  2-PROP 15 360a-361d, prop 19-20 363c-364a;
part ii, prop 1-2 373d-374a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol,
369b-371a  /  Optics, bk hi, 542a-543a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
i,  ch  hi,  sect  15 116c-d; bk ii, ch xvii, sect i 167d168a; ch xxiii,
sect  33-35  212d-213c;  bk hi, CH VI, sect 11-12 271b-272b 35 Berkeley:
Human Knotuledge, sect 146 442a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 229c-230b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  187a-c; 190c; 236b-240b esp 239a-c / Practical
Reason,  303b-304a;  325d-326a;  344b-c;  345a-c;  347d-348b;  350c351a;
352a-c  /  Judgement,  592a-c;  608c-611d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
additions,  161  143a-b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196b-d Aa. The
identity of essence and existence in God: the necessity of a being whose
essence   involves  its  existence  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  3:13-14  8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, ch 7 [1072^ 4-14] 602c-d 17 Plotinus:
Sixth  Ennead,  tr vhi, ch 14 349d350c; ch 18-21 351d-353d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii, par 23, 50c / City of God, bk viii, ch ii, 272c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  2,  a  3, ANS 12c-14a; q 3, a 4 16d-17c; a 7, ans and rep I
19a-c;  q  4, a i, rep 3 20d-21b; a 2, ans and rep 3 21b-22b; a 3, rep 3
22b-23b; q 6, a 3 29c-30b; q 8, a i, ans 34d-35c; g 10, a 2, ANS and REP
3  41d-42c;  q 11, a 4, ans 49d50b; q 13, a II, ANS 73c-74b; q 14, a 13,
rep  I  86d-88c; q 19, a 3, rep 6 llOb-lllc; q 44, A I, ANS 238b-239a; q
50,  a  2, rep 3 270a272a; q 54, a i, ans 285a-d; a 3, rep 2 286c287b; Q
75,  A  5,  REP 4 382a-383b; part i-ii, Q 3, A 7, ans 628a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part hi, q 3, A 2, REP 3 724a-c

[629b]
29:  GOD  571  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  11  1  81 d 89a; v 93a96a /
Objections  and Replies, 110a 112a; 112d114c; 126b-127c; poshlath v 131b
c;  axiom  I  131d;  AXIOM X 132b; prop i 132b c; 158b162a; 217d 218a 31
Spino/.a:  Ethics,  part  i,  ni.ii 355a; oi.i 6 8 355b-c; prop 6-8 356b
357d; prop ii 358b359b; prop 20 363d 364a; prop 24 365a; PROP 34 369a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  469  256a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  143a 145c; 153a;
177b192d  csp  177b-179c,  187a  c,  192c  d; 205a b; 239a-c / Practical
Reason,  344c-355d  csp  353a354d  / Judgement, 570b-571c; 606d 609b csp
608b  609a  46  I  Iecjel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 280, 95a /
Philosophy of History, part hi, 305c306c 4^. The unity and simplicity of
the  divine  nature  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk viii, ch 10 353b-355d /
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1073*2-1 1 ] 603a-b; CH 8
[1074*32-39]
604d; ch 9
[1075*5-11)
605c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [1154^20-31] 406c 17 Plotinus:
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix 353d-360d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 10
3b-c; par 12 4a; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; par 29 26b; bk vii, par 2 43c-44a;
par 16 48c-49a; par 21 49d50a; BK XIII, par 4 lllc; par 19 115c-d / City
of  God,  BK VIII, ch 6 268d-269c; ch ii, 272c; BK XI, CH 10 327d-328d /
Christian Doctrine, BK I, CH 5 625d-626a; ch 32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3 14a-20c; q 4, a 2, rep 1-2 21b-22b; a 3 22b23b;
Q  6,  A  3  29c-30b;  Q  7, a 2 31d-32c; q 8, A 2, rep 2-3 35c-36b; a 4
37c-38c;  q ii 46d50b; Q 13, a I, REP 2-3 62c-63c; a 4, rep 3 65c-66b; q
14,  a i, rep 2 75d-76c; a 4 78b79a; q 26, a i, rep i 150b-c; q 27, a i,
rep  2  153b-154b;  q  28,  a  2,  rep  i  158d-160a; q 30, A I, rep 3-4
167a-168a;  a  3  169b-170c;  q 40, A I, rep I 213b-214b; q 44, a i, ans
238b239a;  q  47,  a i 256a-257b; q 50, a 2, rep 3 270a-272a; a 3, rep 2
272a-273b;  q  54, a i, ans 285a-d; a 3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 57, a i, ANS
295a-d;  q  84, a 2, ans and rep 3 442b443c; Q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c;
part  i-ii,  Q  18,  A  I, ANS 694a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  49,  A  4, ANS 5a-6a; q 50, a 6, ans lla-12a; q 73, a I, REP 3
119c-120c;  part  hi, q 2, a 2, ans and REP I 711d-712d; q 3, a 2, rep 3
724a-c;  a  3 724c-725b; q 6, a 5, rep 2 744a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xhi
[5266]
126a; xxiv
[115-154]
143d-144b; xxix
[127-145] 151c-d; xxxiii [76-145] 157a-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 151d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
52a-d  / Meditations, iii, 86a-88b csp 88b / Objections and Replies, 122
b-c; 232b

[630a]
(4.  The  divine  nature in itself: the divine attributes. 4b. The unity
and  simplicity  of  the divine nature^ 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
2-8 355d357d; prop 12-14 359b'360a; part ii, prop 4 374c; PROP 7, scHOL,
375b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SECT 15 116c-d; BK II,
CH  XXIII, SECT 35 213b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307b-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  229c-230b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 176b-c; 192c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory, part i, 224a-b; 227d-228a; part hi, 306a;
part  iv,  322a-c 4c. The immateriality of God 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk  xii, ch 6 [1071^ 2-23] 601 b-c; cH 8 [1074^31-39] 604d 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of Things, bk v [146-155] 63a 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 53b-c
15  Tacitus  : Histories, bk v, 296a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch
26,  266a; CH 27, 266c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 29 26b; par
31 26c-27a; bk v, par 19-20 32b-33a; bk VI, par 4 36a-b; bk vii, par 1-2
43b-44a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, ch 5-6 267d-269c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2 15c-16a; a 3, ans 16a-d; a 8, ans and rep 3
19d-20c;  Q  7,  A  I, ans and rep 2 31a-d; q 14, A I, ans 75d-76c; a ii
84c-85c;  q  40,  a i, rep I 213b-214b; q 50, a i, rep i 269b-270a; a 2,
REP 3 270a-272a; q 54, a i, ans 285a-d; a 3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 75, a 5,
rep  1,4 382a-383b; Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c; a 4, rep i 444d446b; Q 86,
a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  q  91,  a  2,  ANS 485b-486b; q 105, a 3, ans
540c-541b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, a I, ans and rep 2
710a-711c; a 2, ans 711d712d; Q 25, A 3, rep i 841c-842d; part hi suppl,
q  92,  A I, rep 12 1025c-1032b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 172d-173a
28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 105a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
122b-c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 12-15 359b361d; PART II, def i
373a;  prop  1-2  373d374a; prop 5-7 374c-375c 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi,
529a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SEC^ 17 117a-c; bk ii,
ch  xxiii,  sect  28 211bd; BK III, ch VI, SECT II, 271b-c; bk iv, ch X,
SECT  8-17  351a-353c  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  334b-335b  4d, The
eternity  and  immutability  of  God  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:18  /
Deuteronomy,  32:39-40  /  /  Chronicles,  16:34-36— (D) IParalipomenon,
16:34-36  / Psalms, 9:6-7; 10:16; 29:10-11; 33:10-11; 45:6; 48 csp 48:8,
48:14; 66:7; 90 esp 90:1-4; 93:1-2; 102 esp 102:11-12,

[630b]
572  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Ac  to  Ad 102:26-27; 103:13-18; 136; 145:10-13;
146:510—  (D)  Psalms,  9:7-8; 9:16; 28:10; 32:10-11; 44:7; 47 esp 47:9,
47:15;  65:7;  89  esp  89:1-4;  92:1-2;  loi  esp 101:12-13, 101:27-28;
102:1318;  135;  144:10-13; 145:5-10 / Isaiah, 40:8,28; 43:10-13; 57:15—
(D)  Isaias,  40:8,28;  43:10135 57-15 / Jeremiah, 10:10— (£)) Jeremias,
10:10  /  Lamentations,  5:19 / Daniel, 6:26 / Micah, 5:2— (Z)) Micheas,
5:2  /  Malachi,  3:6  —  (D)  Malachias, 3:6 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
36:17;  39*^0; 42:21— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 36:19; 39:25; 42:21-22 New
Testament:  Matthew, 24:35 / Romans, 1 :2o-25 / Colossians, 1 :i6-iy / I
Timothy, 1 :i7; 6:15-16 / Hebrews, 1:8-12; 7:23-25; 13:7-8 / James, 1:17
/  Revelation,  1:17-18;  10:6;  11:15iy—{D)  Apocalypse, 1:17-18; 10:6;
11:15-17  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  322d-323c;  324a-b 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk viii, ch 6
[258^10259^31] 344b-345d
/ Heavens, bk i, ch 9
[279^23-^4] 370c-d; BK II, CH 3 [286*8-13] 377c
/ Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch io
[337*15-23]
439a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  CH  I  [1069*30-^2]  598b-c;  ch  6-7
601b-603b; CH 9 605a-d esp
[1075*5-11] 605c-d /
Soul,  BK II, CH 4 [415*22-^8] 645c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14
[1154^20-31] 406c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 296a 16 Kepler: Harmonies
of  the  World, 1071b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 2-6 119c122d
esp  CH  5  121c-122a  /  Sixth Eiinead, TR VIII, CH II 348b-c; ch 18-21
351d-353d  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 10 3b-c; bk IV, par 26
25c-d;  par  29  26b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-18 48c-49b; par 21
49d50a;  par  23 50b-c; par 26, 51c; bk xi, par 1216 92b-93a; bk xh, par
ii  lOld;  par 18, 103a-b; par 40 109b-110a; bk xiii, par 44 122d / City
of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  30  261b-d;  bk  viii, ch ii, 272c; bk xi, ch 10
327d-328d;  ch  21-22  333a334c  esp  CH  22, 334c; bk xii, ch 1-3 342b,
d344b;  CH  14-17  350d-354a  esp  ch  14  350d351b,  ch  17 353a-354a /
Christian  Doctrine, bk I, CH 5-6 625d-626b; ch 8 626c-627a; ch 10 627b;
CH  22-23 629b-630c; ch 32 633c-d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i,
q  3,  a  i, rep 4 14b-15b; qq 9-10 38c-46d; q 14, a 9, ans 83b-d; a 13,
ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  a 15 89b-90b; q 18, a 3 106b-107c; q 19, a 7
114d115d; q 22, A I, rep 2 127d-128d; q 26, a i, REP 2 150b-c; Q 42, A 2
225d-227a;  q  43, a 2 230d-231c; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-278c; q 61, a 2,
ANS  315c-316a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 6r, A 5, ANS
58b-59d;  q 91, a i 208b-d; part hi, q I, A I, rep 3 701d-703a; a 5, rep
3  707a708c;  Q 2, A I, ANS 710a-711c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, pap^dise,
vii
[6472] 115d;
xiii
[52-66] 126a; xxiv
[130-141]
144a; xxix
[13-36]
150b-c; xxxiii 158b157d

[631a]
4<f  to  \f Chapter 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 79d-80a; pari hi, 173a
25 Montaigne: Essays, 293d 294a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c 31
\)^scKKT¥.^:  Discourse,  part iv, 52b-c / Meditations, III, 84a-b; 86a;
v,  94d-95a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 6 355b; def 8 355c; PROP 6
356b-c;  prop  11-13 358b 359d; prop 17 362b-363c; prop 19-20 363c-364a;
PROP  33,  scHOL 2, 367d-368c esp 368b-c; part II, PROP 44, coROL 2-PROP
47 390a-391a; PART V, PROP 17 456c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[1-12]
135b;
[372-382] 143b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  469  256a  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, general
schol,  370a-371a  35 Locke: Hinnan Understanding, bk h, ch xv, sect 3-4
162d-163b;  ch xvh, sect 16-17 172a'C; sect 20 172d-173c; ch xxiii, sect
21  209c;  BK  IV,  CH  X  349c-354c  esp sect 3-5 349d-350b, sect 8-1 i
351a-352a  35  Berkeley:  Human Kjiotvledge, sect 117 436a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  176b-c;  190c;  192c-d  /  Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 344b-c;
352a-b  /  Judgement,  592a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro,
156d157b;  PART  III,  306a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 608a-b;
epilogue  II, 684c-d 4^. The infinity of God: the freedom of an infinite
being  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xh,  ch 7 [1073* 3-10] 603a-b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 19-20 32b33a; bk vii, par 7 45a-d; par
20-21  49d-50a;  BK  xiii,  par 12 113b-d 19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica,
part i, q 2, a 3, rep I 12c-14a; q 7 31a-34c; q 14, a i, ans 75d76c; A 3
77d-78b; q 25, a 2, ans and rep i 144c-145b; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q
75,  a  5,  rep 1,4 382a-383b; q 79, a 2, ans 414d416a; q 86, a 2, rep i
462a-463a;  part  i-ii,  Q  I,  A  4,  rep I 612a-613a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64,  A  4,  rep 3 69b-70a; q 87, a 4, rep 2
188b-d;  PART  ii-ii,  q  20,  A  2,  rep  2  475d-476c;  q 24, a 8, ANS
495b-496a;  part hi, q i, a 2, rep 2 703a-704d; q 2, a i, ans 710a-711c;
q  3,  a  i,  REP  I  723b-724a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  92, a i, rep 6,12
1025c-1032b   23   HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  h,  162b-c  31  Descartes:
Meditations,  hi, 86a-88d / Objections and Replies, 112a-d; 123c-d; prop
hi  132d-133a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 2 355a; def 6-7 355b; prop
8-14  356d-360a;  prop  15,  scholPROP  17  360b-363c; prop 21, demoxNst
364a-c;  prop  29  366b-c;  prop  32-35  367a-369a;  part  II,  prop 1-4
373d-374c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vih [411-421] 241a

[631b]
29:  GOD  573  33  Pascal: Pensees, 2^2^^ 213b 216a; 469 256a 34 Nrwrov:
Principles,   bk   hi,   (;i;ni:rai.   scik)l,  370a  35  LocKi::  Human
Understanding, hk h, cm xv, SECT 2 4 162c 163b; sect 12 165b-c; ch xvii,
SECT  I  167d  168a; sect 16-17 172a-c; sect 20 172d-173c; ch xxih, sect
^-36  212d  213d:  BK  HI,  CH  VI,  sect  II  271b d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  117  436a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 188c; 192c-d; 201b c;
205a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  325d-326a;  344b c / Judgement, 590b-d 46
He(;i:l:  Philosophy  of  History,  parp  i,  237d238a;  246b-c  4/. The
perfection  or  goodness  of  God  New Testament: Mattheiu, 5:48 / Lul^,
18:19  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  h,  321d-323a  /  Timaeus,  447d-448a /
Theaetetus,  530b-531a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 7 602a' 603 b
9  Arisiotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 12 347a-b 12 Epictltus: Discourses, bk h,
ch  8  146a-147c  16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1009a 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 12 4a; bk hi, par 12 16b; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; bk
v,  par  19-20 32b-33a; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d esp par 4-7 44b-45d; par
16-23  48c-50c;  bk  x,  par  38 81a; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk xh, par 18,
103b;  BK  xiH,  par 1-5 llOd-llld; par 53 124d-125a,c / City of God, bk
xi,  ch  id  327d-328d;  bk  xh,  ch 1-3 342b,d-344b; ch 8-9 346d-348b /
Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 5-7 625d-626c; ch 31-32 633b-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 2, a I, rep 2 lOd-lld; a 3, ans and rep i
12c14a;  q  3, a I, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c-16a; A 7, rep 2 19a-c; q 4
20c-23b; q 6 28b-30d; q 13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; a ii, rep 2 73c-74b; q 18,
A  3 106b-107c; q 19, a i, rep 1-3 108d109c; Q 21, A I, rep 4 124b-125b;
q  51, a i, rep 3 275b-276b; q 61, a 3, rep 2 316a-d; q 62, A 8, ANS and
rep 1-2 323c-324a; q 66, a i, CONTRARY 343d-345c; q 84, a 2, ans and rep
3  442b-443c; q 91, a i, ans 484a-485b; q 100, A 2, ans 521c-522b; q 103
528a-534b passim; Q 104, A 3, rep 2 537b-d; a 4, ans 538a-c; q 105, A 4,
ans 541c-542a; a 5, ans 542a-543b; part i-ii, q I, a 4, REP I 612a-613a;
q  2, a 4, rep I 618a-d; q 9, a 6 662a-d; q 18, a i, ans 694a-d; q 19, a
4  705b-c;  q  22,  a  2,  rep i 721c722c; Q 24, A 3, REP 2 728c-729c 20
Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; q 64, a
4, ans and rep 3 69b-70a; part ii-ii, q 9, a 4, rep i 425d-426c; q 13, A
I, ans 444b-445a; q 17, a i, ans 457a-d; q 23, a 4, ans 485d-486b; q 34,
a  i, ans 559a-c; q 39, a 2, rep 3 575b-576b; g 184, A 2, ANS 629d-630d;
part  hi, q i, a i, ANS 701d-703a; q 23, a i, ans 833a-d; part hi SUPPL,
Q 91, A 2, rep 4,10 1017c-1020c; q 99, A 2, REP 3 1081a-d

[632a]
574  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (4,  The  divine  nature  in  itself: the divine
attributes.  4f.  The  perfection  or goodness of God.) 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxviii
[91-93] 97a; paradise, vii [64-66] 115d; xix
[40-90] 135c-136a
25  MotiTAiG^Ti:  Essays,ZQQc-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d;
53d  /  Meditations,  i,  166.-11c;  iii-iv,  86a-93a  /  Objections and
Replies, 123d-124c; def viii 130d; 142c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
33,  schol  2  367d-369a;  part  v,  prop  17, demonst 456c-d 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 580 276b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 370a-371a
passim 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect viii, div 78-81 485c-487a; sect xi,
div  106-107  499b500b  passim;  div  113, 502a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  81b-c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 205a-b / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  263a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  307a-d; 325d-326a; 342c; 345a-c;
351b352c  /  Judgement,  592a-c  4g.  The  intellect of God 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072^  14-29]  602d-603a;  ch 9 605a-d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1178^8-23]
433b-c  12 'EvicT'ETUs'. Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120d-121c; bk II, ch 8,
146a  17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr ix, ch i 65d-66d / Fifth Ennead
208a-251d  esp tr v-vi 228b237d,TRix246c-251d 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  viii, ch 6 268d269c; bk xi, ch 21 333a-d; bk xii, ch 17 353a354a; bk
xxii,  ch  29,  614b  / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 13 627d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, REP 2-3 14b-15b; q 14, aa 1-4
75d-79a;  q  18,  A  3  106b-107c;  q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; a 2, rep 4
109c-110b; a 3, rep 6 llOb-lllc; a 4, ans and rep 4 lllc-112c; q 26, a 2
150c-151a; Q 27, A 3, rep 3 155c-156a; q 46, a 2, rep 3 253a-255a; q 50,
a  i,  ans 269b-270a; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 55, a i, ans and rep 3
289a-d;  a  3,  ans 291a-d; q 57, a i, ans 295a-d; a 2, ANS 295d-297a; q
59,  a 2, ans 307c-308b; Q 79, A I, ans 414a-d; a 2, ans 414d-416a; a 4,
ANS  417a-418c; a 10, rep 2 423d-424d; q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c; q 85, a
5, ans 457d458d; Q 87, A I, ans 465a-466c; a 3, ans 467b468a; q 89, a i,
ans 473b-475a; q 105, a i, rep 2 538d-539c; a 3, ans 540c-541b; q 116, A
I,  ANS  592d-593d; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 612a-613a; q 19, a 4, ans
and rep 3 705b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51,

[632b]
4^  to  Ah  A  I,  REP  2  12b-13c;  Q  61,  A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 93, A I
215b,d-216c;  part  hi, q 6, a 2, ans 741c-742a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  ii,  aph  15  149a  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, prop 17, schol 362c363c; PROP 21 364a-c; prop
32,  corol  2 367b; prop 33, SCHOL 2, 368b-c; part ii, prop i 373d-374a;
prop  3-6 374a-375a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 10,
123b;  ch  x,  sect  9  143a-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason,, 33a-d; 52c-53b /
Practical  Reason,  303b-304a;  344b-c;  350c-351b  / Judgement, 590b-d;
592a-c;  600d-601c;  610b613a,c  4:h. The happiness and glory of God Old
Testament: Exodus, 15:1-21; 33:13-23 / / Chronicles, 16:23-27; 29:11-13—
(D)  /  Paralipomenon,  16:23-27; 29:11-13 / Psalms, 8; 19; 24; 57:5-11;
96:3-6;  104:1; 113:4; 138:5; 145:11-12— (D) Psalms, 8; 18; 23; 56:5-11;
95:3-6;  103:1;  112:4;  137:5;  144:1112  /  Isaiah,  6:1-4; 42:8— (Z))
Isaias,  6:1-4;  42:8  Apocrypha: Judith, 16:13— (D) GT, Judith, 16:16 /
Rest  of  Esther,  13:12-14—  (D)  OT,  Esther, 13:12-14 / Song of Three
Children, 283i-(D) OT, Daniel, 3:51-53 New Testament: Mar/{, 8:38 /John,
5:44;  8:54  /  Hebrews,  2:10  /  I Peter, 4:7-11 / // Peter, 1:16-18 /
Revelation,  5:9-14;  7:9-12;  21—  (D) Apocalypse, 5:9-14; 7:9-12; 21 8
Aristotle:   Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072^  13-29]  602d-603a  9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [1154^^20-31]  406c;  BK  X, ch 8
[1178^8-23] 433b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 4 111c / City
of  God,  bk  v,  ch  14  220a-d; bk viii, CH 6 268d'269c; bk xii, ch 17
353a-354a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 26 150a-152a,c; q 62,
a  3,  rep 3 319c-320b; a 4, ans 320b'321b; q 63, a 3 327b-328b; q 65, a
2,  ans  340b-341b;  q  70, a 2, ans 364b-365a; q 73, A 2, REP 3 371b-d;
part  i-ii, q 2, a 2, rep 2 616d-617b; a 3, ans and rep i 617b618a; q 3,
a i, rep i 622c-623a; a 2, rep 1,4 623a-624b; a 8, rep 2 628d-629c; q 5,
a  3,  REP  2  638b-639a; a 7, ans 642a-d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  8, A 4, ans 759b-d; q 16, a 4, rep 2 799b-800b; Q 26, A I,
REP  2  845b-846a; part hi suppl, q 71, A 8, REP I 909d-910d; q 92, a i,
rep 5 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[1-9]
106a;  XXXIII  [46-145]  156c-157d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 17
456G-d;  PROP 35-36 460d-461c 32 Milton: Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a /
Paradise Lost, bk hi [56-415] 136b-144b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 233, 216a

[633a]
5/0 5a Chapter 29: GOD 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 347d-348b / Judgement,
594d
[fn
i]  5.  The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii, 321d-322d / Timaeus, 447b-458b;465d-466a 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk vti, ch i 326a-327b; BK viii, CH 1-6 334a-346b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk vii, ch 14 [1154^20-31] 406c; BK X, CH 8 [ii78''8-27] 433b-c
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 22, 195a-b; bk IV, ch II, 240d-241a
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 4 257b; bk V, SECT 8 269d-270b; bk
vi,  sect 40-46 277d-278d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1017b1018a;
lOrib  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 13 149b-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 4 2a; par 10 3b-c; BK IV, par 25 25c; bk iv, par
^-bk  v,  par I 26c-27b; bk vii, par 1-8, 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; bk
x, par 38 81a; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk XIII, par 19 115c-d / City of God,
BK  VII,  CH 29-31 261a-262a; bk viii, ch i-io 264b,d-271d; bk x, ch 1-2
298b,d-300a;  bk  XI,  ch  24  335c-336a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i,
CH9-io627a'b  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 1425 75c-150a; q
84, a 2, ans 442b-443c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[1-3]
106a; [97-142] 107b-d; 11 [112-148] 109a-b; x
[1-27] 120b-c; XIII [52-87] 126a-b; xix [40-90]
135c-136a; xxvii
[100-120]
148b-c;  xxviii  148d-150b;  xxxiii [76-145] 157a-d 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  428c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38a 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  iv,  52a-d  /  Objections and Replies, 123c-d; 214a-d;
229c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[412-436]
241a-b  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol, 369b-371a / Optics,
bk  hi,  542a-543a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvii, SECT I
167d-168a;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  11-12  271b-272b  35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  57 423d424a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div
106  499b-c; div 113 502a-d 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d; 187d-188a 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  439a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
81b-c;  183c;307b-c;  346b-347a  42  Kant:  Practical Reason, 303b-304a;
321b-c;   325d-326a;   327d-328b;   342c;   344b-c;  345a-c;  347d-348b;
350c-351a; 352a-c / Judgement, 592a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov^
bk v, 120d-121c

[633b]
575  5a.  God  as first and as exemplar cause: the relation of divine to
natural causation Old Ti-srAMFNi: Genesis, 1-2; 7:4 / Nehcmiah, 9:6— (D)
// Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 9:1-9; 12; 26:7-14; 28:24-27; 36:24-42:2 / Psalms,
8:3;  33:6-9; 65:5-13; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 95:4-5; 96:5; 102:25-27; 104;
107:23-30; 115:3; 119:73; 121:2; 136:5-9; 146:5-6; 147-148 — (D) Psalms,
8:4;  32:6-9;  64:6-14; 73:16-17; 88:1213; 94:4-5; 95:5; 101:26-28; 103;
106:23-30;  113:3;  118:73;  120:2; 135:5-9; 145:5-6; 146148 / Proverbs,
3:19   /  Isaiah,  40:26-28;  42:5;  44:24;  45:7-12,18;  48:13;  51:13;
6^:iy-{0) Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5; 44:24; 45:7-12,18; 48:13; 51:13; 65:17
/  Jeremiah,  10:12;  27:5; 3' -355 51:15-16— (D) Jeremias, 10:12; 27:5;
31:35;  51:15-16  /  Amos, 5:8 / Zechariah, 12:1 — (D) Zacharias, 12:1 /
Malachi,  2:10—  (D)  Malachias,  2:10 Apocrypha: Judith, 16:14— (D) OT,
Judith, 16:17 / Rest of Esther, 13:10— (D) OT, Esther, 13:10 / Wisdom of
Solomon, 1:14; 2:23; 9:1-2; 11:17 — (D) OT, Boo/{of Wisdom, i :i4; 2:23;
9:1-2; 11:18 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:1; 24:8-9; 33:10-13; 39:16-35; 43— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1;  24:12-14;  33:10-14; 39:21-41; 43 / Bel and
Dragon,  5—  (Z))  OT,  Daniel, 14:4 / II Maccabees, 7:23,28— (D) OT, //
Machabees, 7:23,28 New Testament: John, 1:1-3 / Acts, 7:49-50; 14:14-17;
17:22-28  / Colossians, 1:16-17 / Hebrews, 1:10-11; 2:10; 3:4; 11:3 / II
Peter, 3:5-7 / Revelation, 4:11; 10:6; 14:7— (D) Apocalypse, 4:11; 10:6;
14:7  7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 427c-429c / Timaeus, 447a-448b / Sophist,
577d-578b  / Statesman, 587a-589c / Laws, bk x, 758b-765c esp 762b765c 8
Aristotle:   Physics,   bk  viii,  ch  1-6  334a346b  /  Generation  and
Corruption, bk 11, ch 10
[336^25-34] 438d; [337^15-23] 439a-h/ Metaphysics, BK I, CH 2 [983*7-9] 501b; bk xii, ch 4
[1070^22-35] 600b; CH
5  [1071*30-36]  601a 9 Aristotle: Motion ofAnimals, ch 3 [699*11]- CH 4
[700*5]  234a-235a  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [146-194] 63a-c
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 14 120d-121c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk
i,  5a-b  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a / Harmonies of the World,
1017b-1018a;  1025a-b;  1049b-1050a; 1061a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
i,  par  10 3b-c; par 12 4a; bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c; bk xi, par 4-1 1
90a-92b;  bk  xii,  par  2-9  99c-101c;  par  14-40 102b-110a esp par 38
108d-109a;  bk  XIII, par 6-48 112a-124a / City of God, bk vii, CH 29-31
261a-262a;  bk  viii, ch i 264b,d265b; ch 4-6 266d-269c; ch 9 270d-271a;
bk XI, CH 4-24 324a-336a; bk xii 342b,d-360a,c; BK XIX, CH 13 519a-520a;
bk xxi, ch 4 562a-

[634a]
(5.  The  divine  nature  in relation to the world or creatures. 5a, God
asfirst  and  as  exemplar  cause:  the  relation  of  divine to natural
causation.^  563c;  CH 7-8 565d'568d; bk xxii, ch 2 587b588a / Christian
Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d; CH 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 2, a 3, ANS and REP 2 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; A 2, ANS
15c-16a;  a  4,  ans 16d-17c; a 5, rep 2 17c-18b; a 6, ans 18c-19a; a 7,
ans  and  rep  i 19a-c; A 8, ans and rep 1-2 19d-20c; q 4 20c23b esp A 3
22b-23b;  q 18, aa 3-4 106b108c; Q 26, A 4 151c-152a,c; q 51, a i, rep 3
275b-276b; q 52, a 2 279b-280a; q 56, a 2, ans 292d-294a; q 60, a i, rep
2-3  310b311a;  Q  65 339a-343c; q 74, a 3, rep i 375a377a,c; q 75, a i,
rep i 378b-379c; q 76, a 5, rep I 394c-396a; q 83, a i, rep 3 436d-438a;
Q 84, A 2, ANS and rep 3 442b-443c; a 4, rep i 444d-446b; q 88, a 3, rep
2 472c-473a; q 89, A I, REP 3 473b-475a; q 92, a i, rep i 488d489d; A 2,
REP  2  489d-490c;  a  4,  ans  491b-d;  Q  93 492a-501c; q 94, a 3, ans
504a-505a;  qq  103-105  528a-545b; q 116 592d-595c; part i-ii, Q I, A 2
610b-611b;  q  2, a 3, ans 617b618a; q 6, a i, rep 3 644d-646a; q 9, a 6
662a-d;  q  10, a 4 665d-666a,c; q 12, a 5, ans 672a-c; q 17, a 8, rep 2
692a-c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, A 3, ans 72d-73d;
q  66,  a  i,  rep  3  75b-76b; Q 68, A I, ANS 87c-89c; q 79, a i, rep 3
156b157b;  A  2,  ANS  and  rep  i 157b-158a; q 80, a i, ANS and rep 2-3
159d-160c;  q 85, a 6 182d184a; q 93, a i 215b,d-216c; q 100, a 6, rep 2
257c-258c; q 102, a 3, ans 272b-276c; q 109, A I, ans 338b-339c; q no, a
i,  rep 2 347d349a; q hi, a 2, ans 352d-353d; part ii-ii, q 18, A 4, ANS
464c-465a;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  5,  rep  3  715a-716b;  q 5, a 3, rep 2
737d-739a;  Q 13, A 3, contrary 782b-783b; part hi SUPPL, Q 74, A 2, rep
3  926c-927c;  Q 75, a 3 938a-939d; q 88, a i, ans lOOOd-lOOld 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-108] 107b; II
[i 12-148]
109a-b; xxvii
[100-120]
148b-c; XXIX [10-36] 150b-c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78d-79a;  79d-80a; part II,
113b-c;  149d;  part hi, 185d; 241c242a; part iv, 272b-c 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  fourth  day,  245b-c  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation,
390d-391a; 406b-407b; 415b-417a esp 416b-c; 426a-429b; 443a-c; 490d-493a
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 2c-d; 4b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  v,  55d-56a  /  Meditations,  in  81d-89a  esp  84b-85a,  87b88c /
Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 158b161d; 213b-214d; 229c-d

[634b]
576  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5a  to 5b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 16-18
362a363c; prop 24-29 365a-366c; prop 33, schol 2 367d-369a; part h, prop
7  375a-c;  prop  10,  SCHOL  376d-377a  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[80-134] 137a138a;
[630-735]
149a-151b; bk v
[468-474]
185b; BK VII 217a-231a esp
[162-169] 220b,
[601-640] 230a-231a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 77 186a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol,
369b-370a  /  Optics, bk hi, 528b-529a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect 2 178c; ch xxiii, sect 28 211b-d; bk iv, CH HI, sect
28-29  322a-323a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 25-33 417d-419a esp
sect  32  418d-419a;  sect  36  419c-d;  sect  51-53  422d-423a; sect 57
423d424a; sect 60-75 424b-427d; sect 105-109 433b-434b; sect 141 441a-b;
sect   146-153   442a-444a   esp  sect  150  442d-443b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  54-57  474b-475d  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
140b,d-145c;  177b-179b;  187a-191d;  205a-209a;  236b-240b esp 239a-c /
Practical  Reason,  332d-337a,c  esp  334b335c  /  ]udgement, 569a-570a;
581b-582c;  592c-596c;  597d-599d;  600d-601c; 608b-609a; 610b-613a,c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 156d157b; PART I, 245d-246c; part
iv,  368d-369a,c  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 239d; 243c-d 5b. God as
final  cause: the motion of all things toward God Old Testament: Exodus,
33:13-23 / Deuteronomy, 4 :29 / / Chronicles, 28 :^— (D) IParalipomenon,
28:9  / // Chronicles, 15 :2-4,i2-i5— (£)) U Paralipomenon, 15:2-4,12-15
/  Psalms, 24:6; 27:4-9; 42; 63; 70:4; 73:25-28; 84; 119:10— (D) Psalms,
2^:6;  26:4-9;  41;  62;  69:5;  72:2528;  83; 118:10 / Proverbs, 16:4 /
Isaiah,  26:89;  43:7;  58:2—  (D) Isaias, 26:8-9; 43:7; 58:2 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of Solomon, 1:1; 13:1-7— (D) OT, Book^of Wisdom, 1:1; 13:1-7 New
Testament:  Romans,  3:10-11  /  Colossians,  1:16-17  / Hebrews, 2:10 /
Revelation,  4:11  —  (D)  Apocalypse, 4:11 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk
xii, ch 7 [1072^ 23-'^4] 602 b-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch 2
41a-c  /  Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch 7, 243b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i,  par  i,  la;  par 5, 2b; BK IV, par 15-19 23a-24b; bk v, par 1-2
27a-c;  bk x, par 29-33 78d-80b; bk xiii, par 3 lllb-c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  4  266d-267c;  CH 8-9 270a-271a; bk x, ch 1-3 298b,d-301a; BK
XII, CH I 342b,d-343c; bk xix, ch 13 519a520a / Christian Doctrine, bk i
624a-636a,c  esp  CH 3-5 625b-626a, ch 9-1 i 627a-c, ch 22-23 629b-630c,
ch 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 4, ans 5a-b; q
2, a i, rep i lOd-lld; a 3, ans

[635a]
5c Chapter 29: GOD 577 12c-14a; q 6, a :?, ans 29c 30b; a 4 30b d; Q 12,
A  I,  ANS  50c  51c;  y i^, a 11, rlp 2 73c74b; Q 19, A I, Ri:i> i 108d
109c;  q 26, a t, 151a-c; Q 44, A 4 241a-d; q 60. a 5 313b 314c; Q 62, a
I,  ANS 317d-318c; q 65, a 2 340b-341b; Q 103, A 2 529a-530a; part i-ii,
c.) i, a H 615a-c; q 2, a 4, rki» i 618a-d; a 5, rep ^ 618d 619c; Q 9, A
6  662a-d; g 11, a t^, rep ^ 667d66Sd; Q 12, A 3, rep i 670d 671b; q 16,
a 3, contrary and rep 3 685b-686a; q 34, a 3, ANS 770c-771c 20 i\QiTNAs:
Sutmna  Theologica,  part i-ii, o 55, A 2, rep 3 27a-d; q 70, a i, rep 2
101d-102d;  Q 72, a 4, ANS 114a-115a; a 5, ans 115a-116b; Q 73, a 3, ANS
121c-122b;  a 9, ans 126d-128a; Q 79, a I, ANS 156b-157b; q 91, a i, rep
3  208b-d;  q  99,  a 3, ans 247a-248a; a 4, ans 248a-d; q 100, a 6, ans
257c-258c;  qq  101-103  265d-304a  passim;  part  ii-ii,  q 5, a i, ans
410a-411b; q 19, a 2, rep 2 465d-466d; q 20, A I, rep I 474d-475d; q 24,
a 4, ans 491d492b; Q 26, A 13, rep 3 519d-520d; 34, a i, rep 3 559a-c; q
44,  a  2, rep 2,4 593d-594c; PART III, Q 2, A II, ans 721c-722b; q 6, a
i, rep I 740b-741b; part hi suppl, q 91, a 3, REP 6 1020d-1022c; q 96, a
i,  rep  4  1050a1052a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, i [94-142]
107b-d; iv[i24-i32] 112a; XXVI [16-51] 146a-b; XXVIII 148d-150b; xxxii
[i39]-xxxiii
[145]
156a-157d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 428c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  v  [468-474]  185b;  BK XII [451-465] 329a; [537-551] 331a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  314  229a; 425-426 243b244b; 430 245a-247b; 438 251a;
487-489  258b-259a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 107-109 433d-434b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b-240b  /  Practical  Reason, 337a-348b esp
340c-341a,  344a-347d  /Judgement,  584c-d;  587a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
ofHistory,  part hi, 306a-c 5c. The power of God: the divine omnipotence
Old  Testament: Genesis, 18:13-14 / Exodus, 15:1-21; 19:5 / Deuteronomy,
10:14;  32:39 / / Samuel, 2:6-8— (D) / Kings, 2:6-^ / // Samuel, 22— (D)
II  Kings,  22 / / Chronicles, 29:10-19— (D) / Paralipomenon, 29:10-19 /
//  Chronicles,  20:6: 25:8— (D) // Paralipomenon, 20:6; 25 :8 / Job esp
9,  12,  26,  34,  36:1-42:3 / Psalms, 29; 33; 47; 50:7-12; 62; 65:5-13;
66:1-7;  76;  78;  89:8-13;  95-96;  104; 107:23-41; 135; 147:1-11 — (D)
Psalms, 28; 32; 46; 49:7-12; 61; 64:614; 65:1-7; 75; 77; 88:9-14; 94-95;
103;  106:23-41;  134;  146 / Proverbs, 16:33 / Isaiah, 2:10-22; 26:4-6;
40:9-31;  43:13;  44:24-28;  55:10-11—  (Z))  Isaias,  2:10-22;  26:4-6;
40:931;  43:13;  44:24-28; 55:10-11 / Jeremiah, 10:12-13; 18:1-10; 27:5;
32:27— (D) JeremiaSy 10:12-13; 18:1-10; 27:5; 32:27 / Ezel{iel, 18:4

[635b]
— (D) Ezechiel, 18:4 / Daniel, 2 esp 2:19-23, 2^^6-47; 4 5 — (D) Daniel,
2  esp  2:19-23, 2:36-47; 3:98 5:31 / Hosea,y.-j-\^ — {D) Osee, 5:7-14 /
Amos, 9 Apocrypha: Judith, 16:1 v 17— (D) OT, Judith, 16:15-21 / Rest of
Esther,  1^9  n  —  (D)  OT, Esther, iy.c)-ii / Wisdom of Solomon, 7:16;
11:17-22;  i2:8-i8-(D)  err,  Book^of  Wisdom, 7:16; 11:18-2^; 12:8-18 /
Ecclesiasticus, 10:1217; 15:18; 16:18-19; ,8:i-7-(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
10:15-21;  15:19; 16:18-19; 18:1-6 / Bel and Dragon, 5— (D) O T, Daniel,
14:4  /  //  Maccabees,  8:i8-(D)  OT, // Machabees, 8:18 New Testament:
Matthew,  3:9;  19:16-26  esp  19:26 / Marl{, 10:17-27 esp 10:27 / Luke,
1:2638  esp 1:37; 18:18-27 esp 18:27 / Acts, 17:1534 / Romans, 9:19-23 /
Ephesians,  1:15-23;  6:10-11 / Revelation, 19:6— (D) Apocalypse, 19:6 7
Plato:  Timaeus,  465d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  682d683a;  bk  x, 766d-767c 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7 [1073*310] 603a-b 14 Plutarch:
Coriolanus,  191d-192b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 12 4a; bk v,
par  20  32d-33a;  bk  vh,  par  6-7  44d-45d / City of God, bk v, ch 10
215c-216c;  bk  vh, ch 30 261b-d; bk xii, ch 25 358b-359a; bk xiv, ch 27
396c-397a;  bk  xxi, ch 5-8 563d-568d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 2, a 3, REP I 12c-14a; q 3, a i, rep 1,4 14b-15b; q 25 143c-150a; q
26,  a 4, ans 151c-152a,c; q 45, A 2 242d-244a; a 5 245c-247a; q 52, a 2
279b280a;  q  63,  a 3 327b-328b; q 65, a 3, rep 3 341c-342b; q 75, a 5,
rep i 382a-383b; a 6, rep 2 383c-384c; q 76, a 5, rep i 394c-396a; Q 77,
A  I,  ANS  399c-401b;  a 2, ans 401b-d; Q 91, A I, REP I 484a-485b; a 2
485b-486b;  Q  92, A I, REP 3 488d-489d; a 2, rep 2 489d490c; Q 104, A 3
537b-d;  a 4, ans and rep 1-2 538a-c; q no, a 2, ans 565d-566d; q 112, a
i,  ANS 571d-573a; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 612a-613a; q 2, a 4, rep i
618a-d;  q 5, a 7, ans and rep i 642a-d; q 6, a 4, rep i 647b648a; q 17,
a  8,  rep  2  692a-c;  q  19,  a  5,  rep 2 705d-707a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, A 4, ans 69b-70a; q 68, a 4, ans 91b-92c; q
80, A 3, REP I 161d-162b; q 88, a i, ans 193a194b; Q 113, A 9 368d-369c;
part  ii-ii,  q i, A 8, rep 2 387a-388c; q 23, a 2, rep 3 483d484d; PART
hi,  q i, a 3, rep 2 704d-706a; q 3, a 7, ans 728a-729a; q 7, a 7, rep 2
750a-d;  a 12, REP 2 754c-755c; q 13 779d-784a; q 15, A 8, REP 3 794a-c;
a  9,  rep  3  794c-795b;  q  20,  A  I,  ans  821b-822c; q 60, a 5, ans
850b-851b;  PART HI SUPPL, q 71, A 13, REP 3 915d-916c; Q 72, A 2, REP I
919a-920c; q 74, a 3, ans and REP 2-3 927c-928d; a 8, rep 3 933b-934a; q
76,  A  I, REP 1-2 939d-941a; q 82, a i, ans 968a-970c; q 83, a 2, rep 3
976c-978c; a 3, ANS 978c-980d; q 87, a 2, rep 2 998d-999d

[636a]
(5.  T^e  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world or creatures. 5c.
Thepower of God: the divine omnipotence.^ 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii,
160c-161a;  162c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  428c  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 17c; 81a 31 Descartes: Objections aitd Replies,
llQh-\l2a;   158b-159a;229a-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17
362b-363c;  PROP 33, scHOL 2-prop 35 367d'369a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  ii  [106-225]  113b116a; BK III [372-415] 143b-144b; bk vii [139173]
220a-221a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 654 292b 35 Locke : Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  xv,  sect 12 165b-c; ch xxi, sect 2 178c; ch XXIII, sect 28
211b-d;  bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b; bk iv, ch x, sect 4 350a 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 33 419a; SECT 36 419c-d; sect 152 443c-d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  56  475a-b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  334a-b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  180b-c; 181b; 192c-d / Practical Reason, 351b-352c / Judgement,
504b-d;  592a-c; 594d [fn i]; 600d-601c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro, 156d157b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790d 5d. The
immanence  of God: the divine omnipresence Old Testament: Genesis, 28:15
/ Exodus, 20:24; 25:8; 29:45-46 / Leviticus, 2.6:11-12. / Numbers, 5:1-3
/Joshua,  y.io-ii—  {D) Josue, 3:10II / II Samuel, 7:1-13— (D) // Kings,
7:1-13  /  /  Kings,  6:11-13  ; 8 :i2-i3,26-30— (D) III Kings, 6:11-13;
8:12-13,26-30  /  / Chronicles, 17:1-12 — (D) I Paralipomenon, ij:i-i2 /
Psalms, 6?>\j8,16-18; 119:151; 139 esp 139:7-12; 145:18-19 — (D) Psalms,
67:8-9,17-19;  118:151;  138  esp 138:7-12; 144:18-19 / Proverbs, 15:3 /
Isaiahy  50:7-9—  (D)  Isaias, ^o :']-() I Jeremiah, 23:24 (D) Jeremias,
23:24  /  Amos,  9:1-4  /  Zechariahy  8:3— (D) Zachariah,S:i Apocrypha:
Wisdom  ofSolomon,  1:7;  12:1—  (D)  OT, BooI{ of Wisdom, 1:7; 12:1 New
Testament:  /oA/z,  1:10  /  Acts,  7:49;  17:2229  /  Romans, 11:^6 / I
Corinthians,  6:15-20  /  //  Corinthians,  6:14-18  / Ephesiafts, 4:6 /
Coloisians,  i  :i6-i9;  2:8-13  / ^^ Timothy, i :i^ [ Hebrews, 13:5 / I
John,  4:4-16  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c 12
AuRFLius:  Meditations,  bk  ii, sect i 256b,d; BK VII, sect 9 280b-c 17
Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 16, 75c-d / Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch
7  242d-243c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; BK III, par
10  15b-d; par 18 18b; bk iv, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4
36a-b; bk

[636b]
578  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5d to 5e VII, par 1-2 43b-44a; par 7 45a-d; par 21
49d50a;  BK  X,  par  8-10  73b-74a;  bk  xii,  par  7 lOOd-lOla; par 21
103d-104a  /  City  ofGod, bk VII, ch 6, 248a; ch 30 261b-d; bk x, ch 14
307c-308a;  bk  xii,  ch  25 358b-359a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 12
627c-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8 34c38c; Q 51, a 3, REP
3  277a-278c; q 52, a 2 279b-280a; q 90, a i 480d-481d; part i-ii, Q 17,
A  8,  REP 2 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 26, A 2,
rep  3 511a-d; part hi suppl, q 84, a 2 REP I 984c-985d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  paradise,  xxxiii  [7693] 157a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
428c-d  31  Descartes:  Meditations, vi, 99c 31 S-piNoza: Ethics, part i
355a-372d  esp  def 3-5 355b, AXIOM 1-2 355c-d, prop 2-8 355d-357d, PROP
10,   scHOL  358a-b,  prop  13,  corol-prop  18  359d-363c,  prop  22-23
364d-365a,  prop  25  365b, prop 28-31 365c-367a, prop 33 367b369a; part
ii,  prop  i-ii 373d'377c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [334-346] 306b
34  Newton:  Principles, bk hi, general schol, 370a-371a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xiii, SECT 18 152a-c; ch xv, sect 2-4 162c163b
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 149-150 442d-443b; sect 155 444b-c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  192c-d  / Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 351b-352c /
Judgement,  580c-d;  592a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
156d157b;  PART  I,  224a-b;  227d-228a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
217c-218a;  bk  XIV,  608a-b;  bk  xv,  631a-c  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk vi, 153b-d 5e. The transcendence of God: the divine aseity
Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:11  /  I  Samuel,  2:2  (D)  / Kings, 2:2/1
Chronicles,  17:20—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon, 17:20 / Job, ii:'j-g; 33:12;
35:6-7;  36:22-42:3  /  Psalms, 89:6-8; 97:9; 99:2; 113:4-5— (D) Psalms,
88:7-9;  96:9;  98:2;  112:4-5  / Isaiah, 29:16; 40:12-26; 45:9; 46:5,9;
55:8-9—  (D)  Isaias,  29:16;  40:12-26;  45:9; 46:5,9; 55:8-9 / Daniel,
4:35—  (D)  Daniel,  4:32 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 11:22; 12:12 (D)
OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom, 11:23; 12:12 / Ecclesiasticus, 16:20-21; 18:4-7—
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  16:20-21;  18:2-6 New Testament: John, 3:31 /
Acts,  7:47-50  / Romans, 9:19-21 / Ephesians, 1:19-23; 4:6 / / Timothy,
6:15-16  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk xii, ch 10 [1075* 12-16] 605d 9
Aristotle: Motion ofAnimals, ch 3 [699*11]- CH 4 [700^5] 234a-235a

[637a]
5/  Chapter 29: GOD 579 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-^ lb- 2a;
BK III, par lo, 15c-d; bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk VII, par 17 49a; bk x, par
8-10  73b-74a  /  City  of  God,  BK  VII, CH 30 261 b-d; bk xii, cii 17
353a-354a  19  Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica,  part  i,  o  3, a i, REP I
14b-15b;  a  8  19d-20c;  o  8,  a i, ans and REP 1,3 34d-35c; q 18, a 4
107d-108c;  q 51, A 3, REP 3 277a-278c; q 61, a 3, rep 2 316a d; Q 90, a
i,  ans  480d-481d;  q  103,  a  2 529a530a; part i-ii, q 17, a 8, rep 2
692a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[112148]
109a-b; xiii
[52-66]
126a; xix
[40-66]
135c-d; xxviii 148d-150b; xxix
[127-145]
151c-d  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, WOh-Wla; 123c-d; 158b-159a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk hi, ch vi, SECT 11-12 271b-272b 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 56 475a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
192c-d  /  Practical  Reason, 334b-335b; 342c /Judgement, 566c-d; 580c-d
5/.  God's  knowledge:  the  divine  omniscience;  the  divine ideas Old
Testament:  Deuteronomy,  31  : 19-21 / 1 Samuel, 2:3; i6:y—{D) I Kings,
2:3;  16:7  /  /  Chronicles,  28:9  (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  28:9 / Job,
12:12-25;  21:22; 22:12-14; 24:1; 28:3,10-28; 34:21-25; 42:2-3 / Psalms,
33:315; 44:20-21; 69:5; 73:11; 94:7-12; 113:4-6; 139; 147:4-5,15-18— (D)
Psalms,  32:3-15; 43:21-22; 68:6; 72:11; 93:7-12; 112:4-6; 138; 146:4-5;
147:15-18  /  Proverbs,  3:19-20;  5:21;  15:3,11; 16:2; 24:12 / Isaiah,
29:15-16;   40:1314,27-28;  46:9-10;  47:10-11—  (D)  Isaias,  29:15-16;
40:13-14,27-28;  46:9-10;  47:10-11  / Jeremiah, 1:5; 16:14-17; 17:9-10;
20:12;  23:23-24—  (D)  Jeremias, 1:5; 16:14-17; 17:910; 20:12; 23:23-24
Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  13:12;  14:14-19—  (D) OT, Esther, 13:12;
14:14-19  /  Wisdom of Solomon, 1:6-11— (D) OT, Bool^of Wisdom, 1:6-11 /
Ecclesiasticus,  15:18-19;  16:17-19;  17:15,17-20;  23:18-20; 39:19-20;
42:18-21—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,  15:19-20;  16:16-20;  17:13-17;
23:25-29;  39:24-25; 42:18-22 / Susanna, 42-44— (D) OT, Daniel, 13:42-44
New Testament :/oA«, 1:1-3; 6:64,70-71; 14:6/ Romans, 8:27; 11:33-36 / /
Corinthians,  1:25;  2:6-16;  3:18-20  /  Colossians,  2:2-3  / Hebrews,
4:12-13  /  I  John,  3:18-20  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 140d / Timaeus, 465d /
Parmenides,  489d-490d  / Laws, bk x, 766d767c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk i, ch 2 [982^28983^11] 501a-b; bk xii, ch 7
[1072^14-29]
602d-603a;   ch   9  605a-d;  ch  10  [1075^19-24]  606c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 14 120d-121c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect
44, 278b

[637b]
17 Pi.oiiNns: Third Ennead, tr ix 136a 138a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, f:ii
4  209d 210c; ch 6-7 211a-212c; tr mi, ch H i^ 219d 224b; tr iv, CM 2 tr
IX,  ch 14 227b 251d 18 \\JG\Jsnii}L:Confesstons, bk xii, par iH,103a-b;
bk  xiii,  par 19 llSc-d / City of Cod, hk v, ch 9-10 213b 216c; bk vii,
ch  ^o  261b  d; bk xi, ch 10 327d 328d; cii 21 333a d; bk xii, ch 17-18
353a  354d;  bk xx, ch 15 543d 544b; bk XXII, CH 2 587b-588a / Christian
Doctrine,  BK  I,  CH 9-10 627a-b; cii 13 627d; ch 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, rep i 14b-15b; a 6, ri:p i 18c-19a;
q  4, a 2, rep 3 21b-22b; qq 14-15 75c-94a; q 18, a 4 107d-108c; q 19, a
3,  rep  6  llOb-lllc;  q  34, A 3, ans and rep 3-4 188b-189a; q 44, a 3
240b-241a;  q  55,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  289a-d;  a 2, ANS and rep i
289d-290d;  a 3, ans and rep I 291a-d; q 56, a 2, ans 292d-294a; g 57, A
I,  ans  295a-d;  a  2,  ans  295d-297a;  a  3,  ans 297b-298a; a 4, ans
298a-299a; q 62, a 9, ans 324a-325b; q 63, a 7, rep 2 331c-332b; q 79, A
10,  REP 2 423d-424d; q 84, a 2, ans 442b443c; A 4, REP I 444d-446b; a 5
446c-447c;  q  85,  A 4, ans 457a-d; q 86, a 4, ans 463d464d; q 87, a i,
ans  465a-466c;  a 3, ans 467b468a; q 89, a i, ans 473b-475a; q 93, a 4,
ans  494c-495b;  a 8, ans 499b-500c; q 105, A 3 540c-541b; q 107, aa 2-3
550b-551c;  part  i-ii,  Q  I,  A  4,  REP  I  612a-613a;  q 2, a 3, ans
617b-618a;  g 3, a 5, rep i 626b-627a; g 14, A I, REP 2 677b-678a; g 40,
a  3, rep i 794c795a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A I,
rep 2 12b-13c; g 61, a 5, ans 58b-59d; g 79, A I, ANS 156b-157b; g 91, a
3,  rep i 209d-210c; g 93, a i 215b,d-216c; g 100, a 9, ans 261b-262b; g
102,  a i, ans 270c-271b; g no, A 2, rep 2 349a-d; part ii-ii, g 2, a 6,
rep  3 395b-396a; g 9, a i, rep i 423c-424b; g II, A 4, REP I 441b-442b;
g  33, a 7, rep i 556a-557d; part hi, g 3, a 8, ans 729b-730b; g 5, A 4,
ANS  739a-740b;  g  7, a 12, ans 754c755c; g 13, a i, rep 2 780a-781b; g
18,  a  4,  rep  I  813a-d;  g  21, a i, rep 2 823d-824d; g 60, A 4, ANS
849c-850b; part hi suppl, g 72, A I, ANS and REP 5 917c-919a; a 2, rep 4
919a920c;  g 84, a 2, ans 984c-985d; g 88, a 3, ans 1002d-1004b; g 91, a
3,  ans  1020d-1022c;  g  92,  A  I, REP 2 1025c-1032b; g 94, a i, rep 2
1040d-1041b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
[94112] 118a; XV [49-63] 128d-129a; xvii [13-45]
132b-c;  XXVI  [103-108]  146d-147a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
iv,  stanza 138-154 106b-108b//V««VPr/<?j/Vra/f [15,236256] 456b-457a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  162c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
17b-c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 23 108c; aph 124 133c-d; BK II, APH 15
149a

[638a]
(5.  The  divine nature in relation to the world or creatures. 5/. God's
knowledge:  the  divine  omniscience;  the  divine ideas.) 31 Descartes:
Meditations^  iii,  86a  /  Objections  and  Replies, 122a-b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17 362b-363c; PROP 21, DEMONST 364a-c; prop 33,
SCHOL  2  367d-369a; part ii, prop i 373d-374a; prop 3-4 374a-c; prop 7,
schol-prop  8  375b-376a;  prop  32 385c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[188-193]  115b;  BK  III [56-134] 136b-138a; bk x [1-16] 274b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch x, SECT 9 143a-c; ch xv, sect 12 165b-c;
bk  hi, CH VI, sect 3 268d; sect ii 271b-d; bk iv, CH x, SECT 5-6 350a-c
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii, div 78, 485d-486a 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  344a-c;  351b-352c / Judgement, 592a-c 44 B0SWEI.1.:
Johnson,  173c;  392d-393a  5g. God's will: divine choice Old Testament:
Genesis,  1-2  /  Psalms,  135:6—  (D) Psalms, 134:6 / Isaiah, 14:24-27;
46:9-11  —  (D)  Isaias,  14:24-27; 46:9-11 / Jeremiah, 4:28; 51:29— (D)
Jeremias,  4:28;  51:29  New  Testament: Matthew, 18:14; 20:1-16 / John,
5:21;  6:38-40  /  Romans, 8:27-29; 9:1119; 12:1-2 / / Corinthians, 12 /
Ephesians,  1:812;  3:10-11 / / Thessalonians, 4:3-6; 5:18 / // Timothy,
1:8-10  /James,  1:18  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens [86-103] 2a-b 5
Euripides:  Bacchantes  [1388-1391]  352a,c  7  Plato:  Timaeus, 452c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk iv, ch 3, 224d; ch 7, 232d-233a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect ii 262a-b 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr viii
342d-353d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 6-7 44d45d; BK XI, par
12 92b; bk xii, par 18, 103a-b; bk XIII, par 5 Hid; par 19 115c-d / City
of  God,  BK  V,  CH 9-10 213b-216c; bk x, ch 7 302d-303a; bk xii, ch 14
350d-351b;  ch  17  353a'354a;  bk  xxi, ch 7-8 565d-568d; bk xxii, ch 2
587b-588a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 8, ANs 82c-83b;
q  19 108d-119d; q 20, a i, rep 3 120a-121b; a 4, ans 122c-124a; q 23, a
4  135a-d;  q  25,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  147d-149a; Q 26. A 2, REP 2
150c-151a; q 50, a i, ans 269b270a; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 57, a 5,
ans  299b-300b;  q 59, a 2, ans 307c-308b; q 60, A I, REP 2 310b-311a; q
61,  a  2,  rep  1,3  315c316p;  q 62, A 6, rep i 322a-d; q 63, a i, ans
325c-326c;  q  104,  aa 3-4 537b-538c; q 105, A I, REP 2 538d-539c; part
i-ii,  q  i,  a 2, rep 3 610b-611b; q 10, a i, rep 2 662d-663d; q 19, aa
9-10 709d-711d; q 39, a 2, rep 3 790d-791b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 93, A 4, rep I 218b-d; q 97, a 3, rep i 237b-238b;

[638b]
580  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5g to 5h part III, Q 18, a I, rep 1,4 810a-811c; q
21,  A I, ans 823d-824d; a 4, ans 826b-827c; q 61, a 4, rep 3 857c-858b;
q  64,  a  7,  ans  875d876c;  PART  III suppL, q 72, a 3, ans and rep 5
920c-922b;  q 74, a 4, ans 928d-929d; q 91, a I, REP 2 1016b-1017c; a 2,
ans  1017c-1020c;  Q 92, A 3, REP 6 1034b-1037c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, hi [64-90] llOa-b; XIX [85-90] 135d-136a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  ii,  113b-c;  162c;  PART  IV,  271b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  265b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  ofLearning,  38a 31
Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-c; 229c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  prop  17  362b-363c;  PROP  32  367a-b;  prop 33, schol 2 367d-369a;
APPENDIX,  370c-371a  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a;
bk vii
[139-173] 220a-221a
/  Samson  Agonistes  [300-329] 346a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch xxi, sect 50-51 191b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knotvledge, sect 25-33
417d-419a  esp sect 29-30 418c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c-151b 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  265b-c  esp 265b,d [fn i];
276b-277a;  278b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  303b-304a; 321 b-c; 324b325a;
325d-326a;  328b  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 393c-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi, 272a-b; bk XII, 553b; bk xiii, 563a-b; bk xv, 631c;
epilogue ii, 675a-677b; 680b'C; 684b-d 5h. God's love: the dififusion of
the  divine  goodness  Old Testament: Exodus, 33:19; 34:6 / Deuteronomy,
4:37-38;   7:7-8;   10:15,18;  32:4  /  /  Chronicles,  16:7-34—  (D)  /
Paralipomenon,  16:7-34 / Job passim, esp 2:10 / Psalms / Proverbs, 3:12
/ Song of Solomon— (D) Canticle of Canticles / Isaiah, 43; 45:7; 63:7-9—
(D)  Isaias, 43 ; 45 :7 ; 63 :7-9 / Jeremiah, 31:1-6; 32:17-44; 33:1-16—
(D)  Jeremias,  31:1-6;  32:17-44;  33:1-16  /  Lamentations,  3:25,38 /
Ezekiel, 16:1-15— (D) Ezechiel, 16:1-15 / Hosea, 1-3; II— (D) Osee, 1-3;
11  /Joel,  2:123:21  /  Micah,  1:12—  (D)  Micheas,  1:12 / Zechariah,
g:iy—{D)   Zacharias,  9:17  /  Malachi,  1:1-3—  (D)  Malachias,  1:1-3
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  13:10—  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 13:12 / Wisdom of Solomon,
7:28;  11:22-26;  12:13-16;  i6:20-29-(D)  OT,  5oo^  of  Wisdom,  7:28;
11:23-27; 12:13-16; 16:20-29 / Ecclesiasticus, 4:14; 11:14-17; 16:29-30;
17:818,29;   33:10-15;  39:16,25-34—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  /^-.ly,
11:14-17;  16:30-31;  17:8-18,28;  33:10-15;  39:21,30-40 New Testament:
Mattheiu, 6:25-34; 7:7-11; 10:29-31 / Luke, 11:1-13; 12:6-7,16-33 /John,

[639a]
5//  to  5/  CuAi'Ti-R  29:  GOD  581 3:16-21; 13:31-35; 14:21; 15:9-16;
17:21-26  /  Romans,  2:4;  5:5;  8:28-39  /  //  Corinthians,  13:11  /
Galatians,  2:20  / Ephesians, 3:14-21; 5:1-2 / / Timothy, 1:14 / Titus,
3:3-7  /  Hebrews,  12:6  /  I  John,  3-4  /  Retelation, ?:i9-2i — (D)
Apocalypse,  3:19-21  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii, 321d-322d / Timaeus,
447c-448a   8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  CH  10
[336*^25-34]  438d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 8 146a-147c 14
Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  50d-51c  16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World,
1049b1050b;  1071b  17  Plotinus:  Sixth Ennead, tr ix, ch 9 358d359c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  7 2c-d; par 31 8d-9a; bk v, par 2
27b-c;  bk  vii,  par 16-23 48c-50c; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; bk xii, par 18,
103a-b;  bk  xiii,  par  1-5  llOd-llld  /  City  of  God, bk VII, CH 31
261d-262a;  bk  xi,  ch  21-24  333a-336a;  bk  xii,  ch i, 343b-c; ch 9
347b348b;  bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a; bk xxii,
ch  i  586b,d-587b; ch 24 609a-612a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 31-32
633b-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, REP I 12c-14a; q
3,  a  i, rep i 14b-15b; q 6, A 4 30b-d; Q 13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; q 19, a
2,  ANs  and  REP  2-4  109c-110b;  a  4,  ans and rep i lllc-112c; Q 20
119d-124a; q 21, a 3, ans 126a-c; q 27, aa 3-4 155c-156d; q 37 197c200c;
Q  44,  A  4,  ans  and  rep  i 241a-d; q 49 264d-268a,c; q 50, a i, ans
269b-270a;  a  3,  ans 272a-273b; q 51, a i, rep 3 275b-276b; Q 59, A I,
ans  306c-307b;  a 2, ans 307c-308b; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; q 74, a 3, rep
3-4  375a377a,c; q 75, a 5, rep i 382a-383b; q 82, a 5, rep I 435c-436c;
q  89,  a  i,  rep 3 473b-475a; Q 91, A I, ans 484a-485b; q 93, a 4, ans
494c495b;  A 8, ans 499b-500c; q 103 528a-534b passim; q 104, a 3, rep 2
537b-d;  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q 105, a 4, ans 541c-542a; Q 106, a 4, ans
548b-549a; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 612a-613a; q 2, a 4, rep i 618a-d;
a  5,  rep  3 618d-619c; q 22, a 3, rep 3 722d-723b; q 28, A 3, contrary
742a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, A 4, ANS 69b-70a;
q 65, a 5, ans and rep 3 74c-75a; q 73, a 10, ans 128a-d; q 75, a 3, ans
139b-d;  q 79, a i 156b-157b; a 3, rep i 158a-d; a 4, rep i 158d-159c; q
90,  preamble,  205a;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  i 213c-214c; q 93, a 6, rep I
219d-220d;  q  96,  a 5, rep 2 233d-234d; q iio, a I 347d-349a; a 4, ans
350d-351d;  q  III,  A  3,  rep I 353d-354b; part ii-ii, Q 6, A 2, rep 2
414c-415c; q 19, a i, rep 3 465a-d; A 5, rep 3 468b-469a; q 23, a 2, rep
1-2  483d-484d;  q  24,  a  2,  ans  490b-d;  a  3, ans 491a-d; a 8, ans
495b-496a;  a  11,  rep  i 498b499c; A 12, ANS 499c-500d; q 26, a 3, ans
511d-512c; q 30, a 2, rep i 534b-535a; q 189,

[639b]
A 10, RF.i' I 699a 700d; part mi, o i, a 3, rep 3 704d 706a; 4, a 5, rep
2 734b d; q 2^, a i, RF.P2 833a-d;Q62, a 2, contrary 859d 860c; part III
suppL,  q 71, A ^, RKP I 903c 904d; O 80, A 3, REP 3 958b 959c 21 Dante:
Divine  (Jomedy, mkll, i (^7-40] Ib-c; PURGATORY, III [10^145) 57a c; XI
(i :^()I 68d69a; xv (40-81] 75d-76a; xxviii (91 96] 97a; PARADISE, II
[i 12-148]
109a-b;  vii  (64  75] 115d-116a; x [i-27ll20b-c;xiii [52-87|126a-b; XIX
[86-90] 135d-136a; xxvi [1-81] 145d 146c; xxvii
[97-120] 148b-c; xxix
[13-36) ISOb-c;
[127-145]
151c-d; xxxii
[i^9j-xxxiii
[145]
156a-157d  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, stanza 1-7 54b-55b;
stanza   250-25^  87a-b;  bk  v,  stanza  26^-267  154b-155a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 80b-81a 31 r3ESCARTEs: Objections and Replies,
229c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop i7,corol 456d; PROP 19 457a; prop
35-36  460d-461c  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-343] 137a143a esp
[135-166]  138b-139a; bk iv [411-439] 161b-162a; bk vii [499-518] 228a-b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  hi,  SECT 12 115b-116a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3 405b-c; SECT 154 444a-b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  345a-c  /
Judgement,  592a-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  539d-540a  48 Melville: Moby
DicI^,  318b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Kara7nazov,  bk  11, 24a-c; bk v, 120d-137c; bk vi, 153a-d; bk
vii,  189a-191a,c; bk xi, 313c-314d 5/. Divine justice and mercy: divine
rewards  and  punishments Old Testament: Genesis, 3:1-4:16; 6-9; ri:i-9;
18:17-19:29;  22:1-19  esp  22:15-18  /  Exodus,  7-12;  20:3-7;  32 esp
32:9-14;  33:19;  34:5-10 / Leviticus, 26 / Numbers, 11-14; 16; 21 :5-9;
25 / Deuteronomy, i-ii passim; 28-32 passim / / Samuel, i^— (D) I Kings,
15  /  //  Samuel,  6:68;  24— (D) // Kings, 6:6-8; 24 / / Kings, 8; 13;
i4:2-i6-(D)  ///  Kmgs,  8;  13;  14:2-16  / li Kings, 9:1-10:11— (D) IV
Kings,  9:1-10:11  /  /  Chronicles, 10:13-14; 21 — (D) / Paralipomenon,
10:13-14;  21  / // Chronicles, 6; 12; 19:6-7; 21:12-20; 26:16-21— (D) U
Paralipomenon, 6; 12; 19:6-7; 21:12-20; 26:16-21 / Nehemiah, 9:5-38 -(D)
// Esdras, 9:5-38 / Job / Psalms f Proverbs, 11:1,20-21; 20:22; 22:22-23
/  Ecclesiastes, 12:14 / Isaiah passim, esp i, 3-4, 10, 1327' 3O' 34-35.
40.  42, 47. 52-53. 59. 65-66— (D) Isaias passim, esp i, 3-4, 10, 13-27,
30,  34-35, 40, 42, 47, 52-53, 59, 65-66 / Jeremiah passim, esp 3-8, 15,
19,  24-25,  29-31,  33,  46-52  — (D) Jeremias passim, esp 3-8, 15, 19,
24-25, 29-31, 33, 46-52 / Lamentations / Ezekjel

[640a]
582  THE  GREAT  (5.  ^he  divine  nature  in  relation  to the world or
creatures.   5/.   Divine   justice   and   mercy:  divine  rewards  and
punishments.^  passim,  esp  4-9,  11, 14-18, 25-33, 35-39— {U) Ezechiel
passim,  esp  4-9,  11,  14-18,  2533,  ^'^-T^g  / Daniel, ^:^-^:^i— {D)
Daniel,  4-5  /  Joel  / Amos I Obadiah—{D) Abdias / Jonah — {D) Jonas /
Micah—{D)  Micheas  /  Nahum  I  Habakkuk—{D)  Uabacuc  /  Zephaniah—{D)
Sophonias  /  Zechariah—{D) Zacharias / Maiachi—{p) Malachias Apocrypha:
Tobit, 2-3; 13— {D) OT, Tobias^ 2-3; 13 /Judith, 5— (Z)) OT, Judith, 5 /
Wisdom  of Solomon, 1-5; 11:23; 12— (D) OT, Boo/{of Wisdom, 1-5; 11 :24;
12 / Ecclesiasticus, 16; 17:19-29; 18:1-14; 23:18-21; 35; 39:25-31 — {D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  16;  17:16-28;  18:114;  23:25-31;  35; 39:30-37 /
Susanna—  (D)  OT, Da?jiel, 13 / Bel and Dragon, 23-42— (Z)) OT, Daniel,
14:22-42  /  11  Maccabees,  6:12-17  —(D) OT, 11 Machabees, 6:12-17 New
Testament:   Matthew,   5:1-22,29-30,45;   9:9-13;  11:20-24;  12:36-37;
13:24-30,36-43;  18:7-14;  19:16-20:16;  23  / MarJ^, 9:37-47; 10:17-31;
i6\i6   /  Lu}{e,  1:46-55;  6:36-38;  7:3650;  10:25-28;  14:7-14;  15;
16:19-31;  18:1-8;  19:1-10;  23:34,39-43  /  John, 5:30; 8:1-11 / Acts,
12:18-23; 13:1-12 / Romans, 1:16-2:16; 6:23; 9:14-18 / II Corinthians, 4
/ Galatians, 6:7-8 / Ephesians, 1 1 II Thessalonians, i :3-io; 2:10-12 /
// Timothy, 4:8 / Titus, 3:4-6 / Hebrevus, 10:26-31 / / Peter, 3:18 / 11
Peter  /  1  John,  1:5-10  /  Jude  / Revelation passim, esp 17-20— (D)
Apocalypse  passim,  esp  17-20  5 Aeschylus : Suppliant Maidens [1-175]
la-3a / Agamemnon
[636-781] 58d'60b;
[1560-1566]
68c / Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[1-275] 99a-101c,
[703-738] 105d-106a,
[863910] 107b'C, [1187-1285] nOh-niSi / Aittigone
[279-289]
133c  /  Oedipus at Colonus 114a130a, c esp [521-545] 119a-b, [939-1014]
123a-d,
[1254-1396] 125d-126d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[430-459] 146d-147a, [748-783] 149c-d / Electra
[173-179]
157c / Trachiniae
[1264-1278]
181c  /  Philoctetes  [446-452]  186a 5 Euripides : Suppliants [598-617]
263c-d  /  Hecuba  [1023-1033]  361c-d  / Heracles Mad [772780] 371c-d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 20b-22a; bk ii, 77a b; bk iv, 158d-159d esp
159d;  bk vi, 199c-d; 201d-202c; 203a-b; bk viii, 278d279a; 283d; bk ix,
308a-c  6  TuucYBivEs  -.Peloponnesian  War, bkv, 506b-c; BK VII, 560a 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  / Laws, BK IV, 682d-683a; bk ix,
757a; bk x, 765d769d esp 767c- 768c / Seventh Letter, 806a 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b; bk vi [43-79] 80d-81b; [379422] 85b-d

[640b]
IDEAS  5/  14 Plutarch: Romulus, 26b-27a / Camillus, 107b-d / Aristides,
265c-d  /  Cato the Younger, 639d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 189d-190a
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk ii, par 15 12b-c; BK V, par 2 27b-c; bk
vii,  par 5 44c-d; bk ix, par 34-36 70c-71a / City of God, bk v, ch 10II
215c-216d;  ch  14-26  220a-230a,c;  bk  ix,  CH  10  291a; bk xi, ch 23
334c-335c;  bk  xiii,  CH 1-8 360a-363c; ch 12-16 365d-367d; BK XIII, CH
2I-BK XIV, CH 28 371a-397d esp BK XIV, CH 15 388d-390a, ch 26 395d-396c;
bk  XV,  CH  24-25  418d-419b;  bk xvi, ch 4 425b-426a; bk xix, ch 10-13
516c-520a;  ch  15  521a-c;  bk xx 530a-560a,c; bk xxi 560a586a,c esp ch
11-12  570b-571c, ch 18 574c575b, CH 24 577b-579d; bk xxii 586b,d-618d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c; CH 32 633c-d; bk ii, ch 23
648a-c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, A 6 113c-114d; a 9,
ans 116d-117d; q 21 124b127c; Q 23, A 5 135d-137d; q 62 317c-325b; Q 63,
A  8,  ANS  332c-333b;  q  64,  a  2,  rep 2 335d-336d; q 65, a 2, rep 3
340b-341b; q 66, A 3, ANS 347b-348d; Q 95, a 4 509b-510a; q 96, A 3, rep
3  512a-c;  q  103, a 5, rep 2 531b-532b; Q 105, A 6, REP 2 543b-544a; q
113,  a 7, ans 580b-581a; q 114, a i, rep i 581d-582c; part i-ii, Q 5, A
I 636d-637c; a 4, ans 639a-640b; A 7 642a-d; q 17, a 9, rep 3 692d-693d;
q  21,  A  4  719d-720a,c;  q 39, a 2, rep 3 790d-791b; Q 47, A I, rep I
819c-820b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 61, A 5, ANS
58b-59d;  q 62, a i 60a-d; q 63, a 3 65a-d; q 68, a 2 89c-90c; q 72, a 5
115a-116b;  Q 73, A 9, REP 3 126d-128a; a 10, rep 2 128a-d; Q 79, AA 3-4
158a-159c;  q  81,  a  2,  rep i 164d165c; Q 85, A 5, ANS 181d-182d; a 6
182d-184a;  QQ  87-88  185c-198d;  q 91, a 6 212c-213c; q 94, A 5, rep 2
224d-225d;  q  98, a 2, rep 3 240c241b; A 4 242b-243c; q 100, a 7, rep 3
258c259c;  A 8, rep 2-3 259d-261a; a 12 264d-265d; Q 103, A 2 299b-300d;
q  106,  a  2  322b-323a;  Q  112,  A  4,  rep  I  358d-359c; qq 113-114
360d378a,c;  part  ii-ii,  q  13,  a  4,  ans  446c-447a; Q 14, A 2, ANS
448d-449d;  q 18, a 4, rep 2 464c-465a; q 19, a i, rep 2 465a-d; q 20, a
i,  ANS  474d-475d;  q 21, a 2, ans 479a-c; q 24, A 10, ANS 496d-498a; q
28,  a  3  528d-529c;  q  182,  A 2 621d-623a; q 184, a 4, ans and rep i
632c-633c;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  ii  721c-722b; q 9, A 2 764c-765a; q 64
870b-879c;  part hi SUPPL, q 69, A 2 886c-887d; q 70, a 3 897d900d; Q 71
900d-917b  passim;  q  72,  a  3,  rep 4 920c-922b; qq 73-74 922b-935a,c
passim;  Q  75,  A  I  935b-937a;  q  78,  a i, ans 947d949b; A 3, REP 3
950b-951a; qq 82-99 968a1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp hell, hi
[1-18]
4a-b, XI 15a-16b, purgatory, hi
[103-145]
57a-c, VI
[25-48] 61a-b, xix [97-126] 82c-d,
paradise. III [i]-v [87] 109b-113a, vii [19-120]

[641a]
5/  to  6  Chaptkr  29:  GOD 583 115b-116b, XIX [22-99] 135b 136a. xxxii
[^784] 155a-c 22 Chaucer: Prologue
[65:5-662] 170b
/  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a  csp  [7056-7085]  281a-b, [72277246] 284a /
Physician's Tale 366a-371a esp
[12,212-220]
370b-371a / Pardoner's Tale
[12,397-852] 374a-381b
/  Tale of Meliheus, par 42-45, 419b-420a: par 77-78, 431a-432a / Mon}(s
Tale  434a-448b  /  Parson  s Tale 495a550a esp par 10 498b-502a, par 56
527b  528b, par 68 533b-534a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 88c-89a: part
ii,   160c-161a;   163d-164a;  part  hi,  191b-198a;  245b-c;  part  iv,
250c-251c;  253b-258b;  260b-c;  272b-c; 276d-277a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
98c-99a;  152d-153a; 250a-251c 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc iv
[4263] 115a-b; [186-225] 116c-117a / Richard II, act I, sc II
[1-44] 322d-323a
/  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv,  sc i [184-202] 427c 27 Shakespeare :
Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  v  [9-22]  37a;  ACT III, sc III [36-98] 53d-54b /
Measure  for  Measure, act ii, sc ii [73-79] 182d / Cymbeline, ACT V, sc
iv  [9-28] 481a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 71c-d 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  69b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, appendix, 369b-371a esp
370b  32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xv  66b  /  Paradise  Lost, bk III [80-216]
137a-140a esp [131-134] 138a; [274415] 141b-144b esp
[397-411]
144a-b; bk v
[224-247] 180a-b; bk x 274a-298b esp [1-16]
274b,   [162-223]   278a-279a,   [1046-1104]  297a298b;  bk  xi  [46-83]
300a-301a;  bk xii [285465] 325b-329a / Samson Agonistes [293-299] 346a;
[667-709] 354a-355a; [1156-1177] 364b36Sa; [1669-1707] 376a-b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  430  245a-247b;  497  259b260a;  513  262a-263a; 562 273a; 584
276b277a 35 Locke: Toleration, 17a-b / Civil Government, ch III, sect 20
29c-d;  ch  xvi, sect 176 66a-b / Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect
5-6  105a-c;  sect  12-13  107b-108c; ch hi, sect 5 113c; BK II, CH XXI,
SECT  54,  192b; sect 62 194c-d; sect 72 198a-c; ch xxviii, sect 8 230a;
bk  iv,  ch  xiv, sect 2 364c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div
108-109 500b-501a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 20b-21a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk xii, 85d86a; bk xxvi, 219a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 237b-238b /
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / Science of Right, 432c-433a
/  Judgement,  592a-c;  594d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 458a-b 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  345b-c;  394a-c;  482a-d;  539d-540a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part i, 234d235a

[641b]
b 47 CJokthk: Faust csp part ii
[11,676-12,111)
284a  294b  48 Mi-lville: Moby Dicl(, 30a 36b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
«k  xiv, 606a 607a 52 nosroi-vsKv: Brothers Karamazov, bk mi, 64c67a; bk
v,  125d 127d; bk vi, 151a 152a; 163b164a; 169c 170b; bk vii, 177d 178b;
185a-c;  189a-191a,c;  bk viii, 217c 218c; bk xi, 313c314d; 341c-342c 54
I'ri.lo:  Xeiv  Introductory lectures, 878a6. Man's knowledge of God Old
Testament:  Eato^wj,  33:12-23  /Job,  11:7-9;  26:14; 34:29; 36:23-33 /
Proverbs,  2:1-5  / Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 8:16-17; 11 :5 / Isaiah, 40:12 -
14:45:15;  55:8-9:60:16—  (D)  Isaias,  40:12-14; 45:15; 55:8-9; 60:16 /
Jeremiah,  24:7;  31:34—  (D) Jeremias, 24:7; 31:34 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  9:13-16;  15:3  —(D)  OT,  Bool^of  Wisdom,  9:13-16; 15:3 New
Testament:  Acts,  17:22-30 / Romans, i :i821; 11:33-34 / / Corinthians,
2:16; 15:34 7 Plato: Cratylus, 93d-94a; 106b / Republic, bk II, 314c-d /
Timaeus,  447c / Critias, 478b-d / I^ws, BK VII, 730a-c; bk x, 757d-761c
8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982'^
28-983*11]   501a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064*28-^5]  592d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 6, llOc-lllc; CH 12, 118d-119a; ch 16 121d-122d 14
Plutarch:  Numa Pompilius, 53b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 8
37b-c;  BK  X 71c-89a / City of God, bk xx, ch 2-3 531a-532b / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 6 626a-b; ch 8-11 626c-627c; bk ii, ch 7 638d639c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i lOd-lld; Q 12 50b-62b; q 13,
aa  1-2  62c-64d;  a  5,  ANs  66b-67d;  a  12 74c-75b; q 86, a 2, REP I
462a-463a;  q  87,  a 3 472c-473a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[3445] 56b; PARADISE, IV [28-48] Ilia; [124-132] 112a; V
[1-12] 112a-b;
xiii
[112-142] 126c-d;
XIX  [1-99]  135a-136a;  xx  [79-93]  137c;  [130138] 138a; xxi [73-102]
139a-b;  xxvi  [13-69]  146a-c  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 160b-c 25
"S{o>iTA\GyiE\  Essays,  98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d;  238c-239c; 267c-268a 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b20a; 38a; 55b-d; 95d-101d esp
95d-97c  31  Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c; part iv 51b-54b passim /
Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 74a,c; iii-iv, 81d-89b esp hi, 88d-89a; v
93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  108a-  114c;  120c-123a;  127b-c;
postulate  iv-v 131a-c; PROP i-iii 132b-133a; 140b; 158b-161d; 168d169a;
211c-212a;  212c-213a; 213d-214a;215b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
ii,  schol  358d-359b;  part  ii, prop 5 374c-d; prop 2142 382d-388c esp
prop 24-25 383c-384a, prop 30-33 385a-d, PROP 36 386b; prop 45-47

[642a]
(6.  Man*s  knowledge  of  God.)  390a-391a; part iv, prop 28 431c; prop
36-37  434a-436a;  appendix,  iv 447b-c; part v, prop 24-32 458d-460b 32
M11.TON : Paradise Lost, bk viii
[i 14-130] 234b235a; [412-416] 241a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 194, 205d-206a; 229-230 213a-b; 233, 214a-b; 242-290
217b-225a;  566-567  273b; 586 277a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i,
ch  hi,  SECT  7-18 113d-117c; bk ii, ch xvii, sect i 167d-168a; sect 17
172b-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect 33-35 212d-213c; bk iii,chvi,sectii 271b-d; BK
IV,  CH  xviii-xix  380d-388d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 146-149
442a-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 200c-201a; 308b309d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  la-b; 173b-248d esp 177b192d, 218d-223d, 234c-240b, 241d-242c /
Practical  Reason, 292a-c; 3200-321 b; 349b352c esp 350c-351a; 354d-355d
/   Judgement,   575b-577a;   589b-590b;  598b-599b;  600d601c;  603a-d;
606d-608c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 159b160a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk v, 196a-197c 6a. The names of God: the metaphorical
and  symbolic  representations of God; the anthropomorphic conception of
God  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  3:13-15;  6:2-3;  i5"3'  20:7;  33:20-23;
34:5-7,14  /  Leviticus, 19:12; 21:6; 22:32 / Deuteronomy, 5:11; 28:58 /
//  Samuel,  22—  (D)  II  Kings,  22 / Psalms passim, esp 18, 23, 28:7;
29:1-11,  31:2-3,  6i:i-8,  68:4, 71:3, 78:35, 78:65. 83:18, 95:i-ii-(D)
Psalms  passim,  esp  17,  22, 27:7, 28:2-10, 30:34, 60:2-9, 67:5, 70:3,
77:35,  77:65,  82:19,  94:1-11 / Proverbs, 18:10; 30:4 / Isaiah, 17:10;
30:27-30;  40:11;  41:4;  42:8; 44:6; 47:4; 48:2,12; 51:15; 54:5; 55:13;
63:16—  (D)  Isaias,  17:10;  30:27-30;  40:11;  41:4; 42:8; 44:6; 47:4;
48:2,12;  51:15;  54:5;  55:13;  63:16  /  Jeremiah, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6;
31:35;  32:18;  33:2;  50:34;  51:19—  (D) Jeremias, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6;
31:35; 32:18; 33:2; 50:34; 51:19 / Daniel, 7:9,13 / Amos, 4:13; 5:8; 9:6
Apocrypha: Wisdom ofSolomon, 14:12-21— (D) OT, Book^ of Wisdom, 14:12-21
New   Testament:  Matthew,  6:9  /  LuJ^,  11:2  /  John,  10:1-18  /  /
Corinthians,  10:4 / Revelation, 1:8; 21:6; 22:13— (£)) Apocalypse, 1:8;
21:6; 22:13 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[160-175] 53d-54a
5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [376391]  414b 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  ii,  49d-50a;  60a-d;  80a-c  7  Plato: Cratylus, 91c-92b;
93d-97d / Philebus, 609d-610a I Laws, bk x, 759d-760c

[642b]
584  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6a  to db 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8
[1074^17]  604d-605a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 [1252^19-27] 446a
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a; 860a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
iv,  ch  ii,  194c195b; CH 24-25 201c-202a; bk vii, ch 10-12 250b-251c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 6-7 626a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  i,  aa 9-10 8d-10c; Q 3, A I, REP 1-5 14b-15b; a 2, rep 1-2
15c-16a;  a 3, rep i 15a-d; q 4, a i, REP I 20d-21b; q 13 62b-75b; q 14,
a  i,  rep  1-2  75d-76c; qq 27-43 153a-237a,c passim; Q 102, A I, REP 4
523d-525a;  q  113,  a  7,  rep i 580b-581a; part i-ii, q 47, a i, rep i
819c820b  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, A 3, REP 3
247a-248a; q 102, a 2, ans 271b272a; part hi, q 2, a 5, ans 715a-716b; q
16,  a  3,  ans  798c-799b; part hi suppl, q 96, a 2, ans 1052a-1053b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv [28-48] Ilia; xxvi
[124-138]
147a-b; xxx
[34-99]
152a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 54b; 79d-80a; part II, 162c-d; part
hi,  172d-173a; 181a182c; 183d-184a; part iv, 271c; 272b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  238d-239b; 256c-d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c-d; 443c
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 60c-61b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop  17,  schol  362c363c;  PART  II,  PROP  3, schol 374b-c 34 Newton:
Principles, bk hi, general schol, 370a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
i,  ch  hi,  sect 17 117a-c; bk ii, ch xih, sect 18 152a-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 176a-b; 192c-d / Judgement, 547b-d; 593c-d; 598b-599b; 599d-600a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  248d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  xi,  345a-c  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
771a-b / New Introductory Lectures, 875d-876b 6b. Natural knowledge: the
use  of  analogies;  the  evidences  of  nature; the light of reason Old
Testament:  Job,  12:7-9;  26:7-14;  36:2442:2  / Psalms, 8; 19:1-^; 65;
75:1;  95:1-6;  104;  107;  147:12-20—  (D) Psalms, 8; 18:1-7; 64; 74:2;
94:1-6; 103; 106; 147 / Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 8:17; 11:5 / Isaiah, 45:5-8—
(D) Isaias, 45:5-8 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 13:1-5— (D) OT Boo/{ of
Wisdom,  13:1-5  / Ecclesiasticus, 16:26-30; 18:4-7; 42:i5-43:33-(^) OT.
Ecclesiasticus,  1  6  :26-3  1  ;  1  8  :2  -6  ; 42 : 1 5-43 :37 / //
Maccabees,  7:28—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees, 7:28 New Testament: Matthew,
6:26-30 / Lut^e, 12:24-28 / Romans, 1:18-24

[643a]
b  6b  to  6c{\)  Chapter  7  Plato:  Thnaens, 465d-466a / Imus, bk vii,
728b-730c;  bk  x,  758b  759a 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch i 375b, d
376a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982^28 98^*1
1  ] 501a-b; bk vi, ch i 547b,d-548c csp [io2()"2:533] 548b-c; bk xi, ch
7 [1064^6-13] 592d-593a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c- 112b;
CH  9,  114c-115a;  ch  16-17 121d-124a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk xn,
sect  28 310a 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 123c-124a / Coriolanus, 191d-192b /
Nicias,  435b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par i 27a-b; bk VI, par
8  37b-c; bk vii, par 16-2:? 48c-50c; bk x, par 8-10 73b-74a; bk xi, par
6  90c-d  /  City  ofGod,  bk viii, ch 3 266a-d; bk x, ch 14 307c-308a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  4 625b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
parii,  o  2,  a  a  1-2 10d-12c; Q 3, A I, REP 1-5 14b-15b; a t^, REP I
16a-d;  a  4,  rep  2 16d-17c; a 6, rep i 18c-19a; q 12, a 4 53b-54c; aa
12-13 60d-62b; Q 32, A I 175d-178a; q 50, a 2, ans 270a-272a; Q 65, A I,
REP  T, 339b-340b; q 79, a 9, ans 422b-423d; q 86, a 2, rep i 462a-463a;
q 88, A 2, rep 4 471c-472c; a 3 472c-473a; q 94, a i 501d-503a; q 103, a
i,  ans  528b-529a; part i-ii, Q 5, a 5, ans 640b-641a; q 14, a i, rep 2
677b-678a;  q  17,  a 8, rep 2 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; q 66, a 5 79b-80c; q 68, a i, ans and rep
2  87c-89c;  q  90, a 4, rep i 207d208b; Q 93, A 2 216c-217b; q 94, a 2,
ans 221d223a; q 99, a 3, rep 3 247a-248a; q 100, a i 251b-252a; q 109, a
i, rep i 338b-339c; part ii-ii, q I, a 5, REP 4 383b-384b; q 4, a 7, ans
407d-409a; q 10, a 12, rep 4 436b-437d; q 27, A 3, REP 2 522c-523b; a 4,
rep 3 523c-524a; A 6, rep 3 524c-525c; part hi, q 3, a 3, ANS 724c-725b;
q  12,  a 3, rep 2 778b-779a; part III SUPPL, Q 91, A I, ANS 1016b-1017c
21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [3445] 56b; paradise, iv [28-48]
Ilia; x
[1-27]
120b-c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i, 54b-c; 66a-c; 78d79a; 79d'80b;
83a-b;  part  ii,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b;  163a-b;  part hi, 165a-167b;
172d173a;     183d-184a;     241a-242a     25     Montaigne:     Essays,
98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d;   238c-239c;   246a-d;  251c-252b;  267c-268a  28
Harvey:  On  A?iimal  Generation,  421  d; 429b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 2c-4c; 17b20a; 38a; 39d'40a; 41b-d; 55b-c; 96c-97c esp 96d'97a
/ New Atlantis, 203a31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c; part iv, 52a-d
/  Meditations,  69a-71a,c  passim; 71d72b; iii-iv, 81d-89b; v 93a-96a /
Objections   and  Replies,  110c-114c;  120c-122b;  127a-c;  prop  i-iii
132b-133a;  140b; 158b-161d; 168d-169a; 211c-212a; 212c-213a; 213d-214a;
215b-c;  232b;  283d-284a; 284d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, def i 373a;
prop 45-47 390a-39 la; part iv, prop 28 431c; prop

[643b]
29:  GOD  585  36-^7,  nF.MONST434a-d;  appendix, iv447b-c; PART v, prop
21-42  458a 463d csp prop 24 -25 458d 459a, prop ^05^ 459d 460c, prop 36
461a  c  32 Mil. ion: Paradise Lost, bk vii [109 i V'l 219b220a; bk viii
[114-130]  234b 235a 33 1'ascal: Provincial Letters, 163a 164b / Pensea,
22()  213a-b; 242 253 217b 220a; 265-290 221b 225a; 557 567 272b 273b 34
Newton:   Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol,  371a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i, ch n, sect 12, 107c-d; ch hi, sect 7-18 113d117c;
BK  II,  CH  VII, sect 6 132d; ch xvn, SECT I 167d-168a; sect 17 172b-c;
sect  20,  173a; ch xxiii, sect 33-37 212d-214b; bk III, CH VI, sect 1 1
271b  d;  bk  iv, ch x 349c354c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 29-33
418c-419a;  sect  146-156  442a-444d 35 Hume: Human Understandirig, sect
ii,  div  14  456b; SECT xi 497b-503c passim; sect xii, DIV 132, 509c 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 12d-13a; 200d; 308b-309c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
33a-d;  173b-192d  /  Practical  Reason, 320c-321b; 346b-347a; 349b352c;
354d-355d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 384a,c / Judgement, 547b-d;
598b599b;  602b-603a; 603b-d; 607d-609b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,   159b160a;   PART  III,  304d-305b  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i
[3432-3468]  84a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk v, 217c-d; bk vi,
248d-249a   52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  120d121c  6c.
Supernatural  knowledge 6c{\) God as teacher: inspiration and revelation
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:1^-1^;  3:8-24;  9:117; 17:1; 26:24; 35:11;
46:2-3  /  Exodus,  3:46,13-15;  4:10-12; 6:2-8; 20:1-7; 24:12; 29:4546;
33:11-34:8  /  Leviticus,  11:44-45;  18:1-2  / Numbers, 12:1-8; 15:41 /
Deuteronomy,  4:1-5,10-13,32-36;  5:4-11;  18:18-22;  29:29  /  /  Kwgs,
3:5-15;   8:35-36-(D)  ///  Kings,  3:515;  8:35-36  7/0^,33;  34:31-32;
35:10-11;  3842  /  Psalms,  25:3-5,8-12; 32:8-9; 94:10-13; 119; 143 esp
143:8-10—  (Z))  Psalms,  24:4-5,812;  31:8-9;  93:10-13;  118;  142 esp
142:8-10  /  31:8-9;  93:10-13; 118; 142 esp 142:8-10 / Proverbs, 2:5-6;
6:23 / Isaiah, 6:1-9; ""^-35 28:9-13; 48:3-8— (D) Isaias, 6:1-9; 11:1-3;
28:9-13;  48:3-8  /  Daniel,  2; 4— (D) Daniel, 2; 3 :98-4 :34 / Joel, 2
:28-29   Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  17:5-14  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,
17:5-12

[644a]
586  Supernatural  knowledge. 6c(l) God as {6c. teacher: inspiration and
revelation.^  New Testament: Matthew passim, esp 4:23, 7:28-29, 10:1-20,
11:25-27,  13:1-23,  17:5,  28:18-20 / Mar\ passim, esp 1:1-1 1, 4:1-2 /
L«^<?  passim,  esp  2:41-50,  3:21-22, 8:4-15, 9:34-35, 10:21-22 / John
passim,  esp  3:2, 5:31-47, 10:26-27, 12:23-30, 15:15, 16:25-29, 17:6-8/
^rfi-,  22:6-14/  Romans,  1:16-20;  10:17  / / Corinthians, 2; 12:1-8 /
Galatians,  1:11-12 / Ephesians, 1 :<^,ij\ 3 :i-5 / // Timothy, 3 :i5-i6
/  Hebrews, i :i-3 ; 2 :3-4 / / Peter, i :io-i2,22-25 / U Peter, 1:19-21
/  I John, 2:20-27 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 7 lOb-c; BK IV,
par  30-31  26b-27a;  bk vi, par 8 37b-c; BK IX, par 23-25 68a-c; bk xi,
par 2-5 89c90c; BK XIII, par 16-18 114d-115c / City of God, BK VII, CH30
261b-d;  bk x,cHi3307b-c; BK XI, CH 2-4 323a-324d; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b;
ch  22  525b-c; bk xx, ch 28 556c557a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 15
643c644a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a10c; Q 3, a I, REP
1-5  14b-15b;  q  8,  a  3,  rep  4  36b-37c;  q  12, a 13 61c-62b; q 32
175d-180d;  Q  46,  A 2 253a-255a; q 57, a 3, rep i 297b298a; q 68, a i,
ans  354a-355c; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; a 2, rep 3 475a-d; q 94, a 3
504a505a;  q  104, a 4, ans 538a-c; q 105, a 3 540c541b; Q 106, A 3, ANS
and  rep  2  547c-548b;  Q  113,  A  I,  REP 2 576a-d; q 117, a i, rep i
595d-597c; a 2, rep 2 597c-598c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  63,  A  3  65a-d;  q  68 87c-96c; q 91, aa 4-5 210c212c; Q 98, AA 2-6
240c-245b;  q  100,  a  3,  ans  253a-d; q ioi, a 2, rep i 267a-268a; qq
106107  321a-330d;  q hi, a 4 354c-355d; q 112, A 5, ANS 359c-360c; part
ii-ii,  q  i,  a 7, rep 3 385c-387a; q 2, a 10, ans 399b-400b; q 4, a 4,
rep  3  405a-406a;  q  6,  a  i,  ans 413d-414c; PART III, q I, A 3, ans
704d-706a;  q  3,  a  8  729b-730b;  Q  7,  a 7 750a-d; q ii, a 6, rep 2
775d-776b;  q 12, a 3, ans and rep 1-2 778b779a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory,  xxxXXXIII  99b-105d  passim; paradise, xix [1-99] 135a-136a;
xxiv  [52-147]  143b-144a;  xxv  [6496]  145a-b;  xxvi [25-45] 146a-b 22
Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,787-816]
467a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 83a-b; part ii, 137b-138b; 160b;
part  m, 165a-167b; 176d177c; 181a-186c; 205b-d; conclusion, 281d282a 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   212a;   238c-239c;  267c268a;  273a-b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 19b-c; 38a; 54b-c; 95d-101d esp 95d-96c / New
Atlantis,  203a-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c  32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk v
[3o8]-bk
viii

[644b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 6^(1) to 6c(2)
[653] 182a-246a esp bk
viii [283-477] 238b242a; bk xi
[99]-bk
xii
[649] 301b-333a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  185  205a; 585-588 277a-b; 642-692 290b-301a; 881
345b  / Vacuum, 355b / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,   bk   hi,  ch  ix,  SECT  23  291b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,
SECTii,340b-c;  CH  XVI,  SECT 14 371b-c; ch xviii-xix 380d388d 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xii, div 132, 509c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
333d;  366c-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 201a; 307d-308a; 346b-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  227d-228a; 231a-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
455a-c 44 Bosw-e-l-l: Johnson, 394a-b; 481d-482a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  157c-d; 159b-160a; part hi, 306c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk i, 50b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,127b137c; bk
VI,  150d-153d 6c(2) The light of faith Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 44-50
esp  44:20,  45:4, 46:15, 49:10, 50:28-29— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 44-50
esp 44:21, 45:4, 46:17-18, 49:12, 50:30-31 New Testament: Luke, 8:4-17 /
John,  6:2840;  10:37-38;  12:44-46;  14:1,7-11;  16:27-31;  20:24-29  /
Romans,  3:21-5:2;  10:14-17  / // Corinthians, 4:3-6 / / Thessalonians,
2:13 / Hebrews, 4:2; 11 / 1 Peter, 1:7-9,21-23 / I John, 2:20-29; 5:4-10
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par i la-b; bk IV, par 25 25c; bk vi,
par  6-8  36c-37c; bk vii, par 16 48c-49a; bk xiii, par 19 115c-d / City
of  God,  bk  X,  ch  1-2 298b,d-300a; bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xix, ch 18
523a-b; bk xxi, ch 5 563d-564d; bk xxii, ch 4-5 588b-590a; ch 7 591c-d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 15 628b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  2, A 2, REP I lld-12c; Q 32, A I, ANS 175d-178a; Q 46, A 2,
ANS  253a-255a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, AA 3-4
61c-63a; q 65, aa 4-5 73d-75a; q 66, A 6 80c-81b; q 67, a 3 83b-84d; a 5
85d-86d; q 100, A 4, REP I 253d-255a; q 108, a 2, rep i 332b-333d; q ho,
a  3, rep i 350a-d; a 4, ans 350d-351d; part ii-ii, qq 1-16 380a-456d; Q
45,  A  I,  REP 2 598d-599d; part hi, q 14, a i, ANS 784b-785c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [34-45] 108a; XXIV 142d-144b 22 Chaucer:
Second Nun's Tale 463hA71h 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 66a-c; part ii,
137b-d;  149c-d;  160b; part hi, 165b-c; 172d173a; 209b; 209d; 241a-242a
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;  209a-d; 212a-d; 238c-239c; 267c-268a;
294a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 95d96c / Novum Organum,
bk i, aph 65 114b-c

[645a]
lyc(3)  to  6r(4)  Chapter 29: GOD 587 31 Descartes: Rules, iii, 4d-5a /
Discourse,  PART  I, 43c / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; III, 88d-89a /
Objections  and  Replies,  125c126b; 168c-169a; 232b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii  [552-587)  331a332a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 147b;
163a-164b  /  Pensees, 229 213a-b; 242-290 217b-225a; 425 243b-244b; 523
264a;  561-567  272b-273b;  794-796  327b;  880-881 345b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv, ch xvi, SECT 14 371b-c; ch xvii, sect 24 380c-d;
CH  xviii-xix 380d-388d passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect x, div
ioi 497a-b; sect xii, div 132, 509c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 379c-380a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  190c-191a;  309a-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
242a-243a  / Practical Reason, 320c-321b; 345c-d; 353a-354d / Judgement,
599d-600a;  604d-609b esp 606a-d 44 B0SWEI.1.: Johnson, 395a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part hi, 306b307b; PART IV, 349b-350a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[10,111-121]
246b247a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 196a-198b; BK XV, 631a-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BK  I,  lla-h; BK II, 26b-27d; bk hi,
64c-67a;  bk  v,  127b137c passim; bk vh, 177b-180a; bk xi, 338a-b 6c(3)
Mystical   experience   Old   Testament:   Genesis,   15;  18;  22:9-18;
26:16,24-25;  28:10-22;  31:11-13;  32:23-32; 46:1-4 / Exodus, 3:1-4:17;
19-20;  24 / Numbers, 12; 22:21-35; 2Y.12-2 A^ / Joshua, 3:7-8; 5:13-15—
{D)Josue,  3:7-8;  y.i7,-i6  / Judges, 6:11-26; 13 / / Samuel, 3— (Z)) /
Kings, 3 / / Kings, 3:5-15; 9:1-9; 19— (£>) /// Kings, 3:5-15; 9:1-9; 19
/  I  Chronicles,  17:1-15—  (D) / Paralipomenon, 17:1-15 /Job, ^:i2-2i;
33:14-17;  38:1-42:8  /  Isaiah,  6—{D)  Isaias,  6  /  Jeremiah, i— (D)
Jeremias, i / EzeJ{iel csp 1-4, 8-12, 40-48— (D) Ezechiel esp 1-4, 8-12,
40-48  / Daniel, -j-it. / Amos, 7-8 / Zechariah, 1-6— (D) Zacharias, 1-6
New  Testament:  Matthetu,  1:20-25; 3:16-17; 17:1-8; 28 / Luke, 1:1-38;
2:8-15,25-35;  9:28-36;  24  /  Acts, 2:2-11; 7; 9:1-20; 10 esp 10:9-20;
11:5-10;  18:9-11; 22:1-21; 23:11; 26:13-18 / II Corinthians, 12:1-9 / U
Peter,  1:17-18  / Revelation— {D) Apocalypse 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  vii,  par  16  48c49a;  bk viii, par 25-30 60a-61c; bk ix, par 23-25
68a-c;  bk  x,  par 65 87d-88a / City of God, BK IX, CH 16 294a-295a; bk
xvi,  ch  6  426c-427a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, A II,
REP  2  59d-60d;  q 84, a 5 446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 98, A 3, REP 2 241c-242b; part ii-ii, q 180, a 5, ans 611d-613a

[645b]
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[i-S?)
106a  107a;  xxi  138b-139c  passim; xxiii I1-69I 141b 142a; xxx U4-<^9l
152a  d;  xxxii I139Ixxxni [145I 156a-157d 23 Hobbhs: Ixviathan, part i,
52a-b;  68d  69b;  part  n, 137b 138a; 149c d; 160b; part hi, 165d 166a;
174b  176d; 183d 185c; conclusion, 281d 282a 33 Pascal: Pcnsccs, 277-288
222b-224b 40 CiiBBON: Decline and Fall, 81a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
476b  477a  42 Kant: Practical Rca<on, 320d 321b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk vii, 189a-191a,c 6c(4) The beatific vision Old Testament:
Genesis, 28:10-22; 32:24-30 / Exodus, 24 esp 24:9-11; 33:11-23; 34:5-7 /
Numbers,  12:6-8  /  Deuteronomy, 34:10 / Job, 19:26-27; 42:5 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   43:30-31   —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  43:32-35  New
Testament:  Matthew,  5:8  / John, 1:18 / Acts, 7:55-57 / / Corinthians,
13:12 / // Corinthians, 5:6-7; 12:1-4 / / Timothy, 6:13-16 / IJohn,y.2-^
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk ix, par 25 68c / City of God, BK XII, CH
20, 355b; bk xxii, ch 29 614b-616d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  12  50b-62b; q 26, a 3 151a-c; q 60, a 5, rep 5 313b-314c; q 62, a i,
ans 317d-318c; a 2, ans 318d-319c; q 84, a 5 446c-447c; q 89, a 2, REP 3
475a-d; q 93, a 8, rep 4 499b-500c; Q 94, A I 501d-503a; q 100, a 2, ans
521c-522b;  PART  i-ii,  Q  3,  A  8 628d-629c; q 4, aa 2-3 630b-631d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, A 3, contrary 83b-84d; a 4
84d-85d;  a 6, rep 3 87a-c; q 69, a 2, rep 3 97b-98c; a 4, ANS and REP 3
lOOc-lOlc;  q  98,  a  3,  rep  2  241c-242b;  part ii-ii, q i, a 8, ans
387a-388c; Q 8, A 7, ANS 421d-422c; q 9, a 4, rep 3 425d426c; Q 180, A 5
611d-613a;  part  hi, q i, a 3, REP I 704d-706a; q 9, a 2, ans and rep 3
764c765a; part iii suppl, q 72, a i, ans and rep 1 917c-919a; q 82, a 3,
rep  4  971a-972d;  q  84.  A 2, ANS and rep 4 984c-985d; q 87, a 3, ans
999d-1000c;  q  90,  a  3  1014d-1016a; q 92 1025b-1037c; q 98, a 5, ans
1075b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[1-12]
106a;  II  [37-45]  108a;  v  [1-12] 112a-b; vi [1021] 113d; XIV [28-51]
127b;  xv  [28-84]  128c129b;  XXI  [52-102]  138d-139b;  xxvi [103-108]
146d-147a;  XXVIII [106-114] 150a; xxxii[i39]- xxxiii [145] 156a-157d 22
Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 10, 499b-500a; par 103 549b-550a 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  i,  65a-b  31  Descartes:  Meditations, in, 88d-89a 32
Milton: On Time
[9-22]
12a-b / Paradise Lost, BK III [256-265] 141a

[646a]
7.  Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, andChristian conceptions
of God and His relation to the world and man la. Creation Old Testament:
Genesis,  1-2; 5:1-2 / Exodus^ 20:11 / / Samuel, 2:8— (D) / Kings, 2:8 /
Nehemiah,  9:6—  (D)  //  Esdras,  9:6  /  Job, 9:113; 10:8-13; 12:7-10;
26:7-14;  28:24-27; 37:14-38:41 esp 38:4-11 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:5; 19:1-6;
24:1-2;  33;  74:16-17;  89:11-12;  90:2;  95:1-7; 96:5; 102:25-28; 104;
119:73,90;  121:2;  136:5-9;  139:14-16; 146:5-6; 148— (D) Psalms, 8 esp
8:6-7;  18:1-7;  23:1-2; 32; 73:16-17; 88:12-13; 89:2; 94:1-7; 95:5; loi
:2629;  103;  118:73,90;  120:2;  135:5-9;  138:14-16;  145:5-6;  148  /
Proverbs,  3:19-20;  8:22-31  /  Ecdesiasies,  3:11  / Isaiah, 40:26-28;
42:5-8; 44:24-28; 45:5-13; 48:12-16; 51:12-16; 64:8; 65:17— (Z)) Isaias,
40:26-28;  42:5-8;  44:2428;  45:5-13;  48:12-16;  51:12-16; 64:8; 65:17
/Jeremiah,  10:11-13;  27:5;  31:35;  51:15-16—  (D) Jeremias, 10:11-13;
27-55  3i-35;  51-15-16 / Amos, 4:13; 5:8 / Jonah, 1:9— (D) Jonas, 1:9 /
Zechariah,  12:1—  (D) Zacharias, 12:1 Apocrypha: Judith, 16:14— (D) OT,
Judith^ 16:17 / ^^^^ of Esther, 13:10— (D) OT, Esther, 13:10 / Wisdom of
Solomon,  1:14;  2:23;  6:7;  9:1,9;  11:17,24— (D) OT, Book^ of Wisdom,
1:14;  2:23;  6:8;  9:1,9;  11:18,25  /  EcclesiasticuSy 17:1-9; 18:1-5;
23:19-20; 24:8-9; 33:9-13; 39:16-35; 42:i5-43:33-(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
17:1-8;  18:1-5;  23:27-29;  24:12-14; 33:10-14; 39:21-41; 42:15-43:37 /
Song  of  Three  Children,  34-60—  (Z))  OT,  Daniel, 3:56-82 / Bel and
Dragon,  5—  (£>)  OT,  Daniel, 14:4 / 11 Maccabees, 7:23,28— (D) OT, //
Machabees,  7:23,28  New  Testament:  /o/iw,  1:1-10  /  Acts, 14:14-15;
17:23-27  / Romans, i :i9-20 / Colossians, i :i217 / Hebrews, 1:10; 3:4;
11:3  /  77  Peter,  3:5 / Revelation, 4:11; 10:6; 14:7— (D) Apocalypse,
4:11;  10:6; 14:7 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 7 45a-d; BK XI,
par  5-1  1  90b-92b; bk xii-xiii 99b125a,c / City of God, bk vii, ch 29
261a-b;  bk  VIII, cH 9-12 270d-273a; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; BK XI, CH 4-34
324a-342a,c;  bk  xii  342b,d360a,c  esp  ch  1-2  342b,d-343d,  ch  4-5
344b345b, cH 9-27 347b-360a,c; bk xiii, ch 24 373d-376a,c; bk xxii, ch i
586b,d-587b; ch 24, 609c-610a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7,
a 2, REP 3 31d-32c; o 8, a i 34d-35c; a 2, ans 35c-36b; a 3, ans and rep
i  36b-37c; q 9, a 2, ANS 39c-40d; q 21, a 4, ans and rep 4 126c127c; QQ
44-46 238a-255d; q 50, a i, ans 269b270a; a 3, ans 272a-273b; q 56, a 2,
ans  and  rep  4  292d-294a;  q  57,  a 2, ans and rep 2 295d-297a; q 61
314d-317c; qq 65-74 339a377a,c; q 75, a 6, rep 1-2 383c-384c; q 84, A 3,
rep 2 443d-444d; qq 90-93 480c-501c;

[646b]
588 THE GREAT IDEAS 7 to lb Q 94, A 3, ANS 504a-505a; q 104, a i esp rep
4  534c-536c; aa 3-4 537b-538c; q 118, aa 2-3 601c-604b; q 119, a i, ans
604c-607b  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, q 24, a 5, ANS
492b-493d;  part  hi, q 2, a 7 718b-d; Q 3, a 8, rep 2 729b-730b; q 6, a
3,  rep  2 742a-743a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv [5878] 92a;
xxviii
[91-96]
97a; paradise, vii
[64-75] 115d-116a;'[i2i-i48] 116b-c; x [1-27'
120b-c;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xix [40-51] 135c: XXIX [1-48] 150b-d 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b; part hi, 188d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learjiing,  17b-d  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 15 149a 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  v, 54d-56a / Meditations, iii-iv, 87a-90b / Objections
and  Replies,  prop  hi  132d-133a; 137d-138a; 140b-c; 214a-c; 229c-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, prop 17, schol 362c363c; appendix, 370c-372d
passim;  part  iv,  PROP 68, scHOL 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[6-10] 93b; [650659] 107b; BK II [345-353] 118b-119a; bk hi
[56-134] 136b-138a; [708-735] 150b-151b; bk
IV
[720-735]
168a-b; bk v
[468-505]
185b186a;
[577-599]
187b-188a;
[800-863]
192b194a; bk vn [59-640] 218b-231a esp [139-161] 220a-b,
[216-550]
221b-229a; bk vm
[452499] 242a-243a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  482  258a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect
56-57 36d-37b / Human Understanding, bk ii, CH XV, sect 12, 165c; bk iv,
ch  x,  sect  15  352d-353a;  sect  18-19  353c-354c  35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  46  421b-c 35 Hume: Human Understandings sect xii, div
132,  509d  [fn i] 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-b 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 228a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 81d'82a / Judgement, 594d
[fni]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 245d246a; part iv, 361a 47
Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
239c-243d  54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 875d-876a 7b. Providence
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1-3; 6-9 esp 8:21-22; 12-13 esp 12:1-3, 12:7,
13:14-18;  15  esp  15:1321;  17-18;  21-22  esp 22:15-18; 26:1-6,22-25;
28:10-22;  35:9-15; 37-50 esp 45:7-8 / Exodus, 3; 12; 13:21-17:7; 19-20;
40:34-38—  (D)  Exodus,  3;  12;  13:21-17:7; 19-20; 40:32-36 / Numbers,
9:15-23;  12; 22-24 / Deuteronomy, 4:1 -40; 6-1 1 ; 29-33 /Joshua, i-ii;
23-24—  (7))  Josue, i-ii; 23-24 / Judges, 1-16 / 7 Samuel, 8-10; 15-16—
(D)  7  Kings,  8-10; 15-16 / 77 Samuel, y—{D) II Kings, 7/7 Kings, 11 ;
13-22

[647a]
lb  to 7c CuAPTF.R 29: GOD S89 passim— (D) /// Kings, ii; 13-22 passim /
//  Kings  passim—  (D)  IV  Kings passim / / Chronicles, 17:3-15— (D) I
Paralipomenon,   17:3   15   /  //  Chronicles,  11-36  passim—  (D)  II
Paralipomenon,  11-36 passim / Esther csp 4:1^-14 — (D) Esther, 1:1-10:3
esp  4:13-14  I  fob  esp  1-2,  24, 27, 38-41 / Psalms passim, csp 3-4,
9h-ii,  13,  17-18,  65,  77, 104— (D) Psalms passim, esp 3-4, 9-10, 12,
16-17,  64,  76,  103 / Proverbs, 16:33 / Ecclcsiastes, 3; 7:13-15; 8-9;
11-12.  I  Isaiah,  36-37;  46;  51  —  (D)  Isaias,  36- . 37; 46; 51 I
Jeremiah,  17:5-8;  18-19;  31; 45— \D) Jeremias, 17:5-8; 18-19; V; 45 /
Daniel  passim,  esp  3:1-4:3,  6:1-28—  (D) Daniel, 1:13:23 passim, esp
3:1-23;  3:91-12:13  passim, esp 3:91-100, 6:1-28 / Jonah esp i, 4— (Z))
Jonas  tspi,^/  Malachi, 1 12-^— (D) Malachias, i :2-3 Apocrypha: Tobit—
(D)  OT,  Tobias  /  Judith csp 5-6, 8-i6-(D) OT, Judith esp 5-6, 8-16 /
Rest  of  Esther— {D) OT, Esther, 10:4-16:24 / Wisdom ofSolomon, 14:1-3—
(D)  OT,  BooI^oJ  Wisdom,  14:1-3/  Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-20—  (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-22  /  Song  of  Three  Children— {D) OT, Daniel,
3:24-90  /  Susanna  —(D) OT, Daniel, 13:1-64 / Bel and Dragon — {D) OT,
Daniel, 13:65-14:42 / / Maccabees, 3:13-26— (D) OT, / Machabees, 3:13-26
/  77  Maccabees,  6:1-16—  (D)  OT, 77 Machabees, 6:1-16 New Testament:
Matthetu,  6:25-34;  7:7-11;  10  csp  10:17-20, 10:29-33; 23:37 / Luke,
11:1-13;  12:1-34;  21:12-19 / John, 6:22-71 esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:64-65—
(D)  John,  6:22-72 csp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:65-66 / Acts, 1:15-26; 6:87:60;
13:48— (D) Acts, 1:15-26; 6:8-7:59; 13:48 / Romans, 8:28-11:36; 13:1-2 /
Ephesians,  1:4-2:10;  4:1-7  / Philippians, 2:12-13 / 77 Timothy, 1:9 /
Hebrews,  1:1-3;  13:5-6 / 7 Peter, 1 :i-5 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
ix,  par  i  61c-d  /  City  ofGod, bk i, ch 8-9 133a-135a; bk iv, ch 33
206c-d;  BK  V,  ch i 207d-208c; ch 8-1 i 212c-216d; ch 19 224b-225b; ch
21-22  226a227a;  bk  x,  ch 14-17 307c'310b; bk xi, ch 22 333d-334c; bk
xii,  ch  27  359c-360a,c;  bk  xiv,  CH  27  396c-397a;  bk  xxii, ch i
586b,d-587b  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 27 650a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 3, a i, REP I 14b-15b; q 8, a 3, ans 36b-37c; q
13,  A  8,  ANS  and  rep  i 70d-71b; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; qq 22-24
127c-143c;  q 96, a i, ans and rep 2 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 9, a 6, rep
3  662a-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 93, a 5, REP 3
219a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a  7,  ans  385c-387a;  q  25, a 11, rep 3
508d-509c;  part  III,  Q 61, A I, ans 855a-d; part hi suppl, q 69, A 3,
ans 887d-889c; q 71, a 5, ans 905C'908b; Q 77, A I, ans 943a-944d; q 78,
a 3, ans 950b951a 21 Dante: Divijie Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; PARADISE, I [94-142] 107b-d; vi [i-iii]

[647b]
113cll4d; VIII (85-148I 117c-118c; xi-xii 122a 125a csp xi
[28
^jg] 122b, \ii
[^745]
124a;  XX  [^1138]  137a 138a 22 Chaucer: rroilits and Crcssida, iiK iv,
stanza m8 15 j 106b 108b/ Knight's Vu/d-li 251 1267] 180b;
[i()()j,
1672I  187b  /  Tale  of  Man oflMW 236b 255b csp [4869 4924] 242b-243b.
I5247525^] 249b / Friar's Talc I7064-7085I 281a b / Franklins Tale
[11,177 206] 353b 354a
/  Monl(s  '7  a/f  [14,021-052)  434b  435a;  [14,149252]  437a-438b 23
HoBBF.s:  leviathan,  pari i, 53d; pari ii, 113b-c; 160a; 162b; part iv,
254b:  271b  25  Moniaigne: Essays, 98b 99a 26 Shaklspeare: Richard III,
aci ii, sc ii [7795]120b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc ii
[i-ii]
67d-68a;  [47  53] 68b-c; [230 235) 70a 29 (>ERVANTEs: Don Quixote, part
ii, 408c 30 Bacon: Advancement of learning, 19d; 38a / Novum Organum, bk
i, apii 93 125d-126a 32 Milton: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Paradise Lost, BK
III [80-134] 137a-138a / Samson Agonistes
[210-214]
344a;
[373-380] 347b-348a;
[667709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-395b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  619-641  284b-290a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect  3  405b-c;  SECT  60-66 424b-426a; sect 93-94 431b-c; SECT
105-107  433b-434a;  sect 146155 442a-444c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  vii, div 54-57 474b-475d; sect xi, div 108 500b-d 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  75c-d;  377c-378a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  331c-d  /  Social
Contract,  BK  III,  414d; BK IV, 437d-438b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
292d-294a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 542a-b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 95c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 158c160b; 168d-170b; part iv,
321b-c:  368d369a,c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  85a; 237a; 396b 397a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b; bk IX, 342a-344b; 357b-358b; bk
x,  447c-448a;  465c-467c  passim; bk xii, 553b; bk xiii, 563a-b; bk xv,
619d-620a;  631a-c;  epilogue I, 650b-c; epilogue ii, 675a-677b; 680b-c;
684b-d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, ekv, 127b137c passim; bk xi,
343b-c  54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 771a b 7c. Divine
government and law Old Testament: Genesis, 9:1-7 / Exodus, 12-13; 15:18;
19-31 esp 20:1-17; 34'"35 / Leviticus passim / Numbers passim, esp 5-10,
15,  18-19,  27-30,  35-36  /  Deuterojiomy  passim,  esp  5  :6-2i  / 7
Chronicles,  29:11-12—  (D)t7  Paralipomenon,  29:11-12  /  Job, 9:1-13;
34:12-18;  37-41 / Psalms, i; 10:16; 19:7-14; 37:30-31; 40:8; 47; 59:13;
66:7; 72:8; 78:1-8: 89:30-32; 93;

[648a]
(7.   Doctrines   common   to  the  Jewish,  Mohammedan,  and  Christian
conceptions  of  God  and  His relation to the world and man. lc» Divine
government  and  law.)  96:10-13;  97:1-2;  99:1; 103:19-22; 119 passim;
145:11-13—  (Z))  Psalms,  i; 9:16; 18:815; 36:30-31; 39:8-9; 46; 58:14;
65:7; 71:8; 77:1-8; 88:31-33; 92; 95:10-13; 96:1-2; 98:1; 102:19-22; 118
passim;  144:11-13  / Ecclesiastes, 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 51:4-8; 52:7— (D)
Isaias,  51 :4-8; 52:7 /Jeremiah, 31-34— (D) Jeremias, 31-34 / EzeJ^iel,
18—  (Z))  Ezechiel, 18 / Daniel, 4; 7:27— (D) Daniel, 3:98-4:34; 7:27 /
Amos,  2:1-8  /  Malachi,  1:14—  (D) Malachias, 1:14 Apocrypha: Bel and
Dragon, 5— (D) OT, Daniely 14:4 New Testament: Matthew, 5:17-20 / Lul{e,
16:17  /  Romans  passim,  esp 2:11-16, 7:21-25, 8:7 / 7 Timothy, 1:17 /
Hebrews,  1:8; 8:10; 10:16 / James, 2:8-12 / Revelation, 11:15-18; 19:6—
(D)  Apocalypse, 11:15-18; 19:6 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 9,
lOd;  par  14 12a-b; bk hi, par 13-17 16c-18a / City of God, BK V, CH II
216c-d;  bk  vii,ch3o  261b-d;  BK  IX,  CH 22 296d-297a; bk x, ch 13-15
307b308b;  CH  17  309c-310b; bk xi, ch 18 331d332a; ch 22 333d-334c; bk
xii,  ch 5 345a-b; BK xix, CH 12-15 517b-521c; ch 21 524a-525a; CH 23-25
525c-528d;  ch  27  529a-d; bk xxii, CH 1-3 586b,d-588b; ch 24 609a-612a
passim  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, ANs 12c-14a; q
21,  a  i, ans 124b-125b; a 2, ANS 125c-d; Q 26, A 4, ANS 151c-152a,c; q
47,  A  3,  REP  I  258c-259a; q 63, a 7, ans 331c332b; Q 65, A 3, REP I
341c-342b;  q 83, a i, REP 3 436d-438a; qq 103-119 528a-608d; PART i-ii,
Q 10, A 4, ANS 665d-666a,c; q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c; q 19, a 4 705b-c; a
6,  ans  and  REP 2 707a-708a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
71,  A 2, REP 4 106d-107c; a 6 llOb-lllb; q 72, a 2, ANS 112b-113a; a 4,
ans  114a-115a;  q  74, a 8, REP I 134b-136a; q 91, aa 1-2 208b-209d; aa
4-5  210c-212c;  q 93 215b,d-220d; q 97, a 3, ANS and REP I 237b-238b; a
4,  rep  3  238b239b;  qq  98-108  239b-337d; part ii-ii, q 23, a 6, ANS
487a-d;  q  187,  a  5,  rep  3  671d-673b;  PART  III, Q 60, A 4, rep 2
849c-850b;  part  hi  suppL,  Q  69,  A I, ANS 885c-886c; q 72, a 2, ANS
919a-920c  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, hell, vii [70-76] 10b; XI 15a-16b;
purgatory, xvi [52-105] 77b-d; PARADISE, I
[94-142]
107b-d; 11
[112-148]
109a-b; iii [34-90] 109d-110b; x [1-27] 120b-c; XXVII
[ioo]-xxviii
[139]
148b-150b; xxxii
[37-84] 155arc
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[i 663-1672] 187b
/ MonJ(s Tale
[14,221-228] 438a-b
/ Canon's Yeoman's Tale [16,935-949] 487a

[648b]
590 THE GREAT IDEAS Ic to Id 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 95d-96b; part
ii,  136d-138b;  159d-164a,c;  part  hi,  167b-c;  171a-172a; 177c-180a;
199b-204a; 216b-219d; 240a-241a; 245c-246a,c; part iv, 247a-249b; 272b-c
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491d-492a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 71a-b; 94b-c; lOOd 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54c; 55b /
Objections  and  Replies,  229c-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 3,
schol 374b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [237-249] 116b;
[310-328] 118a; BK III [274-343] 141b-143a esp
[317-333] 142b; BK V [600-615] 188b; bk vi
[169-188] 200a; bk vii
[139-173] 220a-221a;
[550-609] 229a-230b; bk xii [223-248] 324a-b
/ Samson Agonistes [667-673] 354a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 876 345a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c; bk ii, ch xxviii,
sect  8  230a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 28-29 322a-323a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,   sect   29-33  418c-419a;  sect  51-53  422d-423a;  sect  57
423d-424a;   sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  9394  431b-c;  SECT  105-107
433b-434a;  sect  146-155  442a-444c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
vii,  div  54-57  474b-475d;  sect  viii,  div 78-81 485c487a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  261b-266b esp 261b-262a, 266b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
20a-d  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-2b; BK XII, 85d-86a; bk
xxvi,  214b,d-215a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  252c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  237b; 238b-240b / /«^^^- ment, 594d [fn i] 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  158c160b; 168d-170b; part iii, 309d-310a; part IV,
368d-369a,c  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 12 7b-137c passim
Id.  Grace  Old  Testament: Psalms, 84:11— (D) Psalms, 83:12 / Proverbs,
3:1-4,21-26  /  Jeremiah,  31  :i8 — (D) Jeremias, 31:18 / Lamentations,
5:21  /  Zechariah,  12:10—  (D)  Zacharias,  12:10 New Testament: John,
1:11-18  /  Acts,  4:33 / Romans passim, esp 1:3-5, 3'i~6-23' ii'5~7 / /
Corinthians, 2:11-3:10; 15:9-10 / // Corinthians, i; 4-6; 8:7-9; 9:5-15;
12   /   Galatians   I  Ephesians  /  Philippians,  2:12-13;  4'i3  /  n
Thessalonians,  2:15-16  /  11  Timothy  esp 1 :8-9 / Titus, 2 :9-3 :j /
Hebrews,  2  :9;  12 :i4-29 / James, 4:6 / / Peter passim, esp i, 5:5 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 5-6 2b-c; bk II, par 15 12b-c; bk vi,
par  4  36a-b / City ofGod, BK XIII, CH 3-5 361a-362c; ch 7 362d363b; ch
14-15 366b-d; ch 20 370c-371a; bk XIII, CH 23-BK XIV, CH I 372a-377a; bk
xiv, ch 26 395d-396c; ch 27, 397a; bk xv, ch 1-3

[649a]
d  Id to 7e Chapter 29: GOD 591 397b,d-399c; bk xvi, ch 26-27 438c 439d;
BK  XXI,  CH  15-16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii, cm 22 606d-608b esp 608a- b /
Christian  Doctrine, BK I, CH I 624b, 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  o  2,  a 2, REP I lld-12c;Q8, A3, ANsandREP4 36b 37c; Q 12, A 2, ANS
51c-52c;  a  4,  ans  53b-54c;  a  5,  ANS  54c-55b;  a 13 61c-62b; q 38
200c-202b; Q 43 230a-237a,c; q 62 317c-325b; q 89, a i, REP 3 473b-475a;
a  2,  rep 3 475a-d; q 95 506b-510a; q 104, a 4, ans 538a-c; q 108, a 8,
ANS  and REP 1-2 561a-562a; q 113, a i, rep 2 576a-d; part i-ii, q 5, aa
5-7  640b-642d  esp A 7, rep 3 642a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  50,  A  2  7c-8a;  q  51,  a 4 15a-d; q 55, a 4, ans and REP 6
28c-29d;  q 58, a 3, rep 3 43b-44a; q 62 59d-63a; q 63, a 2, ans and rep
1-2  64b-65a;  aa  3-4  65a-66c;  q 65, aa 2-5 72a-75a; q 66, a 2, rep I
76c-77c;  q  68  87c-96c;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  2 141d-142c; q 79, aa 3-4
158a-159c; q 81, A 3, rep 3 165d-166b; q 83, a i, rep 4-5 171a172b; A 2,
rep  2  172b-173a; q 85, a 6, ans 182d-184a; q 95, a i, ans 226c-227c; q
98, a i 239b-240c; q 100, a 5, rep 2 255a-257c; a 10, REP 3 262b-263b; a
12,  ans  264d-265d;  q  106, A I, ans and rep 1,3 321a-322a; qq 109-114
338a-378a,c; part ii-ii, q 2, aa 9-10 398c400b; Q 24, A 3, rep i 491a-d;
a  11,  ans  498b499c;  PART  III,  Q  6,  A  3, rep 3 742a-743a; qq 7-8
745c-763b; q 10, a 4, rep 3 771b-772a; q 14, A 4, rep 2 786d-787c; q 15,
a  2,  ans  789a-d; q 22, a i, ans and rep 3 827c-828c; q 23, A I, REP I
833a-d;  a  4,  rep  2 835b-836a; q 26, A 2, rep I 846b-d;Q6i, Ai, rep 2
855a-d;  q  62  858b-864c;  part hi suppl, q 75, a 2, rep 5 937a-938a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; purgatory, VII
[40-60] 62d-63a;
[i 12-123] 63d64a; ix [13-69] 66a-c; xi [1-24] 68d-69a; xiii
[10-21] 72a; paradise, vii [16-120] 115b'116b;
XX
[31-138] 137a-138a; xxiv 142d-144b esp
[58-60] 143b,
[i 18-123] 143d-144a; xxix [5866]
150d-151a; xxx
[34-99]
152a-d; xxxii
[40-84] 155a-c; xxxii [i39]-xxxiii [145] 156a157d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk i, stanza 144 19b-20a / Second
Nun's  Tale  [15,788-822]  467a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 88c-89a;
part ii, 137c-d; 149c-d; part hi, 176d-177c; 186a-b; 191b-193c esp 193a;
241c-242a;  part  iv,  250c251b;  253b-254b;  255b;  264a  25 Montaigne:
Essays,   209a-d;   212a-d;   238c239c;  267c-268a;  273a-b;  294a-b  31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 125d126a 32 Mil.ton: Paradise Lost,
bk ii [io24-io33]133b; BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134] 138a,
[167-184] 139a-b, [227-238] 140b; bk xi [1-31]
299a-b; [251-262] 304b-305a / Samson Agonistes [356-372] 347b; [652-666]
353b-354a

[649b]
33  Pascal:  Provincial  letters,  la  14a;  19a  26b;  29b; 154b 159a /
PensSes, 202 211a; 4V>-4^5 245a 251a; 505 261a b; 507-511 261b; 51 \ 517
262a 263b; 520 524 263b 264a; 645 290b291a; <S8i 345b 37 FiKLiMNc;: 'Pom
Jones,  38d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  mi, 310d311a; part iv, 354a-c 52 Dos roEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov,
bk  v, 127b137c passim le. Miracles Old Testament: Genesis, 17:18-18:16;
19:911,24-26;  21:1-8  /  Exodus,  3-4;  7-12; 14-17 / Numbers, 9:15-23;
11-12;  16-17; 20:1-13; 21:5-9; 22:21-34; 26:9-10 / Joshua, 3-4; 6:1-20;
10:12-14;  24:6-7—  (D)  Josue,  3-4; 6:1-20; 10:12-14; 24:6-7 / Judges,
6:36-40  /  /  Samuel,  12:16-19— (Z)) / Kings, 12:16-19 / / Kings, i-j;
18:30-39— (D) /// Kings, 17; 18-30-39 / // Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11
— (D) IV Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-11 / Nehemiah, g:^2i— (D) II Esdras,
9:9-21  / Psalms, 78; 105; 106:7-11; 114— (D) Psalms, 77; 104; 105:7-11;
113:1-8 / Isaiah, 38:1-9— (D) Isaias, 38:1-9 / Daniel, 3:1-4:3; 5-6— (D)
Daniel, 3:1-23,91-100; 5-6 / ]oel, 2:30-31 / Jonah— {D) Jonas Apocrypha:
Song of Three Children, 1-27— (D) OT, Daniel, 3 :24-5o / Bel and Dragon,
28-42  —  (D) OT, Daniel, 14:27-42 / // Maccabees, 1:18-22; 2:10— (D)OT,
//  Machabees,  1:1822;  2:10  New  Testament:  Matthetv,  1:18-25; 8-9;
12:913,22-29;  14:13-36;  15:22-39; 17; 20:29-34 / Marf^, 1:29-34,40-44;
2:3-12;  3:1-5;  4:3440;  5; 6:34-56; 7:24-8:26; 9:1-10,16-29; 10:46-52;
13:24-26   /   Luke,   1:5-66;   4:315:26;   6:6-10;   7:1-16;  8:22-56;
9:12-17,28-43;  11:14-26;  13:11-17;  14:1-6;  17:11-19; 18:3543 / John,
2:1-11;  3:2;  4:46-54;  5:1-16; 6:526; 7:31; 9:1-33; 11:1-45; 12:37-38;
21:1-11  /  Acts, 2:1-22; 3:2-11; 5:12-^6; 8:6; 9:36-43; 14:7-10; 15:12;
19:11-12;  20:7-12; 28:1-10 / / Corinthians, 12:8-10 / Galatians, y.'^-j
I  Hebrews,  2:3-4 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 8-13 303a307c; CH
16-18 308b-310d; bk xxi, ch 5-8 563d-568d; bk xxii, ch 5-10 589a-599b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 89, A 8, REP 2 479c-480c; q 92, a
4,  ans 491b-d; q 104, A 4, ans 538a-c; q 105, aa 6-8 543b545b; Q 106, A
3,  ANS 547c-548b; q no, a 4 567c-568b; q 114, a 4 584a-585a; part i-ii,
Q  10, A 4, rep 2 665d-666a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
63, A 4, rep 3 65d-66c; q 81, a 4, ans 166b-167a; Q 113, A 10 369c-370b;
part  hi  suppl, q 75, A 3, ANS 938a-939d; Q 83, a 3 978c-980d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv [88II i] 143c-d

[650a]
(7.   Doctrines   common   to  the  Jewish,  Mohammedan,  and  Christian
conceptions  of  God  and  His  relation  to  the  world  and  tnan. le.
Miracles.^ 22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp
[4869-4924] 242b-243b
/ Prioress's Tale
[13,418-620] 392a-395b
/ Secofid Nun's Tale
[16,001-021] 471a-b
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  83c;  part ii, 137b-c; 160b: part hi,
166a-167b;  188a-191a;  PART  IV,  249b-250a  30  Bacox:  Advancement of
Learning,  19b-c;  33c-d;  41b-d / New Atlantis, 201d-203c esp 203a-b 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii [173-222] 323a324a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
643-644   290b-291b;   803-856  328b-341b;  876  345a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi,  SECT  13  371a-b  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,   sect   62-63   425a-c;   sect  84  429b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Undeistanding,  sect  vii,  div  54  474b-c; sect x 488d-497b 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  180b-c;  189b-191a;  206b'd;  295c-296b; 465d-466c;
605b-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 227d-228a; 232a-c; 398b-399b 44
BoswEi.!.:  Johnson,  126b-c; 359a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
i,  247a;  part III, 307a-b; part iv, 338b-c; 348d349a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i  [762-770]  20a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 219b-220a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  lla-b;  BK II, 21d-22b; bk v,
127b-137c  passim; bk VII, 171a-177b; 189d-190a 7/. The Book of Life Old
Testament:  Exodus, 32:31-33; 33:19 / Psalms, 69:28— (D) Psalms, 68:29 /
J^^^^^h,   4-3-(^)   Apocrypha:   Ecclesiasticus,   33:10-13—   (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  33:10-14  New  Testament:  Matthew,  20:1-16; 22:1-14 /
Luke, 10:20 /John, 5:21; 6:44; 10:26-29/ Acts, 13:48 / Romans, 8:28-9:23
/  Ephesians,  1-3  /  //  Thessalonians,  2:12-14  / ^^ Timothy, 1:8-9;
2:19-20  /  Hebrews, 12:22-23 / / Peter, 1:1-5; 2 :i-9 / // Peter, 1:10/
Revelation,  3  :4-5  ;  13  :4-8  17:7-8; 20:11-21:27 esp 20:15, 21:27;
22:1819—  (D)  Apocalypse, 3:4-5; 13:4-8; 17:7-8; 20:11-21:27 esp 20:15,
21:27; 22:18-19 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xv, ch i 397b,d398c; bk xx,
ch  8 536d-538c; ch 14-16 542d544d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  24  141b-143c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 63, a i, rep I
864c-865b; part hi suppl, q 87, a i 997b998c

[650b]
;  592  THE  GREAT IDEAS If to Ih 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xix
[103148]  136a-c;  xx  [94-138]  137d-138a; xxi [52102] 138d-139b; xxxii
[40-84]  155a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [356-363] 101a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  884  346a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 238c ; 334b-c Ig. The
resurrection  of  the  body  Old  Testament:  Job,  14:13-15; 19:25-27 /
Isaiah,  26:19;  66:14— (D) ^^^^^>, 26:19; 66:14 / EzeXiel, 37:1-14— (D)
Ezechiel,  37:1-14  /  Daniel, 12:1-3 Apocrypha: // Maccabees, 12:41-45—
(D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  12:42-46  New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:23-33;
27:52-53; 28 / Mar/{, 12:18-27; 16:1-9 / ^w^*?. 20:27-38; 24:1-12 /John,
2:18-22 / Acts, 23:1-10; 24:15; 26:8 / Romans, 4:17; 6:3-11; 8:10-11 / /
Corinthians, 6:14; 15 / // Corinthians, 1:9-10; ^:ij\ / 1 Thessalonians,
4:13-17  /Hebrews,  6:1-2  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x, ch 29,
317b318a;  bk  xiii,  ch  1-2  360a-361a;  ch  16-20 367a-371a; ch 22-24
371c-376a,c;  bk  xx,  ch  6-7  534a-536d;  ch  9-10 538c-541a; ch 12-17
541c-545c;  ch 20-23 547c-552c; ch 26, 555d556a; bk xx, ch 30-BK xxi, ch
10,  559d570b;  BK XXII 586b,d-618d esp ch 4-5 588b590a, CH 7 591c-d, ch
11-21 599c-606d, ch 25-30 612a-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, CH 19-21
629a-b; ch 23-24 630a-631a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl,
QQ  75-86  935a-996a,c;  q  93, a i 1037d-1039a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, vi
[94-1 11]
9b-c; X
[1-15]
13d; xiii
[85-108]
18d-19a; paradise, VII
[121-148]
116b-c; xiv
[1-66]
126d-127c; xxv [64-129] 145a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 191b-193c;
195b-d; part iv, 253b-255b; 259b-c 25 Montaigne: E^^fl^y, 248c-249c;311a
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [227-343] 140b143a esp
[294-329] 141b-142b; bk
xii
[386445] 327b-329a esp [411-429] 328a-b
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  95  431c 38 Montesquieu: 5/7/r7/
ofLaws,  bk  xxiv,  205d206a 41 Gibbon: Decli7ie and Fall, 233d; 234d 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 472a-b 7h. The Last Judgment and the end of the world
Old  Testament:  Job,  19:25-27;  21:27-34  /  Psalms, 50; 96:10-13— (D)
Psalms,  49;  95:1013  / Ecclesiastes, 3:16-17; 11:9-10; 12:14 / Isaiah,
2-4;  11:11-16; 13:6-22; 24; 26-27; 3O' 34-35' 65:17-25; 66— (D) Isaias,
2-4;  11:11-16;  13:6-22;  24;  26-27; 30; 34-35; 65:17-25; 66 / Daniel,
7:21-27;  12 / Joel / Micah, 4— (D) Micheas, 4 / Zephaniah—{D) Sophonias
/  Zechariah,  Ij\—{D)  Zacharias,  14 / Malachi, 3-4 (D) Malachias, 3-4
Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:17-  (D)  OT, Judith, 16:20-21 / Rest of Esther,
10:4-11:12— (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-11:12

[651a]
8/0  Sb  Chapter  29:  CiOD 593 New Testament: Matthew, 7:1-2; 10:14 15;
11:20-24;   12:36;  13:36-43.47-50;  24-25  /  Mar{,  13:4-37  /  Lu/{e,
17:20-37;  21:5-36 / John, 12:48 / Acts, 2:17-21; 17:31 / Romans, 2:5-11
/  /  Corinthians,  4:15-5:4;  15:23 28 / / Thcssalonians, 1:9-10; 2:19;
4*M~5-4 / // Thessalonians, 1-2 / // Timothw 3:1-4:9 / Hebrews, 9 :26-27
/  James,  5  :7-9  /  / Peter, 4 :5-6 / // Peter, 2:9; 3:7-13 / I John,
2:18-29;  4*»7  / Jude I Revelation passim, esp 14:15-16:21, 20:1-22:21—
(D)  Apocalypse passim, esp 14:1516:21, 20:1-22:21 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xviii,  en  53  504d-505c; bk xx 530a-560a,c; bk xxi, ch 11-27
570b-586a,c  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk hi, CH 37, 673d-674a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  QQ  73-74  922b-935a,c;  q 77, a 2
945a-946b; QQ 87-99 997a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[94-115]
9b-c; X
[1-15] 13d; paradise, xix [100-148]
136a-c 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part hi, 230a; 244b-c 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[133-172] 4b-5b
/ Paradise Lost, bk hi [274-343] 141b-143a esp
[326-341] 142b; bk
VII
[139-173] 220a-221a;
BK XI
[45-83]
300a-301a; bk xh
[451-465]
329a;  [537-551] 331a / Areopagitica, 410a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 17a-b
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 187c-189a 41 Gibbon : Decline and Fall,
233c-234d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim, esp
134d-135a;  bk  xi,  337a-346a  passim  8. Specifically Jewish doctrines
concerning God and His people %a. The Chosen People: Jew and gentile Old
Testament:  Genesis,  12:1-4;  13:14-17;  15;  17:1-18:19;  22:1-18  esp
22:15-17;  26:1-6,2325;  27-28;  35:9-13;  46:1-7; 48-49 / Exodus, 3-17;
19-20;  33:1-34:18  /  Leviticus,  26 / Deuteronomy, i; 4-12 passim, esp
4:37-38, 7:6-8, 10:15; 14:1-2; 15:6; 23:1-8; 26-32 passim, esp 26:17-19,
28:1-68,   31:16-21,  32:9-14  /Joshua,  10:12-14;  23"i-i3~('^)  Josue,
10:12-14;  23:113 / / Samuel, 12— (D) I Kings, 12 / I Kings, 8:5i-53-(^)
^I^  Kings, 8:51-53 / // Ktngs, 11:17— (D) /V Kings, 11:17// Chronicles,
1  7  (D)  /  Paralipomenon, 17 / Nehemiah, 9— (D) // Esdras, 9 / Psalms
passim,  esp  33:12,  50:7,  78:1-72,  81:1-16,  89:1-52,  105:1-106:48,
132:1-18,  135:4-14,  136:1-26—  (D)  Psalms  passim,  esp  32:12, 49:7,
77:1-72,  80:2-17, 88:2-53, 104:1-105:48, 131:1-18, 134:4-14, 135:1-27 /
Isaiah  passim,  esp  40:1;  42:1-6,  43:1-7,  44:1-5,  46:3-4' 49:1-26,
63:7-8—  (D)  Isaias  passim,  esp  40:1, 42:1-^, 43:1-7, 44:15, 46:3-4,
49:1-26, 63:7-8 / Jeremiah passim, esp 3, 7:23, 11:4, 24:7, 30:22, 31:1,
31:33,

[651b]
^2:^8  —  (D)  Jeremias  passim,  esp  ^, 7:2^, 11:4, 24:7, 30:22, 31:1,
31:33,  32:38  /  Kzet(iel,  ir:i5  20; 14:11; 16-17; 20; 34; 36-37— (D)
lizechiel,  11:15-20;  14:11;  16-17;  20;  34;  36-37  /  Amos, 3:1-2 /
Obadiah—{D)  Ahdias  I Micah, 5:7-15— (D) Michcas, 5:7-11 / Zechariah, i
:i2-2:i3;  8-10  esp  8:8—  (L>)  Zacharias,  1:12  2:13; 8-10 esp 8:8 /
Malachi, 1:1 ^ — (D) Malachias, 1:1-3 Apocrypha : Rest of Esther, 14:5 —
(D)  OT,  Esther,  14:5  /  Wisdom of Solomon, 16:20-26— (D) OT, Boo{ of
Wisdom,   16:20-26   /   Ecclesiasticus,   17:17-21;   47:22—   (D)  OT,
Exclesiasticus,  17:14-17;  47:24-25  New  Testament:  Matthew, 10:5-6 /
Acts,  15:129;  21:19-25  /  Romans,  1:13-16;  2-4;  9; 10:1113; II / /
Corinthians,  12:13  /  Galatians,  2:616; 3:13-29; 4:21-31; 5:6; 6:15 /
Ephesians,  2:11-3:8  /  Colossians, 3:9-11 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v,
295d  18  Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 34 206d207a,c; bk xvi, ch 16
433c-434a:  ch 18 434c; CH 21-28 435a-440b; ch 32 441c-442c: bk XVII, ch
7  458c-459d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  21,  A  4, REP 2 126c-127c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
98,  AA  4-5  242b-244b;  qq  102-105  27Cb  32Ia passim, esp q 102, a 6
292c-298a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 82d-83a; pari h, 160b-c; PART
III,  177c-180d  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk xii [101-269] 321b325a /
Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[210292]
344a-346a,
[420-471]
348b-350a,
[84^-
902] 358a-359a,
[11 56-1 223] 364b-366a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  603  279b;  dio-inz  280b282b; 619-641 284b-290a;
713-718 304b-308b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 435b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  179d-183a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, pari i,
245d247b;  PART  HI,  305b-c;  part  iv,  322a-b Sb. God's Covenant with
Israel:  circumcision  as  sign  of the Covenant Old Testament: Genesis,
12:1-3,7;  15:17-21;  17; 22:16-18; 26:2-3 / Exodus, 2:23-4:31 esp 2:24;
6:1-9;  19:3-^;  24:7-8;  31:16-17;  32:1113;  34  esp 34:10, 34:27-28 /
I^viticus,  2:13;  26 / Deuteronomy, 1:8; 4-1 1 passim, esp 4:23, 5:2-3,
7:12-13,   8:18-20,   10:16;  29-31;  34:4  /  Joshua,  5:1-9;  7:10-12;
23:16-24:28—  (D) Josue, 5:1-9; 7:10-12; 23:16-24:28 / Judges, 2:1-5 / /
Kings,  8:56;  19:9-18—  (D) /// Kings, 8:56; 19:9-18 / // Kings, 11:17;
13:22-23;  17  esp  17:14-16, 17:34-40; 22-23 ^P 23:2-^5 — (D) IV Kings,
11:17;  13:22-23;  17  esp  17:1416,  17:34-40;  22-23  esp  23:2-3  / /
Chronicles,  16:13-22—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon, 16:13-22 / // Chronicles,
6:14-15—  (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  6:14-15  /  Neliemiah, 1:5; 9— (D) II
Esdras,  1:5;  9  / Psalms, 25:14; 44:17; 74:19-20; 78; 105 esp 105:7-8;
HI— (D) Psalms, 24:14; 43:18;

[652a]
(8.  Specifically  Jewish  doctrines  concerning God and His people. 8b.
God's  Covenant  with  Israel:  circumcision  as sign of the Covenant. )
73:19-20;  77;  104  esp  104:7-8;  no  / Isaiah, 24:1-5; 33:1-8; 54 esp
54:10; 56 esp 56:4-6; 59:20-21; 61 esp 61:8— (D) Isaias, 24:1-5; 33:1-8;
54  esp  54:10; 56 esp 56:4-6; 59:2021; 61 esp 61:8 I Jeremiah, 4:4; 11;
14:19-22; 22:5-9; 31-33 esp 31:31-33. 32:40* 33:20-26; 34:13-20; 50:4-5—
(D)  Jeremias,  4:4;  11;  14:19-22;  22:5-9; 31-33 esp 31:31-33. 32:40.
33:20-26;  34:13-20;  50:4-5  /  EzeJ^tel,  16-17;  20:33-38;  37:21-28;
44:6-9—  (D)  Ezechiel,  16-17;  20:33-38;  37:21-28;  44:6-9  /  Hosea,
2:16-20;  6 esp 6:7; 8— (D) Osee, 2:16-20; 6 esp 6:7; 8 / Haggaiy 2:4-5—
(D) 2:5-6 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 44:19-45:5— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
44  :20-45  :6  /  /  Maccabees,  i :4463; 2:19-6:8 esp4:7-i4— (D) OT, I
Machabees,  1:46-66;  2:19-6:8 esp 4:7-14 New Testament: LuJ{e, 1:70-75;
2:21  /  John,  7:22-23  /  Acts, 3:25; 7:1-8,51-53; 15:1-29; 21:20-21 /
Romans,  2:25-4:16;  11:25-27  /  /  Corinthians,  7:18-19  / Galatians,
3:13^5:11;  6:12-15 / Ephesians, 2:11-13 / Colossians, 2:10-14; 3:9-11 /
Hebrews, 8:6-10:17 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xvi, ch 16 433c434a; ch
18  434c;  ch  21-28  435a-440b; ch 32 441c-442c; ch 36-38 443d-446a; bk
xix,  ch 22 525b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, AA 4-6
242b-245b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part i, 82d-83a; part hi, 177c-180a;
199b-201b;  206c  32  Milton:  Upon  the Circumcision 12b-13a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  610-612  280b-282b; 637-639 289b'290a; 675 296b-297a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part iv, 322a-b 8c. The Law: its observance as a
condition  of  righteousness  and  blessedness  Old  Testament: Genesis,
26:4-5  /  Exodus,  1213; 19-40 esp 20:1-17 / Leviticus passim, esp 26 /
Numbers passim / Deuteronomy passim, esp 4:1-15, 5:6-21, 6:1-9, 6:17-25,
7:9-26,  10:1213,  11:1-32,  12:32,  28:1-68,  30:11-20  /Joshua, 1:7-8;
8:30-35;  22:1-6—  (D) Josue, 1:7-8; 8:30-35; 22:1-6 / I Kings, 8:54-62—
(D)  ///  Kings, 8:54-62 / // Kings, 17; 2i:8-(D) IV Kings, 17; 21:8 / /
Chronicles,  22:12-13 (D) I Paralipomenon, 22:12-13 / ^^ Chronicles, 31;
33:8; 35:1-19— (D) // Paralipomenon, 31; 33:8; 35:1-19 / Ezra, 9-10— (D)
/ Esdras, 9-10 / Nehemiah, 1:5-9; 9:16-38— (D) // Esdras, 1:5-9; 9:16-38
/  Psalms, i; 19:7-14; 37:30-31; 40:8; 78; 89:20-36 esp 89:30-32; 94:12;
105:43-45; 119— (D) Psalms, 1; 18:8-15; 36:30-31; 39:9; 77; 88:21-37 esp
88:31-33;  93:12;  104:43-45;  118 / Proverbs passim, esp 6:20-23, 28:7,
29:18 / Isaiah passim, esp

[652b]
594  THE GREAT IDEAS Sc to M 5:24-25, 30:9, 42:21-25, 51:7-8— (D) Isaias
passim,  esp  5:24-25,  30:9,  42:21-25,  51:7-8  / Jeremiah passim, esp
2:5-8,  6:19,  9:13-16,  16:10-13,  26:4-6,  31:33, 44:10-14, 44:23— {D)
Jeremias  passim,  esp  2:5-8,  6:19,  9:13-16, 16:10-13, 26:4-6, 31:33,
44:10-14,  44:23  / Eze\iel, 5:5-9; 11:17-20; 18; 22:26; 36:2527; 43-48—
(D)  Ezechiel,  5:5-9;  11:17-20;  18;  22:26; 36:25-27; 43-48 / Daniel,
9:1-15  /  Hosea, 4:6; 8:1— (D) Osee, 4:6; 8:1 / Amos 2:4-6 / Zephaniah,
3:1-7—  (D) Sophonias y.i-y I Zechariah, y:i2-i^—{D) Zacharias 7:12-14 /
Malachi,  2:1-10;  3:7; 4:4— (Z)) Malachias, 2:1-10; 3:7; 4:4 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  14:8-9—  (Z))  OT, Tobias^ 14:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus passim, esp
2:16, 9:15, 10:19, 11:15. 17:11-14. 19:17-20, i9:24» 24:23, 32:15, 33:2,
34:8,  39:1-11,  41:8, 42:12, 45:1-5— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus passim, esp
2:19,  9:22-23, 10:23, 11:15, 17:9-12, 19:17-18, 19:21, 24:32-33, 32:19,
33:2,  34:8, 39:1-15, 41:11, 42:1-2, 45:1-6 / Baruch— (D) OT, Baruch / I
Maccabees,  1:38-63; 2:i9-68-(Z)) OT, / Machabees, 1:40-66; 2:19-68 / //
Maccabees,  2:2-3;  6-7;  11:22-26  —  (D) OT, // Machabees, 2:2-3; ^"75
11:22-26  New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:17-20; 12:1-13; 15:1-20; 19:3-9 /
Mar\,  7:1-23; 10:2-12 / Luke, 6:1-9; 11:37-41; 14:2-5; 16:16-17 / John,
1:17;  5:1-18,45-47;  7:19-23  / ActSy 10:9-15,25-28; 13:38-39; 15:1-10;
21:20-21  /  Rofnans  passim / Galatians passim / Ephesians^ 2:14-15 / I
Timothy,  1:5-11  / Hebrews, 7-10 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 17
309c310b;  bk  XX,  ch  28  556c-557a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  91,  AA  4-5  210c-212c;  qq 98-105 239b-321a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  paradise, v [13-84] 112b-113a passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
hi,  177d-178a;  180a-d;  206c-207a; 216b-218a; 223a-c; part IV, 269a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 18b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[223-260]   324a325a;   [285-314]  325b-326a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  610
280b-282a; 619-620 284b-286a; 628-634 287a-289a; 678 297a-b; 680 298a 35
Locke:  Toleration,  14b-15a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 179d-182c esp
181a182a; 208a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 246c-d Sd. The
Temple:  the  Ark  of  the  Torah  Old Testament: Exodus, 25-27; 30:1-6;
35:1038:31;  39:32-40:36  /  Leviticus,  26:11 / Numbers, <^:i'2,-2.2. I
Deuteronomy, 10:1-5; 12:5-6; 16:5-6; 31:24-26 / Joshua, 3-4; 6:1-16— (D)
Josue,  3-4;  6:1-16  /  /  Samuel,  4:3-7:2—  (D) / Kings, 4:3-7:2 / II
Samuel, 6:1-17; 7:1-13 -(D) // Kings, 6:1-17; 7:1-13 / ^ ^^^^^. 5-8 —(D)
/// Kings, 5-8 / II Kings, 12:4-16;

[653a]
Se to 9a Chapti-r 29: COD 595 25:i-i7-(D) IV Kings, 12:4-16; 25:1-17 / /
Chronicles,   13;  15:1-17:12;  22:1-29:10—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon,  13;
15:1-17:12; 22:i-2{>:io / // Chronicles, 2-7 esp 7:12-16; 8:11; 24:4-14;
29;  34;  36—  (D) // Paralipomenon, 2-7 esp 7:12-16; 8:11; 24:4-14; 29;
^4; ^6 / Ezra, 3-6— (D) / Esdras, 3-6 / Psalms, 5:7; 11:4; 27:4-6; 65:4;
68:29;  138:2—  (D)  Psalms,  5:8;  10:5;  26:4-6;  64:5; 67:30; 137:2 /
Isaiah,   2:2-3;   56:6-7—  (D)  Isaias,  2.\2.~y,  56:6-7  /  Jeremiah,
7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7— (D) Jeremias, 7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7 / Eze{iel, 40-42—
(D)  Ezechiel,  40-42  /Jonah,  2:4—  (D) Jonas, 2:5 / Micah, 4:1-2— (D)
Micheas,  4:1-2  /  Haha{-  /{u{,  2:20— (D) Habacuc, 2:20 / Haggai— (D)
Aggeus  /  Zechariah,  8:9—  (D)  Zacharias,  8:9  /  Malachi,  y.i— {D)
Malachias,  3:1  Apocrvpha:  To^/V,  14:4-7—  (Z))  OT, Tobias, 14:6-9 /
Wisdom of Solomon, 9:8— (D) OT, Boo/^ 0/ Wisdom, 9:8 / Baruch, 2:26— (D)
OT,  Baruch,  2:26  New  Testament:  /oA;z, 2:13-17 / Hebrews, 9:1-10 15
Tacitus:  Histories, bk v, 296a; 297d-298a 18 Augustine: Cz>y of God, bk
x,  ch  17 309c310b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q ioi, A 4,
ANS  and  REP  1,4 269a-270b; q 102, a 4 276d-283c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  hi,  178c;  180a-c;  184c; 198a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[244-256] 324b;
[284-371] 325b-327a esp [331-343] 326b
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 180a; 180d-181a; 352c-354d esp 354a-b Be.
The  messianic hope Old Testament: Genesis, 49:10-12 / NumberSy 24:15-25
/  Deuteronomy, 30:1-10 / Psalms, 22:27-31; 44; 46-48; 60; 67-69 passim;
74; 102; 106:40-48; 126; 132; 147:1-11— (D) Psalms, 21:28-32; 43; 45-47;
59;  66-68  passim;  73;  ioi;  105:40-48;  125; 131; 146 / Isaiah, 2-4;
7:10-16;  9:1-7;  11-12;  25-27; 30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 49;
51-56   esp  52:13-53:12;  59:20-62:12;  65:1766:24—  (D)  Isaias,  2-4;
7:10-16;  9:1-7;  11-12;  25-27; 30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 49;
51-56  esp  52:13-53:12;  59:20-62:12;  65:17-66:24  / Jeremiah, 2^:^-6;
30-33—  (D)  Jeremias,  23:3-6; 30-33 / Eze^iel, 17:2224; 34; 36-37— (D)
Ezechiel,  17:22-24;  34;  36-37  /  Daniel,  9:20-27  / Hosea, 1:10-11;
2:16-23;  3-3-55 13-1^— (D) Osee, 1:10-11; 2:16-24; 3:3-5; 13-14 / Joel,
2-3  / Amos, 9:9-15— (D) Amos, 9:9-14 / Micah, 2:12-13; 4-5; 7:7-20— (D)
Micheas,  2:12-13;  4-5;  7:720  /  Zephaniah,  3—  (Z^)  Sophonias, 3 /
Zechariah, 2; 8-10; 12-14— (D) Zacharias, 2; 8-10; 12-14 / Malachi, 3-4—
(D)  Malachias,  3-4  New Testament: Matthew, i esp 1:20-23; 3:13,13-17;
12:14-21; 16:13-16; 17:1-13; 26:63-

[653b]
(^  /  Marl^,  8:27-29;  9:2-13; 14:61-62 / Lul^e^ 1:^0 35; 3:1-6,15-16;
7:24-28;  9:18  20,  2836; 22:66-70 / /o/t«, 1:15-41 esp 1:41; 4:4^0 esp
4:25-26:  7:26-5^; 10:24-^8 2OA011NAS: Summa Theologica, part hi, q i, A
()  708c 709c 23 Hoiiiu.s: lu'vtathan, part hi, 229c 32 Milton: Paradise
Ujst, bk xii
[2:55244]
324b;  [284-:5^o| 325b 326b 33 Pascal: Pensecs, (m-j 280a; 609 280b; 613
282b  283a;  616  619  283b  285a;  642  290b;  662  293b; 673 296a; 675
296b-297a; 692 300b301a; 719 308b-309a; 727 315b 316b; 729 730 316b-317a
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 181b: 207d 208a; 308a 41 GiHtios: Decline
and  Fall,  134b  135a  9.  Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the
divine  nature and human destiny 9a. The Trinity Old Testament: Genesis,
1:26  New  Testament:  Matthew,  1:18-20; 3:11,1617; 10:19-20; 12:31-32;
28:19  /  Marl^,  1:8-12;  3:28-30;  13:11 / Lu/{e, 1:15,26-35; 2:25-27;
3:16,21-22;  11:13;  12:10-12 / John, 1:1-8,14, 18,32-34; 3 esp 3:16-17,
3:35-36;  14-16;  20:22-23 / ^^^^j 1:2,5-8; 2:1-41 esp 2:32-39; 4:23-31;
5:32;  8:17-22;  9:31;  10:38,44-48;  11:15-17;  13:2-4; 15:7-9; 19:1-6;
20:28;  28:25-27  /  Romans,  5 esp 5:5-10; 8:1-9:1; 14:17; 15:13,16 / /
Corinthians,  2:9-14;  3:16-23; 6:19; 12:2-13 / ^^ Cgrinthians, 1:18-22;
4:4;  13:14—  (D)  //  Corinthians, 1:18-22; 4:4; 13:13 / Ephesians, 1-3
passim / Colossians, 1:13-15 / / Thessalonians, 1:5-6 / // Timothy, 1:14
/  Titus, 3:4-7 / Hebrews, 1:2-3; 6:4-6; 10:14-17 / / Peter, 1:1-12 / //
Peter,  1:21  / / John, 4-5 esp 4:9-10, 4:14-15,5:1-2, 5:5-7, y.io-12. /
Jude,  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk xiii, par 6-12 112a-113d; par 32,
119b / City of God, bk x, CH 23-24 312c-313c; bk xi, ch 10 327d-328d; CH
23-29 334c-339b; ch 32 340b-d; bk xiii, CH 24 373d-376a,c; bk xvi, ch 6,
426c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 5 625d-626a; CH 34 634b-c; bk hi, ch
2, 657b-658a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 27-43 153a-237a,c;
q  59, a i, contrary 306c-307b; Q 61, A 2, ANS 315c-316a; q 88, a 3, rep
3  472c473a; q 91, a 4, rep 2 487d-488c; q 93, a i, rep 2 492a-d; aa 5-8
495b-500c;  q 108, a i, ANS 552c-553c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 93, A I, REP 2 215b,d-216c; q 106, a 4, rep 3 324a325c; PART ii-
ii,  Q  I,  A 8, rep 3 387a-388c: q 2, A 8 397d-398b; part hi, q 2, a 3,
rep 3 713a714c; q 8, A I, REP I 756d-757c; q 16, a i, rep 2 796b-797d; a
2,  rep 2 797d-798b; a 5, rep i 800c-801b; q 17, a i, rep 5 807a-808d; a
2,

[654a]
596  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (9.  Spec^cally  Christian dogmas concerning the
divine  nature  and  human destiny. 9a. The Trinity.) REP 3 808d-809d; q
19, a i, rep i 816a-818b; QQ 20-24 821a-839c; q 25, a i, ans and rep 1,3
839d-840d;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  846b-d;  O (iT,, A 3, rep I
866c-867c;  a  4,  contrary  867d-868b;  part hi suppl, q 95, a i, rep 2
1042c-1044c;  a  3, ans 1045b-1046d 21 Dante: Divine Cofnedy, purgatory,
hi
[3445] 56b; paradise, x
[1-6] 120b; xiv [28-33]
127b; XXIV
[124-147]
144a; xxxiii
[76-145]
157a-d  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 267 155a / Second
Nun's Tale
[15,794-808]
467a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  97c;  part  hi, 182a-c; 207b;
207d-208c;  227b;  part iv, 259d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 100c
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  159a; 232b 32 Milton: Christs
Nativity [1-14] la-b / Paradise Lost, BK III
[56-415] 136b-144b esp
[167-172]
139a,
[372-389]
143b-144a; bk v
[600-615]
188b;  bk  VI  [719-733]  212a;  bk  xii  [469-551] 329b'331a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 307a-314a esp 310b311a; 438b-441d esp 438b-c, 441a-b;
605a-b;  607a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 422a-c; 520b-521c esp 521c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  303d304a;  306a-c  9b.  The
Incarnation:  the  God-man  New  Testament:  John, 1 :i-i4 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk v, par 20 32d-33a; bk VII, par 13-14 47c-48b; par 24-25
50d-51c;  bk  X, par 67-70 88b-89a; bk xi, par 4 90a-b / City of God, bk
ix,  ch 15 293a-294a; ch 17 295a-c; ch 21 296b-d; bk x, ch 20 311b-c; ch
22  312a-b;  ch  24 312d-313c; ch 27-29 315b318b; bk XI, ch 2 323a-c; bk
xxi,  ch 15-16 572c-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 11-14 627b-628b;
ch  34  634b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 62, a 9, rep 3
324a-325b;  q 64, a i, rep 4 334a335c; Q 73, a I, REP I 370a-371a; q 95,
a  i,  rep  I  506b-507c;  part i-ii, q 5, a 7, rep 2 642a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  qq  1-26 70lb,d-846d esp q 26, a i, rep 3
845b-846a;  PART  hi  suppl,  q  76,  A  I  939d-941a;  q  95,  a 3, ans
1045b-1046d; a 4 1046d-1047d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxix
[106-120] 98d-99a; xxxi
[76-126]
101c-102a; xxxii [19-63] 102c-103a; paradise, ii
[31-45]
108a; VI [10-21] 113d; vii [16-120] 115b-116b; XIII
[37-87]
125d-126b; xxxii
[i39]-xxxiii
[145]
156a-157d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 182a-c

[654b]
9d  to 9/^(1) 32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passiort 10b-12a /
Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[56-415] 136b-144b esp
[315-341] 142a-b, [383-389] 143b-144a; bk xii
[307-385] 326a-327b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 512 262a; 763-765 322a; 785 325b; 862 342b-343a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  307d-308b  41  Gibbon  : Decline and Fall,
134a-161a,c  esp  134a138a,  150c-151b;  230d-231a  46 Hegel: Philosophy
ofHistory, part hi, 306b-c; 308a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
v,  127b137c  9^(1) The divinity of Christ Old Testament: Isaiah, 9:6-7—
(D) IsaiaSy 9:6-7 New Testament: Matthew passim, esp 1:18-25, 3:16-4:11,
7:21, 8:29-32, 10:32-33, 11:25-30, 14:22-33, 16:13-20, 17:1-8, 26:63-68,
27:38-54  /  Mj;-^  passim,  esp  1:1, 1:10-11, 1:21-28, 2:312, 3:11-12,
5:2-7,  9:1-8,  14:60-65,  15:39,  16:19 / LuJ^e passim, esp 2:49, 4:41,
9:28-36, 10:2122, 22:29, 24:49 I John passim, esp 1:1-14, i-49» 5:17-27,
8:16, 10:30, 10:38, 11:27, 14:10-11, 14:20, 14:28, 17:1-3, 20:17 / Acts,
8:37  /  Romans,  1:3-4;  ^•3'29-33  /  /  Corinthians, 1:24; 15:28 / //
Corinthians,  1:19;  5:18-21 / Philippians, 2:5-6 / Colossians, 1:15-17;
2:8-9  /  /  Timothy, 3:16 / Hebrews, 1:1-8; 4:14; 5:5,8: 13:8 / / ]ohn,
2:22-24;  3:8;  4:9-10,13-15;  5:1-13,20  /  II  John,  7-1  1 / Jude 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 25 51a-c / City of God, bk ix, ch 15
293a-294a;  ch  17  295a-c;  bk  x,  ch  20  311b-c;  ch 22 312a-b; CH24
312d-313c;  ch  27-29  315b-318b;  bk  xi, CH 2 323a-c; bk xxi, ch 15-16
572c-574a;  bk  XXII, CH 6 590a-591c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  3  723a-730b;  qq  16-24 796a-839c; q 25, a i 839d-840d; part hi
suppl, q 95, a 3, ans 1045b-1046d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[16-120]  115b-116b  22  Chaucer:  Prioress's  Ta/^ 391a-395b 32 Milton:
Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  The Passion 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision
12b-]3a / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[56-415]
136b-144b esp
[135-142] 138b, [167-172] 139a, [281-314] 141b142a,
[383-389]
143b-144a; bk v
[600-615]
188b;  BK  VI  [719-733]  212a;  bk  xii  [307-385] 326a-327b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  734 317a; 763-765 322a; 785 325b; 841-842 336a-337a 40 Gibbon:
Declirie  and  Fall,  308a-b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134b-138a esp
135b136b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part ii, 270d271c; PART HI,
306d-307b  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b137c passim; bk
vii, 189c-190c

[655a]
9^(2)  to  9c  Chapter  29:  GOD  597  9b{2)  The humanity of Christ New
Testament:  Matthew, 1:18-25; 2:11; 11:19: 13:54-56; 25:37-45; 26:1-28:8
/  A/rtr/^,  6:2-3;  15:37-16:6  /  Luke,  1-2; 7:33-34; 11:27-28; 2223;
24:2-7,36-43  /  John, i:r-i8 esp 1:14; 5:27; 6:42; 19:28-20:29/ Romans,
1:^-4;  S:^ / // Corinthians, 5:16 / Galatians, 4:4 / Ephesians, 2:14-16
/  Philippians,  2:5-8 / Colossians, 1:2022 / / Timothy, 3:16 / Hebrews,
2:14-18;  4:15;  5  :7  ;  7  :2o-24  /  I  John,  4  :2-3 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk vii, par 25 51a-c / City of God, bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a;
ch  17  295a-c;  bk  x,  ch 20 311b-c; cii 22 312a b; cH24 312d-313c; ch
27-29  315b-318b;  bk  xi,  CH  2  323a-c;  bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a /
Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 14 627d-628b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  51, a 2, rep I 276b-277a; a 3, rep 5 277a-278c; q 113, A 4,
rep  I  578b-579a;  q  119,  a  2,  rep  4  607b608d  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  A I, RXP I 380b-381a; q 18, a 2, rep i
462d463d;  PART  HI,  qq 4-24 730c-839c; q 25, aa 1-2 839d-841c; part in
suppl,  q 76, a i 939d-941a; Q 90, AA 1-2 1012b'1014d; q 92, a 3, rep 12
1034b-1037c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii [16-120] 115b-116b;
xiii  [37-45]  125d;  [73-87]  126b  22  Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 12
503b-504b  32  Milton:  Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a esp
[15-21]  lOb-lla  / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[56-415] 136b-144b esp [238-241] 140b, [281-294] 141b; BK XI
[22-44]
299b'300a; bk xii
[307-385]
326a-327b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 553 268a-270a; 763-765 322a; 785 325b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 308a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134b-138a
esp  134b-135b,  137a-d;  330a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii,
270d271c;  part  hi,  306b-307a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c  passim;  bk  vii, 189c-190c 9*(3) Mary, the Mother of God Old
Testament:  Isaiah,  7:14—  (D)  Isaias,  7:14  New  Testament: Matthew,
1:18-25; 12:46-50 / Mark, 3:31-35 / Luke, 1-2; 8:19-21; 11:27-28 I John,
2:1-12;  19:25-27  18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xvii, ch 16 465c466d esp
466c-d;  ch  24 471d-472a,c; bk xviii, CH 35, 491d / Christian Doctrine,
bk  i, ch 14 627d-628b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, A 10,
rep  I  752c-753c;  q  25,  a  5  843d-844b;  PART III suppl, Q 83, A 3,
CONTRARY 978c980d; Q 96, A 5, REP 2 1055c-1058a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, ii
[43-126]
3a-4a esp
[94-99] 3c; purgatory, x
[34-45I
67d; PARADISE, xni [79-87] 126b; xxiii 141b-

[655b]
142c; XXX -XXXI 151d-154c esp xxxi
[04142I 154b-c; xxxii [85] xxxiii I45I 155c 156c
22  Chaucer: Prioress s Tale 391a-395b 32 Milion: Christs Nativity la-7b
/  Paradise  Lost,  UK III (274-285) 141b; UK XII [?o7-385J 326a327b esp
[375-382]  327b  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 62b 64b / Pensees, 742
319a  41  CiiBiioN:  Decline  and  Fall, 134d 137c passim; 140a; 154d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory, part in , 338b c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3587-3619]  87b  88a;  PART II [11,989-12,111] 291b-294b 9c. Christ the
Saviour  and  Redeemer:  the doctrines of original sin and salvation Old
Testament:  /  Samuel,  2:1-10—  (D)  / Kings, 2:1-10 / Isaiah, 53— (/))
Isaias,  53  /  Lamentations, 4:20 New Testa-ment: Matthew, 1:21; 9:2-8;
10:3233; 16:24-27; 18:11-14; 26:26-28 / Mark, 2:112; 8:34-38; 14:22-24 /
Luke,   1:67-79;   2:11;  5:17-26;  7:37-50;  9:23-26,56;  15;  19:1-10;
22:19-20;  24:46-47  /  John  esp 1:29, 3:16-18, 4:42, 6:31-59, 10:9-18,
14:6-7,  14:18-19, 15:14 / Acts, 3:12-26; 4:10-12; 5:30-31; 13:15-50 esp
13:38-39;   16:30-31   /   Romans  esp  3:20-26,  5:1-6:23,  8:1-4  /  /
Corinthians,  15:3,12-23  /  //  Corinthians esp 2:10, 4:13-14, 5:14-21,
8:9,  13:4-5  /  Galatians  passim, esp 2:20-3:14, 4:1-5 / Ephesians esp
1:5-7, 1:12-14, 2:1-22 / Colossians esp I :i2-i4, I :i9-22, 2 :i3-i4 / /
Timothy,  1:12-17; 2:5-6 / Titus esp 2:11-3:7 / Hebrews esp 2:1-18, 5:9,
'j\2^-:ij,  9:1-10:39/  I  Peter esp 1:3-11, 3:17-4:6 / I John esp 3:16,
4:9-10,  4:14  /  Revelation passim, esp 5-7— (D) Apocalypse passim, esp
5-7  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk ii, par 15 12b-c; bk IV, par 18-19
23d-24b;  bk  vii,  par 24-27 50d-52c; bk x, par 67-70 88b-89a / City of
God,  BK  VII, cH 31-32 261d-262b; bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a; ch 17 295a-c;
bk x, ch 4-6 301a-302d; ch 19-20 310d-311c; ch 22-25 312a-314c; ch 27-32
315b-322a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c; bk xiii, ch 2-4 360b-362a; ch 1215
365d-366d;  ch  23-24 372a-376a,c; bk XVII 449a-472a,c passim; bk xviii,
ch  23  483d-485a;  ch  31-35  488a-493a;  bk xx, ch 26 555a-556b; ch 30
557c-560a,c; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b; ch 3
588a-b;  ch 22-24 606d-612a; ch 29-30 614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  11-12  627b-d;  ch  14-18  627d-629a; ch 34 634b-c; BK II, CH 41
656a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  pab^f  i,  q  97,  A  I, REP 3
513c-514c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  7,  rep  2  642a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  85,  A 5, rep 2 181d-182d; q 87, a 7, rep 3
190c191d;  q 89, A 5, REP I 202c-203b; q 91, a 5, REP 2 211c-212c; Q 98,
A I, ANS and rep 3 239b-240c; a 2 240c-241b; a 4, ans and rep i

[656a]
(9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human
destiny.  9c. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of original
sin  and  salvation.^  242b-243c;  a  6,  rep  2  244c-245b; q ioo, a 12
264d-265d;  q  ioi,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  268a269a;  q 102, a 2, ans
271b-272a;  a  4,  rep 2,56 esp REP 6 276d-283c; a 5, rep 5 283c-292c; Q
103,  A  I, ANS 298b-299b; a 2 299b-300d; a 3, REP 2 300d-302a; q 104, a
3,  ans  305d-306d;  QQ  106-108 321a-337d r PART ii-ii,Q i, Ay, rep 1,4
385c-387a;  a  8,  rep 4 387a-388c; Q 2, a 7 396a-397c; q 14, a 2, rep 3
448d-449d;  part  III,  Q  I 701b,d-709c; q 26 845a-846d; q 60, a 3, ans
848d-849c; a 5, rep 3 850b-851b; q 61, A I, rep 3 855a-d; a 3 856c-857c;
q  62,  a  5,  REP  2  862b-863a; a 6, ans and rep 1-2 863a864c; part hi
suppl,  q 69, a 4 889c-890c; q 71, A 14, REP 2 916c-917b; q 75, a 2, rep
3-4  937a-938a; q 76, a i 939d-941a; q 78, a i, REP 3 947d-949b; q 89, a
2,  ans  and  rep 4 1006b-1007c; a 5, ans 1009b-d; q 90 1012a1016a; Q 95
1042c-1049d; q 99, a 3, rep i 1081d-1083a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
iv [46-63] 5d6a; purgatory, xxxii
[28-63]
102c-103a; XXXIII
[52-72]
104d-105a; paradise, vii
[16-120] 115b-116b;
xiii
[37-87]
125d-126b; XIX
[103-111]
136a; xxiii 141b-142c; xxxii
[1-138] 154d-156a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v, stanza 263-267 154b-155a /
Second Nun's Tale
[15,788-822]
467a-b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par 8 497b-498a; par 13 504b-505a; par 68-69
533b-534b   23   HoBBEs:   Leviathan,  part  hi,  191b-192c;  195d-196a;
197c-198a;  204a-207b;  240c;  242b-245a;  part  iv, 260b-c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk iv, 269c-270b 27 Shakespeare: Measure for
Measure,  act  ii,  sc II [71-79] 182d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
68,  schol 445a-b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b passim / The Passion
10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b13a / Lycidas
[165-185] 31b
/ Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk i
[1-26]
93b-94a, bk hi
[56-415] 136b-144b, BKx [615-640] 287b-288b,
bk XI
[22-44]
299b-300a, bk xii
[285-484]
325b-329b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  425-856  243b-341b passim, esp 556-588
270b-277b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 181b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
334b-c  44  Bcsv/EL.!.: Johnson, 482a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part hi, 306b-c; part iv, 331d-332a; 354a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic^, 318b
52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim 54 Freud: War
and Deaths 763b-c

[656b]
598  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9c  to  9d  9d. The Church: the mystical body of
Christ;  the  Apostolate  Old  Testament:  Song  ofSolomon—(D)  Canticle
ofCanticles  New  Testament:  Matthew,  3; 4:18-22; 8:18-23; 9:35-10:42;
11:1-15;  13:1-53;  16:17-24;  18:1520;  20:25-28; 24:14; 25; 28:16-20 /
Mar\,  1:1-9,16-20;  3:13-19;  10:42-45; 13:10; 16:1420 / Lu}{e, 3:1-20;
4:43-44;  5:1-11; 6:13-16; 8:16-17; 9:1-6; 11:48-50; 12:11-12; 22:24-30;
:l^\YI  I  John,  1:6-8,15-42;  4:34-38; 10; 13:3117:26; 20:19-21:24 esp
20:20-23,  21:15-17  /  Acts  esp  1:8,  1:13-26, 2:1-47, 5-1-42, 13:47,
16:1-40,  22:14-15  / Romans / / Corinthians passim, esp 3:1-23, 4:9-13,
6:1-20,  10:16-17,  12:12-31,  15:1-11  /  II  Corinthians  esp 1:12-21,
2:10-11,  3:1-4:18,  5:20-21, 7:8-13, 10:1-13:10 / Galatians passim, esp
1-2,  3:28,  4:1-31  /  Ephesians esp 1:22-23, 3:8-12, 4:1-12, 5:23-33 /
Philippians,  1  :27-2  :4  /  Colossians  passim, esp 1:15-29, 2:13-19,
3:6-11  /  Hebrews,  3:5-6  /  /  Peter,  2:4-10  / I John 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk vi, par 4 36a-b / City of God, bk i, ch 35 149b-c; bk x,
ch  20  311b-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  21  371a-c;  bk  xvh, ch 9 461b-d; ch ii
462c-463a;  ch  15-16  465b466d;  CH  20  469a-470c;  bk xviii, ch 48-52
501b-504d;  bk  xix, ch 22 525b-c; bk xx, ch 7-12 535b-541d; bk xxii, ch
17-18  603a-604b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  16  628c-d; ch 18
628d-629a;  bk hi, ch 31-32 669c-670a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 95, A I, REP I 506b-507c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q  i,  A 9, CONTRARY and REP 3,5 388d-389d; a io, ANS 389d-390d; q 2, aa
6-8  395b-398b;  q  5  410a-413c;  qq  183-189  625a-700d;  part hi, q 8
756c-763b;  part  hi suppl, q 71, a 9 910d912b; Q 95, A 3, ANS and rep 4
1045b-1046d;   A  4,  REP  1,5  1046d-1047d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,
purgatory, ix [73145] 66c-67b; xix
[127-141] 82d-83a; xxix
[i]-xxx
[21] 97d-99c; xxxii
[i]-xxxiii
[78]
102b-105a;  paradise, xi 122a-123c esp [2839] 122b; xii 123c-125a; xxiii
[i]-xxvi
[81]
141b-146c passim; xxvii
[1-66]
147b-148a;   XXIX   [109-114]   151b;  xxx-xxxii  151d-156a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  151a-c;  part iii, 198a-199a; 207b-224c; part iv,
247a-249b;  275a-278d  32  M11.TON  :  Paradise  Lost,  bk xii [436-514]
328b330b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 473-484 256b-258b; 646 291b; 801-802 328b;
832  334a;  849 339b340a; 852 341a-b; 857-861 342a; 867-905 343b-349a 35
Locke:  Toleration,  4b-5d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part hi,
307b310c;  PART  IV,  315d;  331d-332c;  338a-d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b-137c passim 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 674c-d;
691d-692a

[657a]
9eto   10   9e.   The  sacraments  New  Testament:  Matthew,  y,  i8:i8;
19:4-6,1012;  20:20-23; 26:26-29; 28:19 / ^arf^. 1:4,810; 10:2-12,35-40;
14:22-24;  16:16  /  Luke, 3:3,16; 22:14-20 / John, 1:25-27,33; 3:1-8; 6
csp 6:32-35, 6:47-59; 19:33-34; 20:21-23 / Acts, 2:40-42; 8:12-17,26-40;
11:16;  19:1-7;  22:16 / Romans, 6:3-4 / ^ Corinthians, i : 12-17; 6:11;
7:8-14,34-39;  10:16-17;  11:23-30;  12:13; 15:28-29 / Galatians, 3:27 /
Ephesians,  4:5;  5:21-33  csp  5:31-32 / Colossians, 2:11-12 / Hebrews,
5:1-6 / ]ames, 5:14-16 / / Peter, 3 :20-22 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
ix,  par  12 64d65a; bk xiii, par 26-29 n7c-118c / Cttv of God, BK X, CH
5-6  301b-302d;  ch  19-20  SlOd311c;  BK  XIII,  CH 3-4 361a-362a; ch 7
362d363b; BK XX, ch 26 555a-556b; bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a; ch 20 575c-d;
ch  25 579d-581a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3 637c-d; ch 41 656a-c;
bk  hi,  ch  9  661a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  21,  690d-691b  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 92, A 3, ANs 490c-491b; q 113, a 5, ans and rep 3
579a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, Q 102, A 5 283c-292c; q
103, a 4, ans 302a304a; q 108, a 2, ans and rep 2 332b-333d; part ii-ii,
q I, a I, REP I 380b-381a; a 3, REP 4 381d-382c; a 8, rep 6 387a-388c; q
3,  A I, REP I 400c-401a; q 10, a 12, rep 5 436b-437d; part hi, qq 60-65
847a-884a,c;  part hi suppl, q 83, a 3, ans and rep 4 978c-980d; q 99, a
4  1083a1084a  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvii [67-132] 40c-41a 22
Chaucer:  Pardoner's  Tale [12,829-849] 381b / Parson's Tale, par 12-22,
504b-510b  esp  par  22, 510b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 71b; part hi,
180c-d;  206c-207a;  208b;  211c-212c;  part iv, 249b-250c; 263d-264a 30
Bacon:   Advancement  ofLearning,  101a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and
Replies,  162d-165d  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [436-445] 328b329a
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 71b-80b; 128b137b / Pensees, 554 270a;
862, 343a; 870 344a-b; 904-905 348b-349a; 923 351b 35 Locke: Toleration,
12a / Human Understanding, bk II, CH xxiii, SECT 17 250d-251a; bk IV, CH
XX,  SECT  10 391c-392a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a; 260b261a;
373b-376a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 193a-b; 297c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 329d; 334b-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 173d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  iv,  331d332c;338a-d;349d-350a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk hi, 80c-81a

[657b]
Chapter  29:  GOD  599  9/.  The  second coming of Christ New Testament:
Matthew,  10:14-15;  11:20 24; 12:36-37.' 1^:36-43.47-50; 24-25 / Marl^,
^3:4-37  /  J^^ke^ 10:11-15; 17:20-37; 19:11-28; 21:5-36 /John, 14:1-4 /
Acts, 1:9-11; 2:17-21; 17:31 / Romans, 2:5-11 / / Corinthians, 15:2328 /
Philippians,  3:20-21  /  /  Thessalonians,  1:9-10; 2:19; 4:14-5:4 / //
Thessalonians,  1-2  /  //  Timothy, 3:1-4:8 / James, y.j-<) / II Peter,
2:9;  3:7-13  / Uohn, 2:18-29 / Jude, 17-25 / Revelation csp 1:4-20— (D)
Apocalypse  csp  1  :4-20  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk xiii, ch 2
360b36Ia;  ch 6 362c d; cn 2:5-24 372a-376a,c; bk xvni, CH 53 504d 505c;
bk xx 530a 560a,c; BK XXI, CH 11-27 570b-586a,c / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  15 628b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 73, A I
922b-923c;  a 3 924b-925b; q 77, a 2, ANS 945a-946b; qq 87-90 997a-1016a
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 179d; 191b192c; 197c; 229c-230a; 244b-c;
part  iv, 248a-b; 251c-252b; 254b 255b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b
csp  [133-172]  4b-5b I At a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Paradise Lost, BK III
[274-343] 141b-143a; bk vii [139173] 220a-221a; bk xi
[72-83] 300b-301a
/  Areopagitica, 404a -b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 757 321a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  187b-188a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 13c-d; bk
V,  127a-137c  10.  The  denial  ofGod or the gods, or of a supernatural
order:  the  position  of  the  atheist  Old  Testament: Psalms, 14:1-3;
53:1-3—  (Z))  Psalms,  13:1-3; 52:1-4 5 Aristophanes: Thesmophoriazusae
[443-458]  605b  7 Plato: Apology, 204c-205c / Laws, bk x, 758b-765d esp
758b-759a,  759d-760c,  761b-c  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 3,
263c; BK IX, SECT 39 295a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch 9, 213c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, REP 1-2 12c-14a 23 HoBBEs:
leviathan,  part  ii,  160a  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 211b-212a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  4b-c  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  72a-b 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [569-723] 311b315a esp
[617-623] 312b / Samson Agonistes
[293-299] 346a
33  Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b 35 Locke: Toleration, 18b / Human
Understanding, BK I, ch III, SECT 8 114a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  92-96  431a-d;  sect  133, 439d-440a; sect 154-155 444a-c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 116, 503c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
i, 29a

[658a]
b  (10.  The  dental of God or the gods, or of a supernatural order: the
position   of  the  atheist.^  Zl  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  379c-380c  38
Montesquieu:  5'/?zn> ofLaws, bk xxiv, 200b201a; BK XXV, 208a 40 Gpbbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  13a42 Kant: Pure Reason, llb-c; 192c-d / Judgement,
595d-596c  43  Mill:  Liberty, 280d-281c 50 Marx: Capital, 31c-d; 35b-c;
305d  [fn  2]  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk v, 196b-d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,lla-c;  bk  V,  135b-136b; bk xi, 312b-314d;
345a-c  11.  The  denial  of God as completely transcending the world or
nature: the position of the pantheist 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch
14  120d-121c  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b,d; SECT 13
258c;  bk vii, sect 9 280b-c; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr ix, ch 16, 75c76a / Third Ennead, tr viii 129a-136a / Fourth
Emiead,  tr ix 205a-207a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 1-2 208a-209b; tr ii
214c215c;  tr  III,  CH  15-17 224c-226c; tr viii, ch 7-10, 242d-244d 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; bk hi, par 10 15b-d; par 18
18b;  bk iv, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vii, par 1-3 43b44b; BK X,
par  8-10  73b-74a;  bk xii, par 7 lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of
God,  bk  IV,  CH 12-13 195d-196b; bk vii, ch 6 248a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 8 19d-20c; q 6, a 4 30b-d; q 8, a i, ans
34d35c; A 3, rep i 36b-37c; q 16, a 6 98b-d; q 90, A I 480d-481d; q 105,
a  5  542a-543b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  162b  31 Descartes:
Meditations,  vi,  99c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp def 3-6
355b,  prop  1-15  355d-361d,  prop  18  363c,  PROP 25 365b, prop 28-29
365c-366c; part ii, prop i-ii 373d-377c; part iv, pref, 422b,d423b; prop
4  425b-d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, SECT 18 152a-c
42  Kant:  Judgement,  564c-565d  esp  565c-d;  566c-d; 580c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  176b-c; part I, 220c-221a 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic){,  115b-117a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 216d-218b; bk
xiii,  581c  582a;  bk  xiv,  608a-b;  bk xv, 631a-c 12. The denial of a
revealed  and  providential  God:  the  position  of  the deist 7 Plato:
Parmenides,  489d-490d  / Latvs, bk x, 765d-768c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a; bk ii
[167-183] 17a-b; [589-660] 22c-

[658b]
600 THE GREAT IDEAS 11 to 14 23b; [1090-1104] 29a; bk v [55-90] 61d-62b;
[146-234] 63a-64a; [306-310] 65a; [1161-1240]
76b-77b;  bk  vi  [43-95]  80d-81c  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 91b-d 17
Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 16, 75c76a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  v,  par  19  32b-c  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 162a-b 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters, 137a-b / Pensees^ 242-290 217b-225a passim; 430-434
245a250a;  543-549  266a-267a; 556-588 270b-277b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
38c-39c; 53c; 75c-76a 42 Kant : Pure Reason, 190a-c / Judgement, 547d 52
Dostoevsky : Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 120d121c; 127b-137c passim; bk x,
292d-294a  13.  God as a conception invented by man: its emotional basis
Apocrypha: Wisdom ofSolomon, 14:12-21— (D) OT, Boo}{ of Wisdom, 14:12-21
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  79a-b;  79d-80a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
256c-d  42  Kant: Judgement, 593c-d 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 302b-303d;
593b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 31c-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi,
67d-68c;  bk  v,  120d-121a;  bk  x,  293a  54  Freud: Group Psychology,
692a-693a  /  War  and Death, 763b-c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
771a-b;  778d  / New Introductory Lectures, 875d-878c 14. The worship of
false  gods: deification and idolatry Old Testament: Genesis, 31:19-35 /
Exodus,  20:1-6,22-23;  22:20;  23:13;  32;  34:11-17 / Leviticus, 17:7;
19:4;  20:1-6;  26:1,28-30  /  Numbers,  25:2-5;  33:51-52 / Deuteronomy
passim,  esp  4:1-3,  4^15-19.  4:23-28, 5:7-9, 6:14-16, 7:1-6, 7:25-26,
8:19-20, 9:15-21, 11:16-17, 11:28, 12:2-3, 12:29-13:18, 16:2122, 17:2-7,
18:9-14,   20:16-18,   27:15,  28:1468,  29:16-29,  30:15-20,  31:16-21,
32:15-39 / Joshua, 22-23; 24:14-25— (D) Josue, 22-23; 24:14-25 / Judges,
2:10-23;  3:5-8; 6:24-32; 8:33-34; 105 17-18 / I Samuel, 7:3-4; 15:2223—
(D)  / Ki7igs, 7:3-4; 15:22-23 / / Kings, 3:1-4; 9:6-9; 11-16; 18:17-29;
20:22-28;  21:25-29;  22:51-53—  (D)  ///  Kings,  3:1-4;  9:6-9; 11-16;
18:17-29;  20:22-28;  21:25-29;  22:51-54 / // Kings passim, esp 1:1-18,
8:169:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18, 14:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 21:1-23:37— (Z)) IV
Kings  passim,  esp  1:118,  8:16-9:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18, 14:1-18:37,
19:16-19,   21:1-23:37   /   II  Chronicles,  13:8-9;  28;  33—  (D)  II
Paralipomenon,  13:8-9;  28;  33  / Psalms, 81:8-16; 97:7; 106; 115:1-8;
135:15-18—  (D) Psalms, 80:9-17; 96:7; 105; 113:1-8; 134:15-18 / Isaiah,
1-2  esp 1:29, 2:8-9, 2:18-21; io:io-ii; 19 esp 19:1-3; 30-31 esp 30:22,
31:7; 36 esp 36:18-20; 40:18-20; 41 esp 41:29; 42:8,17; 44 esp

[659a]
14 Chapter 29: GOD 601 44:9-20; 45:20-21; 46:5-9; 57:3 8; 65::^ 5; 66:3—
(D)  Isaias, 1-2 csp 1:29, 2:8-9, 2:18-21; 10:10-11; 19 esp 19:1-3; 30-v
csp  30:22,  31:7; 36 csp 36:18-20; 40:18-20; 41 esp 41:29; 42:8, 17; 44
esp  44:9-20;  45:20-21;  46:5-9; 57:3-^; 65:3-5; 66:3 / Jereviiah, 1-13
passim,  esp 5:19, 7:9-10, 7:17-19, 8:1-2, 8:12, 8:19, 9:13-14, 10:2-15,
11:10-17,  i^io;  16 csp 16:10-13, 16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25:3-7; 32:30-35;
44; 50:38; 51 csp 51:17-18, 51:47, 51:52— (D) Jeremtas, 1-13 passim, csp
5:19,  7:9-10,  7:17-19,  8:1-2, 8:12, 8:19, 9:13-14, 10:2-15, 11:10-17,
13:10; 16 csp 16:10-13, 16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25:3-7; 32:30-35; 44; 50:38;
51  csp  51:17-18,  51:47,  51:52 / Ezel^iel, 5 esp 5:11; 6; 14; 16; 20;
22-23;  36:17-19; 37:23— (D) Ezechiel, 5 esp 5:11; 6; 14; 16; 20; 22-23;
36:17-19;  37:23  /  Daniel,  3:6-  (D)  Daniel, 3:1-23,91-97; 6 / Hosea
passim,  esp  2:8-13, 4:12-13, 8:3-6, 10:1-2, 13:2— (D) Osee passim, esp
2:8-13,  4:12-13,  8:3-6,  10:1-2,  13:2  / Amos, 5 esp 5:25-27 / Nahiim
passim,   esp  1:14  /  Habal^uf{,  2:18-19—  (Z))  Habacuc,  2:18-19  /
Zephattiah  passim,  esp  1:4-6—  (D)  Sophonias  passim,  esp  1:4-6  /
Zechariah, 10:1-3; 13:2— (D) Zacharias, 10:1-3; 13:2 Apocrypha : ]udith,
3  :8  ;  5 :23-6 \^—{D) OT, Judith, 3:12-13; 5:27-6:4 / Rest of Esther,
14:610—  (D)  OT,  Esther,  14:6-10 / Wisdom of Solomon, i2-i<y— {D) OT,
Boo/{ of Wisdom, 12-15 / Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
34:1-7  /  Baruch, 6—{D) OT, Baruch, 6 / Bel and Dragon— {D) OT, Daniel,
14:2-41  /  I  Maccabees, 1:41-2:28— (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:43-2:28 / II
Maccabees,  6-7— (D) OT, // Machabees, 6-7 New Testament: Acts, 7:39-44;
14:7-18;  15:20,28-29;  17:16-31 / Romans, 2:22 / / Corinthians, 5:9-11;
6:9; 8; 10:7,14-21; 12:2/ II Corinthians, 6:14-17 / Galatians, 5:19-20 /
Ephesians, 5:5 / Philippians, 3:18-19 / Colossians, 3:5// Thessalonians,
i:^  /  I  Peter,  4  :3  / I John, 5:21 / Revelation, 2:20; 9:20; 21:8;
22:14-15—  (D)  Apocalypse,  2:20;  9:20;  21:8;  22:14-15  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  12d-13b;  31a-b;  BK II, 79d-80a; bk hi, 95a-c; bk iv,
140c-141a 7 Plato: Laws, bk x, 769c-771b 14 Plutarch : A'wTwa Pompilius,
SZh-c / Camillus, 104d-105a / Pericles, 123c-124a / Pelopidas, 239d-240c
/ Alexander^ 575d-576a / Demetrius, 729d-731a

[659b]
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  hk i, 4b-d / Histories, bk v, 296a 16 Ki i'i.i.r:
Harmonies  of  the  World,  1081a1083b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i-x
129a  322a,c;  BK  xviii,  CH 5-6 474d-475c; cii 8 10 475d477c; CH 12-19
477d  482c;  cm 21 482d-483b; CH 24 485a b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, o 17, A 4, REP 3 103c-104b; q 67, a 4, ans 352a 354a 20 Aquinas:
5«/wma Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, A 4, ans 253d-255a; q ioi, a 3, ans
and  rep  3  268a-269a;  q 102 270b 298a passim 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xix
[88-117]
27d 28a; xx 28b-29d; paradise, iv
[49-63)
111b; VIII
[1-12I 116d
22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 265 154b-155a / Parson s
Tale,  par  35-38,  521a-522b; par 6^-6^ 530a-531a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part i, 51d-52a; 78d79b; 79d-80a; 80d-82d; part iv, 261a-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 18d-20d; 238d-239b; 246a-257d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
100b;  lOla-b  32  Milton:  Christs Nativity la-7b esp [165-228) 5b-7a /
Paradise Lost, bk i
[331-621) 100b107a; BK
XII
[101-120) 321b / Samson Agonistes
[433-471]
349a-350a;
[871-902] 358b359a;
[i 139-1243] 364b-366b
34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  543b-544a 35 Locke: Toleration, 13b-15a /
Human  Understanding,  BK  I,  CH  II, SECT 26 112a-b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  94  431b-c  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 20a-c; 152a-d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk xxiv, 200b201a; BK XXV, 208a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 81d; 184b-185d; 457b,d-467d; 600d-601a; 775c-776a,c [n
173174]   41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  154d;  195a-202a  esp  195b,
197a-199c; 207a-208c; 229c-230a; 252b-c; 329c-330b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
179a-b  44  BoswEL.!.: Johnson, 173d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  270,  85b-c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 196d197c; PART I,
244c-245b;  246a-b;  253b254b  48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 17a-b; 36b 37a:
38b39b;367a-372a

[660a]
602  THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES Vice 8d(3). see Nature ib; One and
Many ib; World 3-3b.

[660b]
For:  Other treatments of polytheism, and for discussions of the gods in
relation  to  fate  and  human life, see Angel i; Fate i; Man loa. Man's
duty  and  piety toward God or the gods, and for man's worship of God or
the  gods, see Duty 5, ii; Justice iib; Religion 2-2g. Man's love of God
and  desire  to  be  with  God, see Desire 7b; Love 5a-5b(2); Virtue and
Matters  relevant  to  proving  God's  existence  and  to  other ways of
affirming  God's existence, see Being 7a, 8f; Change 14; Metaphysics 2d;
Necessity  and  Contingency  2a-2b; Reasoning 5b(3), 5b(5); Theology 4c.
The  problem  of God's immanence and transcendence, and for the doctrine
of  pantheism,  Matters  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  God  as a
necessary  being,  see  Being  7a;  Necessity and Contingency 2a-2b. The
consideration  of  the unity and simplicity of God, see One and Many 6a.
The  consideration  of  God's eternity and immutability, see Change 15c;
Eternity  3.  The  consideration of God's infinity and omnipresence, see
Infinity  7-7d.  The consideration of God's perfection and goodness, see
Good  and  Evil 2—2a; and for the discussion of God in relation to Satan
and  to  the  problem  of  evil,  see  Angel 7—7b; Good AND Evil id, 2b;
Opposition  2d.  The consideration of God's intellect, his knowledge and
wisdom, the divine ideas and the divine truth, see Idea le; Infinity 7d;
Knowledge  7a;  Mind  loe-iof; Truth 2d; Wisdom id. The consideration of
God's  will and love, see Love 5c; Will 4-4a. The consideration of God's
beauty,  happiness,  and glory, see Beauty 7a; Happiness 7d; Honor 6-6b.
The  consideration  of  the divine independence and God's free will, see
Liberty  5d;  Will 4b. The consideration of divine causality in relation
to  nature, the origin of the universe by creation or emanation, and the
eternity  of  the  world,  ^^^ Art 2c; Cause 7-7a; Change 14; Matter 3d;
Nature  3c  (4);  Time 2c; World 4-4e(3); and for the special problem of
the  creation of life and of man, see Evolution 4a, 7a; Man 8b; Soul 4c.
The  consideration  of God's foreknowledge and providence in relation to
man's  freedom  and  to  the course of history, see Cause 7c; Chance 2b;
Fate  4; History 5a; Liberty 5a-5c; Prophecy ib-ic; Sin 6a; Will 7c. The
consideration  of divine causality as expressed in divine law and in the
government  of  the  universe,  see  Astronomy 6; Cause 7c; Law 3-3b(2);
Monarchy  2b;  Sin i; Virtue and Vice 8c; World ic. The consideration of
divine  causality  in  the  dispensation of grace and the performance of
miracles,  see  Cause  7d; Liberty 5c; Nature 3c(4), 6b; Religion ib(2);
Sin  7;  Virtue  and Vice 8b, 8e; Will 7e(2). The consideration of God's
justice  and mercy, and of divine rewards and punishments, see Happiness
7c-7c(3);  Immortality  5e-5f; Justice ii-iia; Punishment 5e; Sin 6c-6e.
Other  discussions  of  the  doctrine  of  the Messiah, the Trinity, the
Incarnation,  and the second coming of Christ, see Man iic; One and Many
6b-6c;  Prophecy 4c-4d; Relation 2. Other discussions of the doctrine of
original  sin  and man's redemption and salvation, see Happiness 7a; Sin
3-3e,  7;  Virtue and Vice 8a; Will 7e(i). Other discussions of the Last
Judgment  and  the  end  of  the world, see Immortality 5c; Prophecy 4d;
World 8.

[661a]
For: Other discussions of the church as the Mystical Body of Christ, and
of the theory of the sacraments, see Religion 2c, 3a-3b; Sign and Symbol
5c.  The  general  theory  of  the relation of reason and faith in man's
knowledge  of  God,  see  Knowledge  6c  (5);  Logic 4f; Metaphysics 3a;
Religion il>-ib(3); Theology 2, 4b-4c; Virtue and Vice 8d(i); Wisdom ic.
The  distinction  between  man's  natural  and supernatural knowledge of
Ci(xi,  and  for  the discussion of mystical experience and the beatific
vision,  see  Experience 7; Hai»i>iness 7c(i); Knowledge 6c(5); Religion
6f;  Will  yd;  Wisdom  ic.  Other  discussions  of  God's revelation of
Himself, of Sacred Scripture, and of man's interpretation of the Word of
God,  i^f^  Education  7a; Language 12; Prophecy 3d; Sign and Symbol 5e.
Other discussions of the relation of creatures to God, and especially of
the  problem  of the resemblance between creatures and God, see Man loa,
iia;  Relation  3;  Same  and Other 6. Other discussions of the names of
God,  and for the bearing thereon of the distinction between 3b, 6; Sign
and Symbol 3d, 5f. Sciences peculiarly concerned with God, see Astronomy
6;  Metaphysics  2a,  2d, 3a; Theology. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below
are  works not included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant
to  the  idea  and  topics with which this chapter deak. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the
last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. Plutarch. "Of Isis and Osiris, or the
Ancient  Religion  and  Philosophy  of Egypt," in Moralia Epictetus. The
Manual  Augustine.  Answer to Skeptics . De Genesi ad Litteram, bk xii .
On the Trinity . On Grace and Free Will . The Enchiridion on Faith, Hope
and  Love  Aquinas.  On  the  Trinity  ofBoethius, qq 1-3 . Summa Contra
Gentiles,  bk  i;  bk  ii, ch 1-28; BK III, CH 64-83, 146-162; BK IV, CH
I-49,  53-55  .  Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, qq 2, 5-7, 14, 23,
27-29;  De  Unione  Verbi  Incarnati . On the Power of God, qq 1-3, 5-7,
9-10  .  Summa Theologica, part hi, qq 27-59 . Compendium of Theology P.
Bacon.  "Of Atheism," in Essays Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy,
part  i,  13-25,  29-31, 40, 51, 54; part III, 1-3 HoBBES. Philosophical
Rudiments  Concerning  Gofemment  and  Society, ch 15-18 Hume. Dialogues
Concerning Natural Religion . The Natural History of Religion

[661b]
Chapter 29: GOD 603 Kant. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par 55 .
Religion  Within  the Limits of Reason Alone Hegel. Science ofLogic, vol
i,  bk  it, sect hi, ch i ; VOL II, sect hi, ch 3 . On the Proofs of the
Existence  of  God  J. S. Mill. "Theism," in Three Essays on Religion W.
James.  The  Will to Believe . Pragmatism, lect hi, viii . A Pluralistic
Universe  n.  Hesiod. Theogony Cleanthes. Hymn to Zeus Cicero. De Natura
Deorum  {On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods)  Sextus  Empiricus. Against the
Physicists,  bk  i  (Concerning  Gods,  Do  Gods  Exist  ?) Proclus. The
Elements  of  Theology, (e,l) "DioNYsius". On Mystical Theology . On the
Divine  Names Boethius. Contra Eutychen (A Treatise Against Eutyches and
Nestorius)  .  De  Trinitate  {On  the  Trinity)  .  The  Consolation of
Philosophy, bk iv-v Erigena. De Divisione Naturae, bk i

[662a]
604  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Saadia  Gaon.  The  Boo\ of Beliefs and Opinions
TREATISE  I-II,  IV, VII AxsELM OF Canterbury. Monologium . Proslogium .
Cur  Deiis  Homo ? Gaunilon. In Behalf of the Fool Bernard of Clairvaux.
On  the  Love of God Hugh of Saint Victor. De Sacramentis JuDAH ha-Levi,
Kitab  al  Khazari  Maimonides.  The Guide for the Perplexed, part i, CH
46-47,  50-60, 73)-'j6; PART II, CH I, 13-16, 2223, 25-30, 48; PART III,
CH   13-16,  20-21  Volsung  Saga  NibelufigenUed  Bonaventura.  On  the
Reduction  of  the  Arts  to  Theology  .  Breviloquium,  part i, iv-v .
Itinerarium Mentis in Deum ( The Itinerary of the Mind to God) R. Bacon.
Opus  Majus,  part  vii Albertus Magnus. On Union tvith God Duns Scotus.
Tractatus  de  Primo Principio {A Tract Concerning the First Principle),
ch  iii-iv  Eckhart.  Serfnons and Collations, xv The Cloud of Unknowing
Albo.  Bool{  of  Principles {Sefer ha-IJ^arim) , bk ii Thomas a Kempis.
The  Imitation  of  Christ,  bk  iii  Nicolas of Cusa. The Vision of God
Luther.  Trinity  Sunday Calvin. Institutes ofthe Christian Religion, bk
i,  ch 1-14, 16-18; BK II, ch 4, 7-17 Knox. An Answer to the CaviHations
ofan  Adversarie  Respecting  the  Doctrine  of Predestination Teresa of
Jesus.  The  Way  of  Perfection  .  BooI{ of the Foundations . Interior
Castle John of the Cross. Spiritual Canticle . Dark^ Night of the Soul .
The  Living  Flame of Love Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, x (3), xi
(34),  XII  (l),  XV (9), XIX (3), XX-XXII, XXIII (9), xxiv, xxriii-xxx,
XXXI  (14), xlvii (15) Boehme. The Aurora . De Electione Gratiae {On the
Election  ofGrace)  Herbert. The Temple BrowxNe. Religio Medici BossuET.
De   la   connaissance  de  Dieu  et  de  soi-meme  Cudworth.  The  True
Intellectual  System  ofthe  Universe,  vol I, CH 4-5 Malebranche. De la
recherche  de  la  verite  .  Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, 11,
viiXIV  Fenelon.  a  Demonstration ofthe Existence and Attributes of God
Leibnitz.   Discourse   on   Metaphysics,  i-vii,  xiv,  xxxvi-xxxvii  .
Philosophical Works, ch 34 {The Principles of Nature and of Grace) . New
Essays Concerning Human Understanding, BK IV, ch 10, 18; appendix, CH lO
.  TIi€odicy . Monadology, par 38-55 J. Butler. The Analogy of Religion,
part i, ch 2-8

[662b]
^  Voltaire.  "Faith,"  "Final  Causes,"  "God-Gods,*  "Grace,"  "Power-
Omnipotence," "Providence,* "Theism," "Theist," "Polytheism," in A Philo
sophical Dictionary . The Ignorant Philosopher, en 26 . The Sage and the
Atheist  Lessing. Nathan the Wise Herder. God, Some Conversations Paley.
Natural  Theology,  ch  23-26  Brown.  Lectures on the Philosophy of the
Human  Mind, VOL 11, pp 134-152 Schleiermacher. The Christian Faith, par
50-56,  79-112,  157-172 Comte. System ofPositive Polity, vol iv. Theory
ofthe  Future of Man, ch i LoTZE. Microcosmos, bk ix, ch 2, 4-5 Whewell.
The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive Sciences^ vol I, bk x, ch 5 . On the
Philosophy  of  Discovery,  en  31  J.  H.  Newman. An Essay in Aid of a
Grammar  of  Assent  L. Stephen. An Agnostic's Apology Romanes. A Candid
Examination  of  Theism T. H. Green. Prolegomena to Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers, vol vi, par 452-547 F. Thompson. The
Hound  of Heaven BosANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 8 Ward. The Realm of
Ends RoYCE. The Conception of God . The World and the Individual, series
ii  (id)  . The Problem of Christianity , vol ii Bradley. Appearance and
Reality,  bk  ii,  ch 26 . Essays on Truth and Reality, ch 15 Cook. Zeus
Garrigou-Lagrange.  God,  His  Existence and Nature, PART i; PART II, CH
I-3  Otto. The Idea ofthe Holy BuBER. Hasidism McTaggart. Some Dogmas of
Religion,  ch  6-8  .  The Nature of Existence, ch 43 Frazer. The Golden
Bough  .  Man,  God, and Immortality, part hi Eddington. Science and the
Unseen  World Tennant. Philosophical Theology, vol ii, ch 5-6 Whitehead.
Science and the Modern World, ch i i . Process and Reality, part v, ch 2
Penido.  Le  role  de  Vanalogic  en  theologie  dogmatique Bergson. Two
Sources  ofMorality  and  Religion,  ch  4  Maritain. An Introduction to
Philosophy,  part  ii  (8)  . The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 4; conclusion
Weyl.  The  Open  World,  lect i LoveJOY. The Great Chain ofBeiiig Mann.
Joseph  and  His Brothers B. Russell. Religion and Science, ch 8 GiLSON.
Reason   and  Revelation  in  the  Middle  Ages  .  God  and  Philosophy
Hartshorne.  Man's  Vision of God AscH. The Nazarene . The Apostle A. E.
Taylor.  Does God Exist? Santayana. The Genteel Tradition at Bay, ch 2-3
. The Idea of Christ in the Gospels E. T. Whittaker. Space and Spirit

[663a]
Chapur  lo:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  INTRODUCTION  THE  theory of good and evil
crosses  the boundaries of many sciences or subject matters. It occupies
a place in metaphysics. It is of fundamental importance in all the moral
sciences—  ethics, economics, politics, jurisprudence. It appears in all
the  descriptive  sciences  of  human  behavior,  such as psychology and
sociology,  though  there  it  is  of less importance and is differently
treated.  The relation of good and evil to truth and falsity, beauty and
ugliness,  carries  the  discussion  into  logic,  aesthetics,  and  the
philosophy of art. The true, it has been said, is the good in the sphere
of  our thinking. So it may be said of the beautiful that it is a quaUty
which things have when they are good as objects of contem- ' plation and
love,  or  good  as  productions.  It  is no less possible to understand
goodness and beauty in terms of truth, or truth and goodness in terms of
beauty. One aim of analysis, with respect to the true, the good, and the
beautiful, is to preserve their distinctness without rendering each less
universal.  This  has  been  attempted  by writers who treat these three
terms as having a kind of parallelism in their appUcation to everything,
but  who  also  insist  that  each of the three notions conceives things
under  a  different  aspect or in a different relation. "As good adds to
being  the notion of the desirable," Aquinas writes, "so the true adds a
relation  to  the  intellect" ; and it is also said that the end "of the
appetite,  namely  good, is in the desirable thing," whereas the end "of
the  intellect,  namely  the  true, is in the intellect itself." In that
part  of theology which goes beyond metaphysics and moral philosophy, we
meet  with the concept of infinite goodness— the goodness of an infinite
being—and  we  then  face  tJie  problem  of how God's goodness is to be
understood by man. The basic terms of moral 605

[663b]
theology—  righteousness  and  sin,  salvation  and  damnation—arc, like
virtue  and  vice, happiness and misery, conceptions of good and evil in
the condition of man. (Their special theological significance comes from
the  fact that they consider the goodness or evil of man in terms of his
relation  to  God.)  But  the theological problem which is traditionally
called "the problem of evil" concerns the whole universe in its relation
to  the  divine  perfection. That problem, which is further discussed in
the  chapter on World, can be formulated in a number of ways. How are we
to  understand  the existence of evil in a world created by a God who is
omnipotent  and  perfectly good ? Since God is good and since everything
which  happens  is within God's power, how can we account for the sin of
Satan  or  the  fall  of  man,  with  all the evil consequent thereupon,
without  limiting  God's  power  or  absolving  the erring creature from
responsibility.?  Can  it  be said that this is the best of all possible
worlds,  if  it is also true that this world is far from perfectly good,
and  if,  as  certain theologians hold, "God could make other things, or
add  something  to the present creation, and then there would be another
and  a  better universe".'^ The contemporary discussion of good and evil
draws  its  terminology  from  economics  rather than theology. The word
"value"  has almost replaced "good" and **evil." What in other centuries
were  the various moral sciences are now treated as parts of the general
theory  of  value.  The  substitution of "value" for "good" or of "value
judgment"  for  "moral  judgment"  reflects  the influence of economics.
According to Marx, Aristotle "was the first to analyse . . . the form of
value."  As  indicated in the chapter on Wealth, economics at its origin
was treated by Aristotle, along with eth-

[664a]
606 THE GREAT IDEAS ics and politics, as a moral discipline. But he made
it  subordinate  to  them  because  it dealt not with the whole of human
welfare,   but  only  with  wealth—one  of  the  goods.  In  the  modern
development  of  economics,  the  word  "goods"  comes to have a special
significance.  It  refers  to commodities or utilities, as in the phrase
"goods  and  services."  More  generally,  anything  which  is useful or
exchangeable  has  the character of an economic good. This general sense
is  usually  conveyed  by  the  economist's  use  of  the  word "value."
According  to  Adam  Smith,  "the  word  value  .  . . has two different
meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object,
and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the possessor of
that  object conveys." These two meanings are distinguished as "value in
use"  and "value in exchange." Marx accepts this distinction, but thinks
that  there  is  a  more  fundamental  notion  of value. He thinks it is
possible  to  abstract  from  both  use-value and exchange-value, and to
discover  the  underlying property which gives value to all exchangeable
things, namely, that they are products of labor. With Smith and Marx, as
with  Aristotle,  the  theory  of value does not deal with every type of
good,  but  only with that type which earlier moralists called "external
goods" or "goods of fortune." But more recently the concept of value has
been extended, by economists and others, to the evaluation of everything
which  men think of as desirable in any way. In consequence, the age-old
controversy  about  the  objectivity or subjectivity of good and evil is
now  stated  in  terms  of  the  difference between facts and values, or
between  judgments  of  fact  and  judgments  of  value.  The  issue, as
currently  stated,  is whether questions of value can be answered in the
same  way  as  questions  of  fact.  One position maintains that, unlike
questions  of fact which can be answered by scientific investigation and
can  be  objectively  solved,  questions  of  value  elicit no more than
expressions of opinion, relative to the individual's subjective response
or  to the conventions of his society at a given time. The other side of
the  issue  is  held  by those who insist that the norms of value are as
objective  and as scientifically determinable as the criteria of fact or
existence.

[664b]
The  word  "value" does not change the problem in any way; for what does
evaluating  anything  mean  except  judging it as good or bad, better or
worse } The problem, which has a history as long as the tradition of the
great books, is the problem of how we can defend such judgments and what
they  signify  about  the things judged. Are good and evil determined by
nature  or  convention  ? Are they objects of knowledge or opinion } The
title  of  an  essay  by  Montaigne—  "that  the taste for good and evil
depends  in  good  part upon the opinion we have of them"— indicates one
set of answers to these questions. "If evils have no admission into us,"
he  writes,  "but  by  the judgment we ourselves make of them, it should
seem  that  it is, then, in our power to despise them or to turn them to
good.  ...  If what we call evil and torment is neither evil nor torment
of itself, but only that our fancy gives it that quality, it is in us to
change  it."  Echoing  Montaigne,  Hamlet remarks that "there is nothing
either  good  or  bad  but  thinking  makes  it so." The Greek sophists,
centuries  earlier,  appear  to  take  the  same  view. The statement of
Protagoras  that  "man is the measure of all things," Plato thinks, does
not  significantly  apply  to all things, but only to such things as the
good  or  the  right,  the  true  or  the  beautiful. In the Theaetetus,
Protagoras  is  made to say that as "to the sick man his food appears to
be bitter, and to the healthy man the opposite of bitter," so in general
men  estimate  or  judge all things according to their own condition and
the  way  things  affect  them. This theory of good and evil necessarily
denies  the  possibility  of  moral  science.  Socrates calls it "a high
argument  in  which  all  things  are  said  to  be relative." Plato and
Aristotle  respond  to the sophists by arguing in the opposite vein. For
Plato,  the good is not a matter of opinion, but an object of knowledge.
Knowledge  of  good and evil is the best fruit of the tree of knowledge.
"Let  each one of us leave every other kind of knowledge," Socrates says
at  the  end of the Republic, "and seek and follow one thing only," that
is,  "to  learn  and  discern between good and evil." Aristotle does not
think  that  ethics,  or any science which deals with good and evil, can
have as much precision as mathematics. "Our discus-

[665a]
sion  will  be adequate," he writes, "if it has as much clearness as the
subject matter admits of, for precision is not to be sought for alike in
all discussions." This, however, does not exclude the possibility of our
knowing  with  great  exactitude  the first principles of moral science,
such  as  the  nature of happiness and virtue. Indefiniteness and even a
certain  kind  of  relalivi-  '  ty occur only when these principles are
applied  to  particular  cases.  Hence,  in  Aristotle's view, the moral
sciences,  such as ethics and politics, can have objective and universal
validity  no  less than physics or mathematics, at least on the level of
principles.  In  modern times, Locke and Kant also affirm the scientific
character  of  ethics,  but  without  the  qualification which Aristotle
insists  upon when we go from principles to practice. Locke explains the
grounds  on  which  he  is  "bold  to  think that morality is capable of
demonstration,  as well as mathematics"; for, he says, "the precise real
essence  of the things moral words stand for may be perfectly known, and
so  the  congruity  and  incongruity  of  the  things  themselves may be
certainly  discovered;  in  which  consists  perfect  knowledge."  He is
confident   '   that   "from  self-evident  propositions,  by  necessary
consequences,  as incontestible as those in mathematics, the measures of
right  and  wrong  might be made out, to any one that will apply himself
with  the  same  indifferency and attention to the one as he does to the
other  of  these sciences." But Locke adds, "this is not to be expected,
whilst  the  desire  of  esteem,  riches, or power makes men espouse the
well-endowed  opinions  in  fashion."  He  himself  seems to tend in the
opposite  direction  when  he  identifies the good with the pleasant and
makes it relative to individual desires. For Kant the two major parts of
philosophy  —physics  and ethics—are on equal footing, the one concerned
with  the  "laws  of nature^ the other with the "laws oifreedomT In each
case  there  is  both  empirical  and a priori knowledge. Kant calls the
latter  in each case "metaphysics" and speaks of "a metaphysic of nature
and  a metaphysic of morals'' The nature of science, he thinks, requires
us  to  "separate  the  empirical  from the rational part, and prefix to
physics  proper  (or  empirical  physics) a metaphysic of nature, and to
practical anthropology a meta-

[665b]
Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL 607 physic of morals, wfiich must be carefully
cleared of everything empirical." This partial inventory of thinkers who
stand  against skepticism or relativism in the field of morals indicates
that  agreement  on this point is accompanied by some disagreement about
the  reasons  for holding what appears to be the same view. The opposite
view  seems  also to be shared by thinkers of quite different cast, such
as  Spinoza  and  Mill,  who  differ  from  each  other  as well as from
Montaigne  and  the ancient sophists. The terms "good and evil," Spinoza
writes,  "indicate  nothing positive in things considered in themselves,
nor  are they anything else than modes of thought . . . One and the same
thing   may   at   the   same   time   be   both   good   and   evil  or
indifferent"—according  to  the  person  who  makes  the judgment of it.
Spinoza  therefore  defines  "good"  as "that which we certainly know is
useful  to  us." Apart from society, he says, "there is nothing which by
universal  consent  is  good  or evil, since everyone in a natural state
consults  only  his  own profit." Only when men live together in a civil
society  under  law can it be "decided by universal consent what is good
and  what  is  evil."  Holding that all men seek happiness and that they
determine what is good and evil in particular cases by reference to this
end,  Mill  seems  to  offer  the  standard  of  utility as an objective
principle of morality. But insofar as he identifies happiness with a sum
total  of pleasures or satisfactions, it tends to become relative to the
individual  or  the group. If competent judges disagree concerning which
of  two pleasures is the greater or higher, there can be no appeal. Mill
says,  except  to  the verdict of the majority. To this extent at least,
judgments  of  value  are  expressions of opinion, not determinations of
science.  Nor  does  Mill hesitate to say that "the ultimate sanction of
all  morality"  is  "a  subjective  feeling  in  our minds." In order to
clarify  this  basic  issue  it is necessary to take note of other terms
which are usually involved in the discussion of good and evil—such terms
as pleasure and pain, desire and aversion, being, nature, and reason. In
the course of doing this, we will perceive the relevance of the chapters
which deal with those ideas.

[666a]
608  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  It  has been said, for example, that the good is
identical  with the pleasant; that the good is what men desire; that the
good  is  a  property of being or existence; that the good is that which
conforms  to  the  nature  of  a  thing;  that the good is that which is
approved  by  reason.  It is possible to see some truth in each of these
statements.   But   each,   taken   by   itself,  may  be  too  great  a
simplification.  Searching questions can be asked by those who refuse to
equate  the  good  with  the  pleasant  or  the desirable, the real, the
natural,  or  the  reasonable. Are there no pleasures in any way bad, no
pains  in  any  way  good  ? Are all desires themselves good, or are all
equally good ? How does calling a thing "good" add anything to its being
or  existence?  Does  not  evil  exist  or  qualify  existence?  By what
standards  can  the natural and the rational be judged good, if the good
is  that  which  conforms to nature and reason? These questions call for
more  analysis  of  each  of these factors in the discussion of good and
evil  and suggest that no one of these factors by itselfIS sufficient to
solve  the  problem  of  defining  good  and  evil  or formulating their
criteria.  Of the five things mentioned, two particularly — pleasure and
desire—seem  to  leave  open  the  question  whether  good  and evil are
objective or subjective. They require us to decide whether things please
us  because they are good or are good because they please us; whether we
desire  things  because they are good or simply call them "good" when we
desire  them.  On  this  issue  Spinoza  flatly declares that "we do not
desire a thing because we adjudge it good, but, on the contrary, we call
it good because we desire it." In saying that "a thing is good so far as
it  is desirable," Aquinas takes the opposite position, for according to
him  "a  thing  is desirable only in so far as it is perfect." It can be
desirable,  therefore,  without  being  actually desired by this or that
individual.  The  other  three  terms—unlike pleasure and desire—seem to
favor  the  objectivity  of good and evil, at least for those who regard
the  order of existence, the nature of things, and the laws of reason as
independent  of our desires or preferences. Thus for Spino2:a the nature
of  man  and  his  reason  seem  to  provide  an  objective standard for
determining  what is good alike for all men. Nothing, he writes, "can be
good ex-

[666b]
cept  in  so far as it agrees with our nature, and therefore the more an
object  agrees  with  our nature the more profitable it will be." And in
another  place  he says, "By good I understand . . . everything which we
are certain is a means by which we may approach nearer and nearer to the
model of human nature we set before us." That model, he tells us, is the
man  of  reason,  the  man who always acts "according to the dictates of
reason,"  for  "those  desires  which  are  determined by man's power or
reason  are always good." Nevertheless, if desire and pleasure cannot be
eliminated from the consideration of good and evil—at least not the good
and  evil  which  enter  into  human life— then the problem of finding a
purely objective foundation for our moral judgments is not solved simply
by  an  appeal to being, nature, and reason. Some help toward a solution
may be found in one often reiterated fact about the relation between the
good  and human desire. The ancients insist that no man desires anything
but  what  at the time seems good to him in some way. "No man," Socrates
observes, "voluntarily pursues evil, or that which he thinks to be evil.
To  prefer  evil  to  good  is  not  in  human nature; and when a man is
compelled  to  choose  one  of two evils, no one will choose the greater
when  he  may  have  the less." This, however, does not prevent men from
desiring "what they suppose to be goods although they are really evils."
Since  they  are mistaken in their judgment "and suppose the evils to be
goods,  they  really  desire  goods."  The object consciously desired is
always at least apparently good. When men are mistaken in their estimate
of  things  as beneficial or injurious to themselves, the apparent good—
the  good  actually  desired—will  be really an evil, that is, something
actually  undesirable.  An object which is really good may not appear to
be  so,  and  so  it  will  not be desired although it is desirable. The
deception  of  appearances, Socrates says, tricks us into taking "at one
time  the  things of which we repent at another, both in our actions and
in  our  choice  of things great and small." The distinction between the
r^^/and the apparent good is, of course, connected with the

[667a]
problem  of  the  objective  and  the subjective good. The apparent good
varies  from  individual  to  individual and from time to time. If there
were a real good, it would be free from such relativity and variability.
Unless  there  arc  real,  as  distinct  from  merely  apparent,  goods,
moralists  cannot distinguish between what men should desire and what in
fact  they do desire. Since moral science deals with human behavior, its
province  can  be  separated from that of other sciences which treat the
same subject matter—such as psychology and sociologv— only in terms of a
different  treatment  of  that  subject  matter.  Moral  science must be
normative  or  prescriptive  rather  than descriptive. It must determine
what  men  should  s^^k,  not  what  they do seek. The very existence of
normative sciences, as well as their validity, would thus seem to depend
on  the  establishment of a real, as opposed to a merely apparent, good.
This  creates  no  special  difficulty  for moralists who think that man
knows what is really good for him, both in general and in particular, by
intuition  or rational deduction, through the commandments of the divine
law,  or  through • the precepts of the law of reason. But for those who
insist  that  the  good  is always somehow relative to desire and always
involves  pleasure,  the  distinction  between the real and the apparent
good raises an extremely difficult problem. To say that an apparent good
is not really good suggests, as we have seen, that what is called "good"
may  not be in itself desirable. That something which is really good may
not  in fact appear to be so, seems to imply that the word "good" can be
significantly  applied  to  something  which is not actually desired— at
least  not  consciously.  How,  then,  is  the  good  always relative to
desire.?  The  traditional  answer  to  this question must appeal to the
distinction  between natural and conscious desire, which is discussed in
the  chapter  on  Desire.  It is by reference to natural desire that the
good  is said to be in itself always desirable—even when the really good
thing  is  not  consciously  desired.  The  relation of good and evil to
pleasure  and  pain can also be clarified by a basic distinction between
the pleasure which is an object of de-

[667b]
Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  609  sire  and  pleasure conceived as the
satisfaction  of  desire. 'I'his is discussed in the chapter on Pleasure
and  Pain.  If  obtaining  a  desired gcKKl is satisfying, then there is
certainly  a  sense  in  which  the  g(xxl  and  the  pleasant  (or  the
satisfying) are always associated; but it may also be true that pleasure
is  only  one  kind  of  good  among  various objects of desire and that
certain  pleasures  which  men  desire  appear to be, but are not really
good.  The  foregoing  considerations apply to the good in the sphere of
human  conduct.  But  the human good, the practicable good, the good for
man, does not exhaust the meaning of the term good. The idea of the good
is,  for Plaio, the measure of perfection in all things; it is "not only
the  author  of  knowledge  to  all things known, but of their being and
essence,  and  yet  the  good is not essence, but far exceeds essence in
dignity  and power." The absolute good is also, as in the Diiine Comedy,
the  final  cause  or ultimate end of the motions of the universe. It is
"the  Alpha  and Omega," Dante says, "of every scripture that Love reads
to  me . . . the Essence wherein is such supremacy that every good which
is  found outside of It is naught else than a beam of Its own radiance .
.  .  the  Love  which  moves  the  sun and the other stars." So too, in
Aristotle's  cosmology,  the  circular motions of the celestial spheres,
and  through  them  all  other  cycles  of natural change, are sustained
eternally  by  the prime mover, which moves all things by the attraction
of  its  perfect being. It therefore "moves without being moved," for it
"produces  motion  through  being  Though desire and love enter into the
conception  of  the  good  as  a  cosmic final cause, thev are not human
desire or love. Though the goodness which inheres in things according to
the  degree  of  their  perfection  may  make  them desirable, it is not
dependent  on  their  being  consciously  desired  by men. In Jewish and
Christian  theology,  for  example,  the  goodness  of  God is in no way
measured  by  human desires, purposes, or pleasures; nor is the goodness
of  created  things  which, according to Genesis, God surveyed and found
"very good." The order of creation, moreover,

[668a]
610  THE  GREAT  IDEAS involves a hierarchy of inequalities in being and
goodness.  Even  when  each thing is perfect in its kind, all things are
not  equally  good,  for  according to the differences in their natures,
diverse  kinds  are  capable  of  greater  or  less  perfection.  In the
metaphysical  conception  of  goodness,  that  which  has more actuality
either  in  existence  or  power  has  more  perfection.  God's infinite
goodness is therefore said to follow from the fact that he is completely
actual— infinite in being and power. Things "which have life," Augustine
writes,  "are  ranked  above those which have none . . . And among those
that  have  life,  the  sentient  are  higher  than  those which have no
sensation . . . and among the sentient, the intelligent above those that
have   no   intelligence."   Augustine  contrasts  these  gradations  of
perfection  which  are  "according  to  the  order  of  nature" with the
"standards  of value" which are "according to the utility each man finds
in  a  thing."  That  which  is less good in a metaphysical sense may be
preferred  on  moral  grounds  as  being better for man. "Who," he asks,
"would  not rather have bread in his house than mice, gold than fleas.?"
Is  it  not true that "more is often given for a horse than for a slave,
for  a  jewel  than  for a maid" ? According to Augustine, as well as to
Aquinas  later, metaphysical goodness consists in "the value a thing has
in  itself  in the scale of creation," while moral goodness depends upon
the  relation  in  which  a  thing  stands  to human need or desire, and
according to the estimation placed upon it by human reason. It is in the
moral,  not  the  metaphysical sense that we speak of a good man, a good
will,  a  good  life,  and a good society; or of all the things, such as
health, wealth, pleasure, virtue, or knowledge, which it may be good for
man  to  seek  and possess. Only in the metaphysical sense can things be
thought  of  as  good  entirely  apart from man; only then can we find a
hierarchy  of perfections in the world which accords with a hierarchy of
beings.  Thus  Spinoza  declares that "the perfection of things is to be
judged  by  their  nature  and  power  alone;  nor are^they more or less
perfect because they delight or offend the human senses, or because they
are beneficial or prejudicial to human nature."

[668b]
The  metaphysical  conception  of  goodness  raises peculiarly difficult
problems.  Are there as many meanings of "good" as there are of "being"?
When  we  say  God  is  good,  are  we  making a moral or a metaphysical
judgement.?  Are  we attributing perfection of being or goodness of will
to  God  ?  If  goodness  is a propertv of being, then must not all evil
become  a  privation  of  being?  Conceiving evil in this way, Augustine
points  out that if things "be deprived of all good, they shall cease to
be,"  so  that there is "nothing whatsoever evil" in itself; and Aquinas
maintains  that  "no  being is said to be evil, considered as being, but
only  so  far  as  it  lacks being." If to understand what the notion of
goodness  adds  to the notion of being it is necessary to say that being
has  goodness  in  relation to appetite, the question inevitably arises,
"Whose  appetite?"  Not  man's  certainly,  for  then  the moral and the
metaphysical  good  become identical. If God's, then not appetite in the
form  of  desire,  but in the form of love, for the divine perfection is
usually thought to preclude desire. Problems of this sort confront those
who,  conceiving  the good both apart from and also relative to man, are
obligated to connect the metaphysical and the moral meanings of good and
to  say  whether they have a common thread. Some writers, however, limit
their  consideration  to  the  strictly  moral good, and deny, as do the
Stoics,  goodness  or  evil  to anything but man's free acts of will. We
should,  says Marcus Aurelius, "judge only those things which are in our
power,  to  be  good  or bad." In this we are entirely free, for "things
themselves  have  no natural power to form our judgments ... If thou art
pained  by any external thing, it is not this thing which disturbs thee,
but  thy  own judgment about it. And it is in thy power to wipe out this
judgment now . . . Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse
thee.  What  then can these things do to prevent thy mind from remaining
pure,  wise,  sober,  just?"  Though  Kant  develops  what  he  calls  a
"metaphysic  of  ethics,"  he  does  not  seem to have a metaphysical as
opposed to a moral conception of the good; unless in some analogous form
it  lies  in his distinction between "value" and "dignity," according to
which "whatever has

[669a]
Chaptf.h  30:  GOOD  /VND EVIL reference to the general inclinations and
wants  jof  mankind  has  a market value,'' whereas "what- , ever ... is
above  all value, and therefore admits of no equivalent, has a dignity"—
"not a merely
[relative worth, but an intrinsic worth."
But  since  Kant  thinks  that  only  men,  or rational beings, can have
mtrinsic  worth,  he  finds  goodness only in the moral order. He agrees
with  the  Stoics that good and evil occur only in the realm of freedom,
not  at  all  in  the  realm  of existence or nature. "Good or evil," he
writes,  "always  implies  a reference to the will, as determined by the
law  ofreason'  which is the law of freedom. According to Kant, "nothing
can possibly be conceived in the w^orld, or even out of it, which can be
called  good  without qualification, except a Good Will"; and in another
place  he  says,  "If anything is to be good or evil . absolutely ... it
can only be the manner of acting, the maxim of the will." In this sense,
the  free  will  complying  with or resisting the imperatives of duty is
either the seat or the source of all the goodness or evil that there is.
"Men may laugh," Kant says, "at the Stoic, who in the severest paroxysms
of  gout  cried  out: Pain, however thou tormentest me, I will never adI
mit  that  thou  art  an  evil: he was right ... for pain did not in the
least diminish the worth of his person, but only that of his condition."
In the sphere of moral conduct, and especially for those who make desire
or  pleasure  rather  than  duty  the  principle,  there  seems  to be a
plurality  of goods which require classification and order. Some things,
it  would  appear,  are  not desired for themselves, but for the sake of
something  else. They are good only as means to be used. Some things are
desired  for  their  own  sake, and are good as ends, to be possessed or
enjoyed.  This division of goods into means and ends— the useful and the
enjoyable  or  pleasant —permits a third type of good which is an end in
one  respect, and a means in another. Analysis of this sort leads to the
concept  of  a  summum  bonum—  that  good  which  is not a means in any
respect,  but entirely an end, the supreme or highest good for which all
else  is sought. The chief question with respect to the summum bonum. is
whether it is a good or the good —whether it is merely one type of good,
more

[669b]
611  desirable than any other, or the sum of all good things which, when
possessed, leaves nothing to be desired. Aristotle and Mill seem to take
the  latter  view  in their conception of happiness as the summum bonum.
"Human nature," Mill says, "is so constituted as to desire nothing which
is  not  cither a part of happiness or a means of happiness." Happiness,
he  insists,  is  "not an abstract idea, but a concrete whole" including
all  other  goods  within  itself.  It is the only good which is desired
entirely  for  its  own  sake.  Aristotle treats virtue and knowledge as
intrinsic  goods,  but  he  also  regards them as means to happiness. In
Mill's  terms,  their  goodness  remains  subject  to  the  criterion of
utility,  from  which  happiness  alone  is exempt since it measures the
utility of all other goods. If the evaluation of all things by reference
to  their  contribution  to  happiness  as the ultimate good constitutes
utilitarianism  in  ethics,  then  Aristotle  no  less  than  Mill  is a
utilitarian,  even  though  Aristotle does not refer to the principle of
utility,  does  not  identify  the good with pleasure, and conceives the
virtues  as  intrinsically good, not merely as means. Kant ^vould regard
them  as  in  fundamental  agreement despite all their differences—or at
least  he  would  regard them as committing the same fundamental To Kant
any  discussion of human conduct which involves the calculation of means
to  ends  is  pragmatic or utilitarian, even when the controlling end is
the  summum  bonum  or happiness. Kant makes a sharp distinction between
what  he calls "pragmatical rules" of conduct which consider what should
be  done  by  one  who  wishes  to  be happy, and what he regards as the
strictly  "moral  or  ethical  law"  which "has no other motive than the
worthiness  of being happy'' Morality, he says in another place, "is not
properly  the doctrine of how we should make ourselves happy, but how we
should  become  worthy of happiness"— through doing our Kant's criticism
of  Aristotle's  ethics  of  happiness  is  therefore  applicable to the
utilitarianism of Mill; and Mill's rejoinder to Kant serves as a defense
of  Aristotle.  This  basic issue concerning the primacy of happiness or
duty—  of  desire  or  law—  is  discussed  in  the chapters on Duty and
Happiness, where it is suggested

[670a]
612  THE GREAT IDEAS that in an ethics of duty, right and wrong supplant
good  and  evil as the fundamental terms, and the summum bonum becomes a
derivative  notion  rather  than  the  first principle ofmorality At the
other  extreme are those who deny duty entirely, and with it any meaning
to  right  and  wrong as distinct from good and evil. A middle ground is
held  by  those  who  employ right and wrong as subordinate terms in the
analysis  of  good  and  evil, finding their special significance in the
consideration  of  the good of others or the social good. To do right is
to  do good to others; to do wrong is to injure them. The question which
Plato  so insistently raises, whether it is better to do injustice or to
suffer  it,  can  also be stated in terms of good and evil, or right and
wrong.  Is  it  better  to  suffer  evil or to do it? Is it better to be
wronged by others or to wrong them? As justice for Aristotle is that one
among the virtues which concerns the good of others and the common good,
and  as  it  is  the  one  virtue  which  is  thought to involve duty or
obhgation,  so  the  criteria of right and wrong measure the goodness or
evil  of  human  acts  by  reference to law and society. The division of
goods  into means and ends is not the only distinction made by moralists
who  recognize  the  plurality  and inequality of goods. Goods have been
divided into the limited and the unlimited with respect to quantity; the
pure  and  the  mixed with respect to quality; sensible and intelligible
goods or particular goods and the good in general; external goods, goods
of  the  body,  and goods of the soul; the pleasant, the useful, and the
virtuous.  More  specific  enumerations  of  the  variety  of goods list
wealth,  health, strength, beauty, longevity, pleasure, honor (or fame),
virtue,  knowledge, friendship. All of the foregoing classifications can
be  combined with one another, but there is one distinction which stands
by  itself,  although it affects all the others. That is the distinction
between  the  individual  and  the  common  good, or between private and
public good, the good for this one man and the good of all others and of
the  whole community. In the language of modern utihtarianism, it is the
distinction  between  individual happiness and what Bentham called *'the
greatest good for the greatest number."

[670b]
.  The phrase "common good" has several meanings in the tradition of the
great  books.  One  sense,  which  some  think is the least significant,
refers  to  that  which  can be shared or used by many, as, for example,
land  held in common and worked by a number of persons or families. Thus
we  speak  of  the  "commons" of a town or village. This meaning applies
particularly  to economic goods which may either belong to the community
as a whole or be divided into parcels of private property. Another sense
of  common  good is that in which the welfare of a community is a common
good  participated  in  by its members. The welfare of the family or the
state  is  a good which belongs to a multitude organized for some common
purpose. If the individual members of the group derive some benefit from
their association with one another, then the prosperity of the community
is  not  only a common good viewed collecti\'ely, but also a common good
viewed distributively, for it is the good of each member of the group as
well  as  of  the  whole. With this in mind, perhaps. Mill speaks of "an
indissoluble association between
[the
individual's]  happiness  and  the  practice  of  such  mode of conduct,
negative and positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes;
so  that  not  only  he  may  be  unable  to conceive the possibility of
happiness  to  himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the general
good,  but also that a direct impulse to promote the general good may be
in  every  individual  one  of  the  habitual  modes of action." If this
statement  by  Mill  is used to interpret Bentham's phrase "the greatest
good  for  the greatest number" then the greatest number cannot be taken
to  mean  a  majority,  for  the  good  of  nothing  less than the whole
collectively  or  of  all  distributively  can be taken as the common or
general good. Still another conception of the common good is possible. A
good  may be common in the sense in which a specific nature is common to
the  members  of  the  species—not as organized socially in any way, but
simply  as  so  many  like  individuals.  If all men seek happiness, for
example,  then  happiness  is a common good, even though each individual
seeks  his  own  happiness. In a deeper sense it is a common good if the
happiness each seeks is the same for all men

[671a]
ibecause  they  are  all of the same nature; inn, most strictly, it is a
common good if the happiness of each individual cannot be separated from
the  happiness  of all. Aquinas seems to be using this meaning of common
good  when, in defining law as a rule of conduct "directed to the common
good,"  he  refers  not  merely  to  the  good  of the community or body
politic,  but  beyond  that  to  "the  last end of human life," which is
"happiness  or  beatitude."  Law,  he  says,  "must needs concern itself
properly  with  the  order  directed  to universal happiness." Mill also
seems  to  conceive  happiness as a common good in this sense. "What the
assailants of utilitarianism seldom have the justice to acknowledge," he
writes,  is  "that the happiness which forms the utilitarian standard of
what  is right in conduct, is not the agent's own happiness, but that of
all  concerned."  The  several  meanings  of  the  common  good create a
fundamental  issue. Some writers use it in one sense only, rejecting the
others. Some not only use the term in all its meanings, but also develop
a  hierarchy  of  common  goods.  They  regard  universal happiness, for
example,  as  a  common  good  of a higher order than the welfare of the
political  community. Yet in every order they insist upon the primacy of
the  common  over  the  individual  good.  In  the  political order, for
example,  they  think the welfare of the community takes precedence over
individual  happiness.  They  would regard Adam Smith's statement of the
way  in  which  individuals  accidentally  serve  the  common good while
seeking their private interests, as a perversion of the relationship. To
say  that an individual considering only his own gain is "led OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  I.  The general theory of good and evil 615 I a. The idea of the
good:  the  notion  of finality lb. Goodness in proportion to being: the
grades  of  perfection  and  the goodness of id. The oriein, nature, and
existence of evil

[671b]
Chaptf.r 30: GOOD AND KVIL 613 by an invisible hand to promote an cnii u
hich  was  no  part  of  his intention" (i.e., the general prosperity of
society)  does  not excuse the individual's failure to aim at the common
grxxl.  The  several  meanings  of  the common gfxxi also complicate the
statement of the issue between those who seem to say that the welfare of
the  community  always  takes  precedence  over individual well-being or
happiness— that the good of the whole is always greater than the good of
its  parts—and those who seem to say that the state is made for man, not
man  for  the  state, or that the prosperity of the society in which men
live  is  good  primarily  because it enables each of them to live well.
This  issue,  which runs through all the great books of political theory
from Plato and Aristotle to Hegel and Mill, is discussed in the chapters
on   Citizen   and   State.  The  opposition  between  collectivism  and
individualism  in  economics  and  politics  does  not exhaust the issue
which,  stated  in  its  broadest  moral  terms,  is  a conflict between
selfinterest  and  altruism.  The  primary  problem  to consider here is
whether the issue is itself genuine, or only an opposition between false
extremes  which needlessly exclude the halftruth that each contains. The
collective  aspect  of  the common good may not need to be emphasized at
the  expense  of  its  distributive aspect. The good of each man and the
good  of  mankind  may be inseparable. It may be the same good which, in
different respects, is individual and common. It may be that no good can
be  supreme  which  is  not  both  immanent and transcendent—at once the
highest  perfection  of the individual and a good greater than his whole
being and his life.

[672a]
614  THE GREAT IDEAS lb. The divine goodness and the problem of evil (i)
The  prescriptions of duty estimations of goodness evil 4^. Sensible and
intelligible  goods  4^. Useful and enjoyable goods: good for an end and
good  in  itself  4^.  Intrinsic and external goods: intrinsic worth and
extrinsic  value  5.  The  order  of human goods 55. The supreme good or
summum  bonum:  its  existence  and  nature  is good 6c. The goodness of
knowledge or wisdom : the use of knowledge

[672b]
PAGB  2.  The goodness or perfection of God: the plenitude of the divine
being  6i8  ia.  God's  goodness  as  diffusive, causing the goodness of
things:  God's love 619 3. The moral theory of the good: the distinction
between the moral and the metaphysical good 620 3^. Human nature and the
determination  of  the  good  for  man:  the real and the apparent good;
particular  goods  and the good in general 621 3^. Goodness in the order
of  freedom  and  will  622  (2)  The  good  will:  its  conditions  and
consequences  623 3c. The good and desire: goodness causing movements of
desire  and  desire causing 3^. Pleasure as the good, a good, ov feeling
good 624 3^. Right and wrong: the social incidence of the good; doing or
suffering  good  and  ^f.  The  sources  of  evil  in  human life 625 4.
Divisions  of  the human good 626 4c. Goods of the body and goods of the
soul 627 4^. Individual and common goods 628 5^. The judgment of diverse
types  of good: their subordination to one another 629 5c. The dialectic
of  means  and ends: mere means and ultimate ends 630 <^d. The supremacy
of  the  individual  or the common good: the relation of the good of the
individual  person  to  the good of other persons and to the good of the
state  631  6.  Knowledge  and  the  good 632 6a. Knowledge, wisdom, and
virtue:  the  relation  of  being good and knowing what 6b. The need for
experience  of  evil  633  6(^.  The possibility of moral knowledge: the
subjectivity or conventionaUty of judgments of good and evil 634

[673a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc  the vokimc and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer: Iliad, bk ii (265-28:^) 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page.  For example, in 53 James :Pi^^\'c/io/o^^',116a-l
19b,  the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the
lower  half  of  page  119. When the text is printed in two columns, the
letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side
of  the  page,  the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the
right-hand  side  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  7 Plato: Symposium,
163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of
page  163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164.
Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as
part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included  in the reference; line
numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  Bible References : The references are to book, chapter,
and  verse.  When  the  King James and Douay versions differ in title of
books  or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James version
is  cited  first  and  the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g., Old
Testament:   Nehemiah,   7:45—   (D)   //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols:  The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed intermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in  the  use  of  The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The
general theory of good and evil Old Testament: Isaiah, 45:7— (D) Isaias,
45:7 / Lamentations, 3:38 Apocrypha: Ecdesiasticus, 33:14-15; 39:25— (D)
OT,  Ecdesiasticus, 33:15; 39:30 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 83b-84a / Gorgias,
282c284b  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  322d-323a; bk vii, 389b-c / Theaetetus,
518a-b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 383b-384c / Metaphysics, bk i,
ch 6 [988^8-16] 506a-b; ch 7 [988^6-16] 506c-d; BK V, ch i
[1013^20-24!
533b;  BK XII, ch 7 602a-603b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch
6-7 341b-344a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 29, 134d135b; bk ii, ch
8 146a'147c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b; bk vi, sect
40-45  277d-278c;  bk viii, sect 19 286d-287a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  viii  27b-34a / Third Ennead, tr ix, ch 3, 138a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr
i-vi  208a-237d  passim;  tr ix, ch 10, 250c / Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch 10
309a-d;  TR  vii,  ch  24-26 333d-334d; ch 28 335b-d; tr ix 353d-360d 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 20 32d33a / City ofGod, bk xii, ch 1-5
342b,d-345b

[673b]
Chapter  30:  GOOD AND EVIL 615 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq
4-6  20c-30d;  q  21,  a  i,  rep 4 124b-125b; a 3, ans 126a-c; qq 48-49
259b-268a,c;  part i-ii, q i, A 4, rep i 612a-613a; a 8 615a-c; q 2, a 5
618d-619c; q 18, a i, ans 694a-d; a 2, ans 694d-695c; a 3, ans 695d-696b
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 61d-62a 26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet,
act  ii,  sc  III  [1-30]  296b-c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix
369b-372d; part III, PROP 9, scHOL 399c; prop 39, schol 408b-d; part iv,
pref-def  2  422b,d-424a;  prop  8  426b-c; prop 27-28 431b-c 32 Milton:
Areopagitica,  390b-391a  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals,
256a-b  / Practical Reason, 314d-321b esp 316a317d, 318c-321b; 338c-355d
la.  The  idea  of the good: the notion of finality 7 Plato: Protagoras,
50c-d  /  Symposium,  164c165b / Phaedo, 240d-242b / Gorgias, 282c284b /
Republic,  bk  i, 309b-310a; bk vi-vii, 384a-401d / Timaeus, 447d-448a /
Theaetetus,  535b-d / Philebus 609a-639a,c esp 609a-c, 614a, 635b-639a,c
8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ii
[94^8-95*9]
129b-d / Topics, bk i, ch 15
[107*3-11] 151a; bk vi, ch 5 [143*9-12] 196c;

[674a]
(1.  The  general theory of good and evil. la. The idea of the good: the
notion offinality.^ CH 6
[145^19-27]
198d-199a; ch 8
[146^9147*11] 200c-201a; ch 12 [149^31-39] 204b-c /
Physics,  BK  I,  CH  9  [192^2-24]  268a'C;  bk  ii,  ch  2 [194^27-^8]
270d-271a; ch 3 [194^33-195^2] 271b-c;
[195^22-26]
271d; ch 8 275d-277b; BK VII, ch 3
[246*10-248^8]
329c-330d / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 383b-384c / Generation and Corruption,
bk ii, ch 6 [333*35-^20] 434b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982*^4-10] 500d;
CH 3
[984''8]-CH 4
[985*28] 502d-503c; ch 6
[988*8-16]
506a-b; ch 7
[988^6-16]
506c-d;  ch 9 [992*29-34] 510c; bk II, CH 2 [994^9-16] 512d-513a; bk hi,
ch 2
[996*21-^13]
514d515a;  bk  v,  ch  2 [1013*32-^3] 533c; [1013^2528] 533d-534a; ch 14
[1020^14-25] 541d-542a; bk IX, CH 8
[1050*3-^1] 575d-576b; bk
xii,  ch  7 [1072*18-^4] 602a-c; ch 10 [1075*25-^7] 606a-b; bk xiv, ch 4
[1091*29-1092*8] 624a-d; CH 6 625d-626d / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[415*
22-''8] 645c-d; [4i5''i5-22] 645d-646a; bk hi, CH 9 [432^21-26] 665b-c /
Sleep, ch 2
[455^^
13-28]  698b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [639^ 8-640*12]
161d-162b;
[641^10-642^4]
164c165d; ch 5 [645*23-26] 169a / Gait ofAnimals, CH 2 [704*'i2-i8] 243c
/  Generation ofAnimals, bk I, CH I [715*1-11] 255a; bk v, ch i [778*15-
^19]  320a-321a  / Ethics, bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch 6 341b-342c / Politics,
bk i, ch 2
[1252^301253*1] 446a-b; ch 8 [1256^8-26] 450b-c
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 6, 170b-c; CH 12 172d-173c; bk ii,
ch 4, 187c 12 LvcRETivs: Nature of Things, bk i [1022-1037] 13c-d; bk ii
[1052-1063] 28b-c; bk iv [823857] 55a-b
12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b; sect 16 271c-d; bk vi,
sect  40  277d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vii, ch 1-2 26a-d; TR viii,
CH  2  27c-d / Third Ennead, tr ix, ch 3, 138a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr v-vi
228b-237d  /  Sixth En?iead, tr v, ch i 305c-306a; ch 10 309a-d; tr vii,
ch  15-42  329c-342d;  tr ix 353d-360d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par  10  lla-b;  BK XIII, par 53 124d-125a,c / City of God, bk XI, ch 22
333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  i  342b,d343c; CH 4-5 344b-345b; bk xiv, ch 13
387c388c;  bk  xxii, ch 24, 610c-611c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  2, a 3, ANs 12c-14a; qq 5-6 23b-30d esp q 5, a 4 25d-26c; q 16, a
i, ans 94b-95c; a 3, ans 96b-d; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a i, ANS
108d-109c;  a 4, ans lllc-112c; q 22, a, 2 ANS 128d-130d; q 23, a i, ans
and rep 1-2 132c-133b; q 36, a 3, ans 194c-195d; q 44, A 4 241a-d; q 48,
a  i,  rep  4 259b-260c; q 59, A I, ANS 306c-307b; a 3, ans 308b-309a; q
60,  A  5,  ans  313b-314c;  q  63,  a 4, ans 328b329a; q 65, a i, rep 3
339b-340b; a 2 340b-

[674b]
616  THE GREAT IDEAS la to \b 341b; Q 70, a 3, ANS 365b-367a; q 78, a i,
rep 3 407b-409a; q 82, a 4, ans and rep i 434c435c; Q 91, A 3 486b-487d;
q  92,  a  i, rep i 488d-489d; q 98, a i, ans 516d-517c; q 103 528a-534b
passim;  q  105, a 5, ans 542a-543b; part i-ii, q I, a 2 610b-611b; a 6,
ans  614a-c; A 8 615a-c; q 2, a 4, rep i 618a-d; a 5, rep 3 618d-619c; q
8, a i, ans 655b-656a; q 9, a i, ans 657d-658d; q 12, a 5, ans 672a-c 20
Aquinas:  Swmna Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A 2, ans and rep i 2b-4a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[125-136]
79d; XVIII
[19-39]
80a-b; paradise, I [94-142] 107b-d; III [82-90] llOa-b; iv
[ii5]-v
[12]
llld-112b; xxvi
[1-69]
145d146c;  xxxii [i39]-xxxiii [145] 156a-157d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i, 50a; part iv, 271d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation^ 355c-d; 442d-443c
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 45a-46a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48
llOd-llla 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies,
215a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, appendix 369b-372d; PART IV, pref
422b,d-424a  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 425-426 243b-244b; 430 245a-247b; 438
251a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 107 433d-434a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  v, div 44, 469b-c; sect xi, div hi 501b-c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  187a-190a;  205a-209b  / Judgement, 467d-470b; 473a-474b;
478a;  550a-613a,c  esp  550a-562a,c,  568c-570b,  575b-578a, 587a-588a,
592a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 157b-c; 160b-178a esp
168d-169d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 40c-d; 41c-42a; 95d-97a esp
96b-c;  217d-218a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 646c647b;650b-c
53  James:  Psychology, 4a-6b; 671b [fn i] \b. Goodness in proportion to
being: the grades of perfection and the goodness of order Old Testament:
Gefiesis, i 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124c- 126a / Symposium, 167a-d / Gorgias,
282c-284b  /  Timaeus,  447a455c  /  Philebus,  635b-639a,c 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192*16-24]
268b-c  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  359d-360d;  bk II, CH 12 383b-384c /
Generation  and Corruption, bk II, CH 10 [336^25-34] 438d / Metaphysics,
BK IX, CH 9
[1051*4-21] 577a-b;
bk xii, ch 7 602a-603b; ch 10 [1075*11-24] 605d606a; bk xiv, ch 4 624a-d
9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals, bk ii, ch i [731^24-33] 272a-b /
Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*17-^7] 341 b-d
17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 1-2 26a-d; TR viii 27b-34a /
Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 3 67b-c / Third Ennead, tr viii, ch 8-10 132d-

[675a]
Icio  \d Chapter 30: CX)()l) AND EVIL 617 136a / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch
1-2  246c-  247b;  CH  10, 250c / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 25 334a-c; ch
28-29 335b-336b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 16 2^ , 48c-50c /
City  of  God,  bk viii, ch 6 268d 269c; BK XI, CH 16 331a-c; ch 22 333d
334c;  BK  XII,  CH 1-5 342b,d-345b; bk xiv, ch i^ 387c-388c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c627a;  ch  32  633c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 2, a i, REP 2 lOd-lld; A 3 12c-14a; q 3, a i, ans
14b15b; A 2, ANS 15c-16a; a 7, rep 2 19a-c; qq 4-6 20c-30d passim; q 16,
a  3, ans 96b-d; q 18, A 3 106b-107c; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; a 8, ANS
116a-d; q 22, a 4, ans 131c-132b; q 2^, A 5, rep 3 135d-137d; q 25, a i,
rep  2 143d144c; A 6 149a-150a; q 42, a i, rep 1-2 224b- ' 225d; Q 44, A
I, ANS 238b-239a; q 47, aa 2-3 257b-259a; qq 48-49 259b-268a,c passim; q
50,  A I, ans and rep i 269b-270a; a 3, ans and REP 2 272a-273b; q 57, a
i,  ans  295a-d;  Q  65,  A 2, ANS and REP 3 340b-341b; q 70, A 3, REP 2
365b-367a;  q 73, a i, ans 370a371a; q 75, a 7 384d-385c; q 76, a 3, ans
391a-393a;  a 4, rep 3 393a-394c; q 77, a 2 401b-d; A 4, REP I 403a-d; q
82,  a  3, ans 433c-434c; q 103 528a-534b passim, esp a 3 530a-c, AA 6-8
532b-534b;  q  106,  a  4,  ans  548b-549a;  part  i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i
612a613a;  a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a  5, rep 2 618d-619c; q 18 693b,d-703a
passim, esp aa 1-4 694a-696d; q 22, A 2, rep i 721c-722c; q 29, a i, rep
i  745a-c; a 5, ans 747c-748b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
52,  A  I,  ANS  15d-18a;  q  54, a 3, rep 2 24c-25b; q 55, A 4, rep 1-2
28c-29d;  q 85, a 4 181b-d; part ii-ii, q 2, A 3, ANS 392d-393c; q 23, a
3,  rep 3 485a-d; part hi, q 7, a 9, ans 751d-752c; part hi suppl, q 74,
A  I,  REP  3  925c-926c  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [103-142]
107b-d; II
[i 12-148] 109a-b; vii [64-75] ^^d116a;
[121-148]
116b-c; xiii
[52-87] 126a-b;
XXVIII
[i]-xxix
[66]
148d-151a esp xxviii
[64-72] 149b-c
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d  / Meditations, III, 84a-b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 372c-d; PART II, DEF 6 373c; part IV,
PREF  422b,d424a;  part  v,  prop  40, demonst 462c 32 Milton : Paradise
Lost,  bk  v [468-490] 185b186a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch
vi,  SECTi2 271d-272b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187c-188c; 206d-207c / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 278b-d / Practical Reason, 307a-d Ic. The
good,  the  true,  and  the  beautiful 7 Plato: Lysis, 21b-c / Phaedrus,
124c-129d / Symposium, 162d-163a; 167a-d / Republic, bk V, 357d-358a; bk
vi, 383d-388a / Philebus, 637c-638a

[675b]
8  Arisioile:  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch 1 (1013*202}] 533b; HK xii, en 7
(io72"2^ 36] 602b c; UK XMi, ch 3 [i078»^:5>6] 609d 610a / Soul, HK ill,
CH  7  (4^i''io  1^1 664b 12 I'.pictetus: Discourses, bk ii. ch 2, 141a;
i;k HI, CH I 175a 177c; bk iv, ch 11 240d 242d 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  ii, sect i 256b, d; HK IV, SECT 20 265a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tk  mi,  ch 1-2 10a d; tr VI, CH 3-9 22b-26a; ir viii, ch 2, 27c / Fifth
Ennead,  ir  i  208a-214c passim; tr v, ch 12 234a-d / Sixth Ennead, i k
vii,  ch  22  332d333b; CH 31-33 336d 338b 18 Augustine: Confessions, hk
xi,  par  6  90c-d;  bk  xiii,  par  53  124d-125a,c  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 5, a 4, rep I 25d-26c; q 16, a i, ans 94b-95c; a
^,  ans  96b-d;  a  4  97a-c;  q 17, a 4, rep 2 103c104b; Q 54, A 2, ans
285d-286c; q 79, a ir, REP 2 424d-425b; q 82, a 3, rep i 433c-434c; A 4,
rep I 434c-435c; part i-ii, q 3, a 5, rep 2 626b-627a; q 9, a i, ans and
rep  2-3 657d658d; Q 19, A 3, rep i 704c-705a; q 22, a 2, ANS 721c-722c;
q  26, a i, rep 3 734a-d; q 27, A I, REP 3 737b-d; a 2, ans 737d-738c; q
29,  A 5, ANS 747c-748b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 180,
A  2,  REP  3  608c-609c; part hi suppl, Q 94, A I, REP 2 1040d-1041b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
26c-27a  42  Kant: Judgement, 478a-479d; 480a-482b; 488a-489a; 521b-523c
esp 522b-c; 546d-548c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 266a267a
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov^ bk vi, 153a-d \d. The origin, nature,
and  existence  of  evil Old Testament: Isaiah, 45:7— (D) Isaias, 45:7 /
Lamentations,  3:38  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 33:14-15; 39:25— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  33:15; 39:30 7 Plato: Gorgias, 282c-284b / Republic, bk
x,  434d-435a  /  Theaetetus,  518a-b;  530b-d  / Statesman, 587a-589c /
Latvs, bk x, 763b 765a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch ii [13^36-14*6] 19c /
Physics,  BK  I,  ch  9  [i92''2-24l  268a-c  /  Metaphysics, BK I, ch 4
[984''23-985'"^]   502d-503c;  ch  6  [988*8-16]  506a-b;  bk  v,  ch  5
[1015^9-16]  536a;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051*17-22]  577a-b;  bk xii, CH 10
[1075*25-1076*4] 606a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 6
[1106^28-35]
352b-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 20, 126c-d; ch 29 134d-138a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6, 24b: tr viii 27b-34a / Second
Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 16, 48d-49a; ch 18, 49c-d; tr iv, ch 16, 57c: TR IX,
CH  13  73d-74b / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 5-7 85b-86c; ch 10-14 88a-89d;
tr hi

[676a]
618  THE  GREAT  (1. The general theory ofgood and evil. Id. The origin,
nature,  and existence oj evil.) CH 5, 95d-96a; ch 7, 96d-97a; tr vi, ch
ii,  113b-c  / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d / Fifth Ennead, tr ix,
ch  10,  250c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  28  335b-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk hi, par 11-12 15d-16b; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; bk v, par 20
32d-33a;  bk  vii,  par  3-7 44a-45d; par 11-23 47a-50d; bk xiii, par 45
123a / City of God, bk XI, CH 9, 327c-d; ch 22 333d-334c; bk xii, CH 1-9
342b,d-348b;  bk  xix, ch 13 519a520a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 5, a 3, REP 2 25a-d; a 5, rep 3-4 26c-27c; qq 48-49 259b-268a,c; q
65,  a  i, rep 2-3 339b-340b; PART i-ii, Q 18 693b,d-703a passim, esp aa
1-4  694a-696d; q 29, a i, ans and rep 1,3 745a-c; a 5, ans 747c-748b 20
Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 79, AA 1-2 156b-158a; q 80
159d-162d;  q8i, aa 1-2 163a-165c; a 5 167a-d; part hi suppl, q 69, A 7,
REP  9  891d-893c;  q  74,  a i, rep i 925c926c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, i [103-142] 107b-d; vn
[19-148] 115b-116c; xin
[52-87]
126a-b; xix
[40-66]
135c-d; xxix
[49-66]
150d-151a   23   HoBBEs:   Leviathan,   part  hi,  191b-d;  195d196a  26
Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet, act ii, sc HI [15-30] 296c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix 369b-372d 32 MiL.TOi^ : Paradise Lost, bk ix
[494-1189]  258a273a  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 116a-b 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  153-154 443d-444b 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  vih,  div  76-81  485a-487a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81b-c 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 330a-b 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 316a-317d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 139 48d-49b; additions, 90-91
130b-131d / Philosophy of History, intro, 160a; 162a-163a; 168d; part i,
237d-238c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\ esp 30a-36b, 117a124b, 131a-145a, 171b,
317a-321a, 411a-419b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi, 344a-d 2.
The goodness or perfection of God: the plenitude of the divine being New
Testament:  Matthew,  5:48  / LuJ^, 18:18- \()l l]ohn, 1:5 / Revelation,
15:4—  (Z))  Apocalypse,  15:4  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk ii, 321d-323a /
Timaeus^  447a-448b  /  Theaetetus,  530b-d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk
xii, ch 7 602a603b

[676b]
IDEAS 2 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch i [1145*15-27] 395a; ch 14
[1154^20-31] 406c; bk
x, ch 8
[1178^8-23] 433b-c
/ Politics, bk vii, ch i
[1323^22-25]
527c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 8 146a147c 16 Kepler: Harmonies
of the World, 1009a; 1049b-1050b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 12
4a;  bk II, par 10 lla-b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; bk
x,  par  38  81a; bk xi, par 6 90c-d; BK XIII, par 1-5 llOd-llld; par 53
124d-125a,c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  10 327d328d; BK XII, ch 1-3
342b,d-344b;  ch 8 346d347b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 5-7 625d626c;
CH  31-32  633b-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, REP 2
lOd-lld;  A  3,  ANS  and rep i 12c-14a; q 3, A I, ANS 14b-15b; a 2, ans
15c-16a;  a  7,  rep  2  19a-c; q 4 20c-23b; q 6 28b-30d; q 13, a 2, ans
63c-64d;  a  11,  rep 2 73c-74b; q 18, a 3 106b-107c; q 19, a i, rep 1-3
108d-109c;  q 21, a I, rep 4 124b-125b; q 26 150a-152a,c; q 51, A I, REP
3  275b-276b;  q  54, a 2, ans 285d286c; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; q 61, a 3,
rep  2 316a-d; q 62, a 8, ans and rep 1-2 323c-324a; Q 66, A I, CONTRARY
343d-345c;  q 84, a 2, ans and REP 3 442b-443c; q 91, a i, ans 484a485b;
Q  100,  A  2,  ANS  521c-522b; q 103 528a534b passim; q 104, a 3, rep 2
537b-d;  a 4, ANS 538a-c; q 105, a 4, ans 541c-542a; a 5, ANS 542a-543b;
part  i-ii,  q 2, a 4, rep i 618a-d; a 5, rep 2 618d-619c; q 9, a 6, ans
662a-d;  q  18, a i, ans 694a-d; q 22, a 2, rep i 721c-722c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49,  A  4, ANS 5a-6a; q 61, a 5, ans
58b-59d;  q  64, a 4, ans and rep 3 69b-70a; part ii-ii, q 9, a 4, REP I
425d-426c;  q  13,  a i, ans 444b445a; q 17, a i, ans 457a-d; q 23, a 4,
ans 485d-486b; q 34, a i, ans 559a-c; q 39, a 2, REP 3 575b-576b; q 184,
a  2,  ans  629d-630d;  PART HI, Q I, A I, ANS 701d-703a; q 23, a i, ANS
833a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a; xxviii
[91-96] 97a; paradise,
VII [64-148] 115d-116c esp [64-66] 115d; xiii
[52-87] 126a-b; xix [40-90] 135c-136a
22  Chaucer:  Merchant's  Tale  [10,160-164]  336a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
300c-d  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 52a-d; 53d / Meditations, i,
77b-c; hi, 86a-88d; iv 89a93a passim / Objections and Replies, 123d124c;
def  VIII  130d;  228a-c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 6 355b;
PFOP  8-9  356d-357d;  prop 10, schol 358a-b; prop 14 359d-360a; prop 16
362a;  prop  33,  SCHOL  2  367d-369a  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk hi
[135-166]  138b139a;  bk vii [170-173] 220b-221a 33 Pascal: P(?«^<?1?^,"
425-426 243b-244b; 430 245a-247b

[677a]
2a  to  lb  Chapter  30: GOOD AND EVIL 619 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi,
general schol, 370a-371a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXIII,
SECT  34-35  213a-c;  bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b passim 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xi, div 106-107, 499c-500a passim; div 113,
502a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 230a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 205a-b;
237d-239a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 263a-b; 278b-d / Practical
Reason,  307a-d;  325d326a;  342c; 345a-c; 351b-352c / Judgement, 592a-c
2a.  God's goodness as diflfusive, causing the goodness of things: God's
love Old Testament: Genesis, i / Exodus, 20:4-6 esp 20:6; 33:19; 34:5-10
/  Deuteronomy,  4:140  esp  4:6-8, 4:31, 4:37; 5:7-10 esp 5:10; 7:6II /
Job,  33:13-33  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  8-10, 16-18, 20, 22-23, ^5' 68,
97:10,  114:1-115:18,  118:1-119:176— (D) Pjfl/m^ passim, esp 8-9, 1517,
19,  21-22, 24, 67, 96:10, 113:1-18, 117:1118 : 176 / Proverbs, 3:11-12/
Song  ofSolomon—  (D)  Canticle ofCanticles / Isaiah, /[0-66 passim, esp
42-44,  46:3-4,  49:1-26,  52:1-15,  56:1-8,  63:8-9  (D)  Isaias, 40-66
passim,  esp  42-44,  46:3-4,  49:1-26,  52:1-15,  56:1-8,  6^  -.S-g  /
Jeremiah,  31-33—  (^) Jeremias, 31-33 / Lamentations, 3:22-39 esp 3:25,
3:38  /  Ezekjei, 16 esp 16:6-14, 16:59-63— (D) Ezechiel, 16 esp 16:614,
16:59-63  /  Hosea  esp  2:14-23,  3:1  ,  3:5, 6:1-3, ii*i-4» 13 '16-14
:9—(I>) Osee ts^ 2:1423' 3-1' 3-5' 6:1-3, II '1-4' 14:1-10 / Jo^^^ 2 esp
2:18-32  /  Zechariah,  g:ij—{D)  Zacharias,  9:17 / Malachi, 1:1-3— (D)
Malachias, 1:1-3 Apocrypha: Tobit, 13:10— (D) OT, Tobias, 13:12 / Wisdom
of  Solomon,  11:22-26;  16:2029—  (D)  OT,  Boo)^  of Wisdom, 11:23-27;
16:20-29   /   Ecclesiasticus,   11:14-17;   16:2618:14   esp  16:29-30;
39:16,25-34—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 11:14-17; 16:26-18:14 esp 16:3031;
39:21,30-40  New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:25-34; 7:7-11 / Luke, 11:1-13;
12:6-7,16-33  / John, 1:1-5; 3:16-21; 13:31-35; 14:21; 15:9-16; 17:21-26
/ Romans, 2:4; 8:31-39 / Galatians, 2:20 / Ephesians, 3:14-21; 5:1-2 / I
John, 3-4 esp 3:1, 3:16, 4:7-12 / Revelation, 3:19— (D) Apocalypse, 3:19
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d; bk vi-vh, 384a-389c / Timaeus,
447a-448a   8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  10
[336^25-34] 438d / Metaphysics, bk xii, CH 7 602a-603b; ch 10
[1075^11-24] 605d606a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 8 146a-147c 16 Kepler: Harmonies of
the  World,  1049b1050b; 1071b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vii, ch 1-2
26a-d  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v  228b-235b  /  Sixth Ennead, TR IX, CH 9
358d-359c

[677b]
18  AncjisTiNi; : Confessions, hk i, par 7 2c-d; bk II, par 10 lla-b; bk
vii,  par  4 44b-c; par 162^ 48c 50c; bk xi, par 6 90c d; bk xm, par 1-5
llOd  Hid  /  City of God, bk vii, cm ^i 261d 262a; »k xi, ch 21-24 333a
336a;  bkxii,  ch I 342b,d 343c; en q 347b 348b; hk xiv, CH n 387c 388c;
bk  xxii, ch 24 609a 612a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 31-52 633b-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, A 3, ANS and REP I 12c 14a; q 3,
a  i,  rep  i  14b  15b;  a  2, ans 15c-16a; q 6 28b-30d; o 13, A 2, ANs
63c-64d;  q  19, a 2, ans and REP 2-4 109c-110b; A 4, ANS and rep i lllc
112c;  Q 20 119d-124a; q 21, a 3, ans 126a c; Q 25, A 6 149a-150a; q 50,
a i, ans 269b-270a; A 3, ans 272a-273b; q 51, a i, rep 3 275b276b; Q 59,
A  I,  ans 306c-307b; a 2, ans 307c308b; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; q 91, a i,
ans  484a485b;  Q  103  528a-534b;  q  104,  a 3, rep 2 537b-d; a 4, ans
538a-c;  q 105, a 4, ans 541c542a; q 106, a 4, ans 548b-549a; part i-ii,
q  I,  A  4,  rep  i  612a-613a; q 2, a 5, rep 3 618d619c; Q 9, A 6, ans
662a-d;  q  19,  a  4,  ans 705b-c; Q 28, A 3, contrary 742a-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a; paradise, ii
[112-148] 109a-b
VII [16-148] 115b-116c esp [64-75] 115d-116a XIII
[52-87]
126a-b; xix
[40-90]
135c-136a XXVI
[1-69]
145d-146c;  xxviii  148d-150b  xxix  [13-36] 150b-c; [127-145] 151c-d 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part hi, 185d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
229c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [135-143] 138b; BK V
[153-208] 178b-179b; bk
vii
[170-173]
220b-221a  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 3 405b-c; SECT 154
444a-b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  169d170a  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c; bk
vi,  167b-168c;  bk  vii,  189a191a,c  2b.  The  divine goodness and the
problem  of  evil  Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  30:15-20 esp 30:15 / /
Samuel,  16:14-23—  (D)  /  Kings, 16:14-23 / Job I Psalms, 5 esp 5:4-6;
9-10;  13;  22 esp 22:7-8; 37; 39 esp 39:8-12; 44; 73; 88— (D) Psalms, 5
esp  5:5-7;  9;  12;  21  esp  21:8-9;  36; 38 esp 38:9-13; 43; 72; 87 /
Proverbs,  8:13  /  Ecclesiastes,  8:1-9:12 esp 8:10-14, 9:1-3 / Js^i^b,
45:7—  (D)  Isaias,  457 / Jeremiah, 12 esp 12:1-2— (D) Jeremias, 12 esp
12:1-2 / Lamentations, 3:38 / Amos, 3:6 / Micah, 1:12— (D) Micheas, 1:12
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 1:13-16; 2:2324; 11:24— (D) OT, Book of
Wisdom,  1:13-16;  2  :23-25  ;  II  :25  /  Ecclesiasticus, 1 1 :i4-i6;
15:1120;  33:10-15;  39:25-31  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  II :i^--i6;
15:11-22; 33:10-15; 39:30-37

[678a]
(2.  The  goodness  or  perfection  of  God: the plenitude of the divine
being.  2b. The divine goodness and the problem of evil.) New Testament:
Matthew, 13:24-30,36-43 esp 13:38-39 / John, 3:16-21 / Romans, 3:1-10; 5
/James,  1:12-15  / I John, i esp 1:5-6 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides 81a-91d 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d  / Timaeus, 452c-453b 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9
[105 1*
17-22]  577a-b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  12 118d-120b 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  140d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii 27b-34a 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 11 15d16a; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; bk v,
par  20  32d33a; bk vii, par 3-7 44a-45d; par 11-23 47a50d; bk xiii, par
45 123a / City of God, bk viii, ch 24, 283a-b; bk x, ch 21 311c-312a; BK
XI,  CH 9 326d-327d; ch 13-15 329c-331a; ch 22 333d-334c; bk xii, ch 1-9
342b,d-348b;  ch  21-22  357a-c;  ch  27  359C'360a.c; bk xiii, ch 13-15
366a-d;  bk xiv, ch 10-15 385b390a; bk xix, ch 13 519a'520a; bk xxii, ch
I  586b,d-587b  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, CH 23 648a-c; bk hi, ch 37,
673d-674a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, REP I 12c-14a;
q  8,  a i, rep 4 34d-35c; a 3, ans 36b-37c; q 14, a 10 83d-84c; q 15, a
3, rep I 93b-94a; q 17, a i lOOd-lOld; q 18, a 4, rep 4 107d-108c; q 19,
a  9  116d-117d;  a  12,  ans  and  rep  4  118d-119d;  q 20, a 2, rep 4
121b-122a;  q 22, a 2, rep 2 128d-130d; a 3, rep 3 130d-131c; q 23, a 5,
rep  3 135d-137d; A 7, REP 3 138d-140a; q 25, a 3, rep 2 145b147a; q 48,
a  2,  rep 3 260c-261b; q 49, aa 2-3 266a-268a,c; q 63, a 4 328b-329a; a
5,  ans 329a-330c; a 7, rep 2 331c-332b; q 64, a 4 337d-338d; q 65, a i,
rep  2-3 339b-340b; q 66, A 3, ans 347b-348d; q 72, a i, rep 6 368b369d;
Q 92, A I, rep 3 488d-489d; q 103, a 3, rep 2 530a-c; a 7, rep i 533b-d;
a  8  533d534b;  Q  114, A I, ANS 581d-582c; part i-ii, q 39, a 2, rep 3
790d-791b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 79 156a-159c; part
hi  suppl,  q  74, a i, rep i 925c-926c . 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xxxiv [28-^56] 51c; paradise, i
[103-142] 107b-d;
vii
[19148] 115b-116c;
VIII
[91-148] 117d-118c;
xiii
[52-87] 126a-b; xix
[40-90] 135c-136a; xxix
[49-66] 150d-151a
22  Chaucer:  Friar's Tale [7056-7085] 281a-b 23 HoBbEs: Leviathan, part
ii,  160d-161a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 17d-18a; 80b-81a 31
Descartes:  Meditations, iv 89a-93a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 33,
schol  2 367d-369a; appendix 369b-372d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a
esp bk i [128168] 96a-97a,
[209-220] 98a, bk hi
[56-343]

[678b]
620 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to I 136b-143a, bk iv
[32-113] 153a-155a, bk
vi
[262-295] 202a-b, bk vii [519-549] 228b-229a,
bk viii
[316-337]
239a-b, bk ix
[679-779]
262a-264a, bk x [585-640] 287a-288b, bk xi
[84-98] 301a
/  Samson  Agonistes  [1156-1177] 364b-365a / Areopagitica, 394b-395b 33
Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 116a-b / Pensees, 735-736 317b; 820 331b 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 154 444a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect viii, div 78-81 485c-487a; sect xi, div 106-107, 499c500a passim 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81b-c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 230b;
330a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  401a-b; 482a-d; 539d540a; 549c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  90  130b-d  / Philosophy of History,
intro,  160a;  part  III,  304d-306a 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue 7a-9b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  381a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 120d-121c; 122c-123b; 132a-135d;
bk  xi, 337a-346a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790d / New
Introductory  Lectures,  877d-878b  3. The moral theory of the good: the
distinction  between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical  good  7 Plato:
Protagoras,   58b-62d  /  Gorgias,  262a263c;  280d-285a  /  Theaetetus,
530b-531a / Philebus 609a-639a,c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i 339a-348d esp
ch 6 341b-342c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6
[1362^2-6]
603b;   ch   9  [1366*23-1367^27]  608c-610c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses
105a-245a,c esp bk i, CH I 105a-106c, CH 6 110c-112b, ch ii 116d118d, CH
15  121c-d,  CH 18 124a-125a, ch 22 127c-128c, CH 25 129d-131b, ch 27-29
132b138a,  BK  II,  CH  5  142c-144a,  ch  io-ii  148c151b,  BK HI, CH I
175a-177c, ch 3 178d-180a, CH 10 185d-187a, ch 24 203c-210a, bk iv, ch I
213a-223d,  ch 6 230b-232c 12 AuRELius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk ii,
sect I 256b,d, sect 9 257d, sect 11-12 258a-c, BK IV, sect 10 264c, sect
24 265c-d, SECT 32 266b-c, sect 37 266d-267a, sect 39 267a, BK V, sect 2
269a, sect 6 269b-d, sect 10 270c-d, sect 12 271a, sect 15-16 271b-d, BK
VI,  SECT  2 274a, SECT 51 279b-c, bk vii, sect 36 282b, SECT 44 282b-c,
sect 55 283b-c, BK viii, sect I 285a-b, sect 10 286b, sect 19 286d-287a,
sect 32 287d-288a, sect 39 288c, SECT 41 288d, sect 51 289d-290a, bk ix,
SECT  I  291a-c, sect 16 293a, sect 42 295c-296a,c 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk xi, ch 16 331a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 1-5
609a-643d: qq 18-21 693b,d-720ax

[679a]
3^  Chapter  30:  GOOD AND EVIL 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, PirROATOKY, xvi
(52114) 77b-78a; xvii [82]-xviii
[75J 79b-80c
30  11\con:  Advancement  of  Learning, 69d-76a; 80a-81a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  cm  XXVIII,  SECT  4-17 229b 232d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  114d-115a;  149d  150a;  169b  [tn  i];  173b-174a / Fund. Fnn.
Metaphysic  of  Morals  253a-287d  esp 256a-261d, 263d 264a, 282d-287d /
Practical  Reason  291a-361d esp 297a-307d, 314d-321b, 325c, 337a-353a /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Fthies 365a379d esp 366d-373d / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387h  / Judgement, 594d [tn ij; 595a-d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par
129-140  45d-54a  49  Darwin:  Descent  ofMan,  304a-319a  esp 304a305a,
310a-319a 54 Freud: War and Death, 757b-760a esp 757d758c, 759d-760a 5a.
Human nature and the determination of the good for man: the real and the
apparent  good;  particular goods and the good in general New Testament:
Romans, 7:15-25 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[587-631]
136b-c  /  Philoctetes [895-903] 190a 7 Plato: Charmides, 2d-3b esp 3a /
Protagoras,  57d-62d  / Euthydemus, 69a-71a; 74b-76b / Meno, 177d-178b /
Gorgias,  261a-270c;  282b284b  /  Republic, bk i-iv 295a-356a; bk vtii,
410a-c;  bk  ix,  421a-425b;  bk  x,  439b-441a,c / Timaeus, 474b-476b /
Theaetetus,  528c531a  / Sophist, 557b-d / Philebus, 619d-620b / Seventh
Letter,  805d-806a  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246*10-248* 6]
329c-330d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*
22-28]  499a;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072*26-29] 602b 9 Aristotle: Motion of
Animals,  ch 6 [700^1529] 235d-236a / Ethics, bk i, ch 6 341b-342c; ch 7
[1097^22-1098*19]  343a-c; bk i, ch 13bk II, ch 6 347b-352d; bk hi, ch 4
359a-c; ch 5 [1114*22-1115*3] 360b-361a; bk v, ch i
[1129^1-10] 376d-377a; bk
vi, ch 5 389a-c; bk X, ch 6-8 430d-434a / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*2-38] 446b-d; ch
5-6 447d-449b; bk III, CH 6 [1278^15-29] 475d-476a; bk vii, ch 13
[1332^39-^10]
537a-b; ch 14 [i333^i7-37] 538a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6-7 602d-607d; CH
10 [i369''i9-27] 613a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk v
[1113-1135]
75c-d;
[1412-1435]
79b-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 6
110c-112b;  cH  II 116d-118d; ch 15 121c-d; ch 27 132b133b; bk III, CH i
175a-177c;   ch  3  178d-180a;  bk  IV,  CH  6  230b-232c  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk ii, sect 9 257d; sect II 258a-b; bk iv, sect 24 265c-d;
sect 32 266b-c; sect 39 267a; bk v, sect 15-16

[679b]
621  271b d; bk vi, sect i ^ 274d; bk vii, sect 20 281b; SECT 55 283b c;
bk  vim,  spot  i  285a-b;  BK IX, SECT I 291a-c; sect 42 295c 296a,c 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122b  15  Tacitl's: Histories, bk iv, 267c 17
Pi.oTiNus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 4^-44 181b-182b / Sixth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  26  334c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 29 ^4 78d80c /
City  of  God, bk xii, ch t, 343d 344b; BKXix,cHi-9 507a-516c/ Christian
Doctrine, bk I, CH 38 635c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12,
A  I,  ans  50c-51c;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  150c-151a;  a 4, ANS and rep i
151c-152a,c;  q  59,  a  i,  ans 306c-307b; a 3, ans 308b 309a; a 4, ans
309a310a; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; q 62, a i, ans 317d318c; Q 80, A 2, REP 2
428a-d;  q  82, a 4, rep i 434c-435c; a 5, ans 435c-436c; q 92, a i, ans
488d-489d;  q 105, a 4, ans 541c 542a; part i-ii, QQ 1-5 609a-643d; q 9,
a 6, rep 3 662a-d; q 18 693b,d-703a; q 19, a i, rep i 703b-d; q 22, a 3,
rep  2 722d-723b; q 34, a 4 771c-772b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  54, A 3 24c-25b; qq 55-56 26a-35a; q 63, a i 63a64a; q 71, a 2
106d-107c;  q  91, a 2 208d-209d; q 94 220d-226b; part ii-ii, q 29, a 2,
rep  3  531a-d; a 3, rep i 531d-532c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi  [85114] 77d-78a; xvii [82}-xviii [75] 79b-80c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part i, 61a-62c; 65a; 96a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
65c-d  25  Mo^TWGSE-.Essays,  149b-d;231d-233a;489b490c  27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet,  act  hi, sc i [103-134] 48a-b / Measure for Measure, act ii, sc
iv
[1-17] 184c-d / Othello, act ii, sc hi [342-368]
220c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 70d-71b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  pref,  423c-d; prop 18-28 428d-431c; prop 31 432a-b; prop 35,
coROL   1-2  433c-d;  appendix,  v  447c  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  ^2^-^26
243b-244b;  430  245a-247b;  438 251a; 463-468 255a-256a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, 90a-d; bk i, CH II, sect 5-6 105a-c; sect 1:5, 108b-c; bk
II,  CH  XXI,  sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect 55-56 192c-193b; sect 60-70
194a-197b  passim;  ch  xxviii,  SECT  II  230c-231a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  257a-268a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 38c-40a; 41a-43b; 53b54d;
82c-83b;  88b-89c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 343a-346d; 351c-352a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 169b [fn i] / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254d;
263d-264a;  270c-d  / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387d388a / Judgement,
584d-587a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  295d-296d  /  Representative Government,
367a-369a / Utilitarianism, 448a455a; 456d-457b; 458b-464d

[680a]
(3.  The moral theory of the good: the distinction between the moral and
the  metaphysical  good.  'ia. Human nature and the determination of the
geodf»r  man:  the  real and the apparent good; particular goods and the
good  in  general?)  44 Bos-well: Johnsoti, 130b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  78  128c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 166b;
182d-184d;  part  i, 236a-c; part ii, 280b-c 48 Melville: A/o^;/Z)/<ry^,
36a-b  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310a-317d passim, esp311d-313a;592d 50
Marx:  Capital, 301d [fn 3] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689b
52  DosTOEVsKY  :  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 127b137c; BK VI, 164b-d 53
James  :  Psychology,  198b-209b  esp 198b-200a, 202a-204b, 208b-209b 54
Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  20c-d  / Gefjeral
Introduction,  624a625  b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 767a;
785c-802a,c  esp 786d-787a, 788d-789b, 792b-c, 800c-801b 3b. Goodness in
the  order  of  freedom  and  will  New  Testament:  Romans,  7:15-25  9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk hi, ch 1-5 355b,d-361a; BK IV, CH 9 [1128^20-30]
376a,c 12 Epictetus: Discourses 105a-245a,c esp bk i, CH I 105a-106c, CH
11  116d-118d,  ch  18 124a125a, CH 22 127c-128c, ch 25 129d-131b, CH 29
134d-138a,  bk  ii,  ch  5  142c-144a,  bk  III,  CH  2 177c-178d, CH 10
185d-187a,  ch  18  192a-c,  CH  26 210d-213a,c, bk iv, ch i 213a223d 12
AuRELius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp bk iv, SECT 37 266d-267a, sect 39
267a,  bk  v,  sect  2 269a, sect 10 270c-d, bk vi, sect 2 274a, bk VII,
sect  44  282b-c,  bk  viii,  sect  32  287d288a,  sect 41 288d, sect 51
289d-290a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 19-24 58b-60a / City
of  God, bk xii, ch 1-9 342b,d348b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  48,  a  6,  ANs  264a-d;  q  49,  a  i, rep i 264d-265d; Q 82, AA 1-2
431d-433c; q 83, a i 436d-438a; Q 87, A 4, rep 2 468b-d; q 105, a 4, ans
541c542a;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  aa  2-4  663d-666a,c  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 79, AA 1-2 156b-158a; q 80, aa 1-3 159d-162b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[58-129] 77c-78a; xviii [19-75] 80a-c; xxi [4072] 85b-d; paradise, iv [64-114] lllb-d
23  Houbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  87c;  93c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk i, 65c-66b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 69d-81c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part hi, 50b / Objections and Replies, axiom vii
132a; 228a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a-

[680b]
622  THE  GREAT IDEAS lb to lb{X) 138a; bk v [224-245] 180a-b; [506-543]
186a187a; bk ix
[342-375]
254b-255b  / Areopagitica, 390b-391a; 394b-395b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-338a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  164a-171a;  236d-237a / Pund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 253d-254d; 256a-261d; 265b; 271d-287d / Practical
Reason, 298a-300a; 304a-d; 310b-311d; 315b-c; 318c-d; 331c-337a,c / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 378a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
391a-c;  393d  /  Science  of  Right, 397b398a; 400b,d-402a; 403b-404a /
Judgement,  571c-572a;  605d-606b  [fn 2] 44 Boswell: Johnson, 112a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, intro, par 8 14c; PART II, par 114 42a-b;
part  hi,  par  142-157  55a-57d; additions, 68 126d-127a; 82-86 129a-c;
92-100  131d-133a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311a-d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c 53 James: Psychology, 794a-808a esp
797b-  798a,  799a-b,  807a-808a; 816a-819a esp 817a-818a; 825a-827a esp
827a  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 164d-168d; 386c-387a 3^(1) The
prescriptions  of  duty  5  Euripides  :  Hippolytus [373-430] 228b-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 10 185d187a 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk vi, sect 2 274a; BK VII, SECT 44 282b-c; bk viii, sect 32 287d288a 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122b  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xix, ch
14-16 520a-522a; ch 19 523b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71a-76a
esp  74b-76a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 48b-49d; part VI, 62d-63a
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372b-373b  /  Social Contract, bk i,
393b-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 114d-115a; 149d-150a; 190c-d; 236d-237a /
Fund.   Prin.   Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254d;  256a-b;  260a-261d;
265c266d;   268c-270c;   272a-b;   273d-287d  esp277d279d,  281c-282d  /
Practical Reason, 297a314d esp 307d-314d; 321b-329a esp 325c; 330d-331a;
338c-355d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 366d-367a; 368b-369a;
373d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 383a390a,c esp 383a-384d, 388b-c,
389a-390a,c; 391a-c; 392b-393a / Science of Right, 397c398a; 416b-417b /
Judgement, 571c-572a; 593a-d; 595a-d; 599b-d; 605d-606b [fn 2] 43 Mil l:
Liberty,  296b-c / Utilitarianism, 446a-d; 453c-d; 458b-459b; 468b-469b;
469d-470b;  475a-476a,c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 36
21b-c;  par  79 33a-c; part ii, par 129-135 45d47d esp par 133 47a; part
hi, par 148-149

[681a]
3^(2)  to 3r Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL 623 56a-b; additions, 84 129b; 86
129c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 362c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
304a;  310d;  313d314a;  592b-c  3^(2) The good will: its conditions and
consequences 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-263c / Timaeus, 474b d / Laws, BK V,
688d-689a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[126*30-37]
175c-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi, ch 1-5 355b, d-361a; BK IV, CH 9
[1128^20-30]  376a,c  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i 105a-106c; CH
II  116d-118d;  ch 18 124a-125a; ch 22 127c-128c; ch 25 129d-131b; ch 29
134d138a; bk ii, ch 5 142c-144a; ch 13 152c-153d; CH 16 156b-158d; ch 23
170a-172d;  bk  hi, CH 10 185d-187a; bk iv, ch 10 238d-240d 17 Plotinus:
Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 35, 177d178a 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xii,
ch  3-9  343d348b; bk xiv, ch ii 385d-387a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 5, A 4, REP 3 25d-26c; q 48, aa 5-6 263a-264d; Q 49, A I, REP
I 264d-265d; part i-ii, q 3, a 4, REP 5 625a-626b; q 4, a 4 631d-632c; q
9,  a  6,  REP  3  662a-d;  qq 18-21 693b,d-720a,c esp q 19 703a-711d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xv
[1-12]
128b-c 23 HoBBEs: Let'iathan, part i, 62d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 13d-14c;
115b-119d;  124c-125a;  146b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 72a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix [342-375] 254b255b / Samson Agonistes
[1334-1379] 368b369b
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372a-373b  / Social Contract, bk ii,
396b-d; 400a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 169b
[fn
i]  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254d; 256a-257d esp 256a-b,
257c-d;  260a-261d;  265c; 268c270c; 272a-b; 279b,d-287d esp 281c-282d /
Practical   Reason,   297a-319b  esp  307d-314d,  316a-317d;  321b-329a;
330c-331a  / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-387a,c; 388b-c; 392b-393a
/ Judgement, 595a-d; 605d-606b
[fn 2]
43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 453c-d 44 BoswELh: Johnson, 112a-b; 145c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  105  40a; par 114 42a-b;
additions, 90 130b-d 3c. The good and desire: goodness causing movements
of  desire  and  desire  causing  estimations of goodness New Testament:
Romans,  7:15-25  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 105c-d 7 Plato: Lysis,
21b-25a  /  Phaedrus,  120b-c;  128a-d/  Symposium,  164c-165c  /  Meno,
177d178b / Philebus, 614a / Laws, bk v, 689b

[681b]
;  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1072* 26-29) 602b /Soul, BK
III,  CH lo-ii 665d 667a 9 Aristotlk: Motion of Animals, ch 6 235d236b /
Ethics, bk i, ch i
[io94»i-^]
339a; ch 2 [1094*17-22] 339b; bk in, cii 4 359a c; bk V, ch I
[ii29*'i-i()] 376d377a; bk
vi,  ch  2  387d-388b;  bk  ix,  ch  9 [1170*1^-25] 423d424a; bk x, ch 2
426c-427b esp
[ii72*'^5ii7^»4] 427a; ch 6 [ii76*^o>8] 430d 431a /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6-7 602d-607d; ch 10
[n69'':}-4] 612b; [1369V12] 612d;
[i36c>''i927] 613a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d 170a 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
121a-122b  17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr v, ch 3 102a-c; CH 10 105d-106b
/ Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 19 332a-b; tr viii, ch 7, 345d; ch 13, 349b-c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a i, ANs 23c-24a; a 2, rep 4
24b-25a; a 4, ans 25d26c; A 6, ANs 27c 28b; q 6, a i, rep 2 28b-d; q 20,
A  2, ans 121b-122a; part i-ii, q 5, a 8 642d-643d; q 8 655a-657c; q ii,
a  3  667d668d; Q 12, AA 2-4 670b 672a; q 22, a 3, rep 2 722d-723b; q 23
723c-727a;  q  27,  a  i  737b-d;  q 41, a 3 799c-800b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  58,  A  4  esp REP 3 44a-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xv [4081] 75d-76a; xvi [85-114] 77d-78a; xvii [82]-
xviii
[75]
79b-80c esp xviii
[19-39] 80a-b;
PARADISE, I [103-142] 107b-d; iv [ii5]-v
[12]
llld-112b; VII
[139-144] 116c;
xxvi
[1-69]
145d-146c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 61d-62a; 96a-b; PART IV, 272c 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 149b-d; 297d-300c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
67a-b  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part hi, 50b / Objections and Replies,
axiom  vii 132a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d: PART hi,
prop  6-9  398d-399c esp prop 9, scHOL 399c; prop 12-13 400b-d; prop 39,
scHOL 408b-d; prop 54 413a-b; part iv, pref-def 2 422b,d-424a; prop 8-13
426b428a;  prop  19 429d; prop 27-28 431b-c; prop 63 443d-444a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xx, SECT 6 177a-b; ch xxi, sect 29-54
184d-192c  passim;  sect  61-62  194b-d;  sect  70  197a-b  38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 338c-339a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 259a-c;
264d-265b / Practical Reason, 293c-d
[fn 3];
298a-300a;  301a;  304a-d;  330c-331a;  341c-342a / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  385a-c  /  Judgement, 605d-606b [fn 2] 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
461c-464d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par 123 44a-b;
additions,  78  128c-d  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 166b 53 James:
Psychology, 810b-811a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 79 2 b
-c 801d

[682a]
624  (3. The moral theory of the good: the distinction between the moral
and the metaphysical good.) ^d. Pleasure as the good, a good, or feeling
good 7 Plato: Protagoras, 59a-62d / Gorgias, 275b280d / Republic, bk vi,
384b-d; bk ix, 421a425b / Philebus 609a-639a,c / Laws, bk ii, 656d-658b;
660a-d;  bk v, 689c-690c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 40 68b /
Topics, BK III, CH 2
[117^23-25] 163d; ch 3
[118^27-36] 165d-166a; ch 6 [119^37-^1] 166d;
BK IV, CH 4 [124^15-20] 172d; [124^7-14] 173b; BK VI, CH 8
[146^13-19] 200c; bk
viii, ch 9
[160^16-23]
218a-b / Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246^20-247^19] 330a-b / Metaphysics, bk xii,
CH  7  [1072^13-29] 6#2d-603a / Soul, bk hi, CH 7 [431^8-^9] 663c-664a 9
Aristotle:  Motion  ofAnimals, ch 6 [700^2329] 236a / Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[1095^14-22] 340d; CH 8 [1099^^7-30] 344c-d; bk ii, ch 3 350a-c; BK III,
ch  4  359a-c;  bk vii, ch 4 398a-399a esp [1148*22-^4] 398c-d; ch 11-14
403c-406a,c; BK X, ch 1-5 426a-430d / Politics, bk viii, ch 5
[1339^1 1~3^] 545a-c /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6
[1362^5-9]
603b; CH 7
[1364^23-27]
606c;
[1365^11-13] 607d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[14-21]
15a-b;  bk  v  [1412-1436]  79b-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch ii
150a151b;  BK III, CH 24 203c-210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect
11-12  258a-c;  bk  vi,  sect  51  279b-c; bk vii, sect 27 281d; SECT 64
284a-b;  bk viii, sect 10 286b; sect 19 286d-287a; sect 39 288c; sect 47
289b-c;  bk ix, sect i 291a-c; bk x, sect 3435 301a-b 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr iv, ch 12 17d / Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15, 74d-75a / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 26 334c-d; ch 29-30 335d336d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk v, ch 20 225b226a; bk x, ch 18 310b-d; bk xix, ch 1-3 507a-511a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 6, ANS and rep 2 27c-28b;
part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  6,  rep  i  614a-c;  a 7, ans 614c-615a; q 2, a 6
619d-620d;  q 3, a 4 625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a; q ii 666b,d-669b;
q 27, a 3, ans 738c-739c; q 30, a 4, rep 3 751c-752b; qq 3134 752b-772b;
q  39  790a-792d  20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 28-29
527b-533a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[127-139] 79d; xviii [19-39] 80a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61d-62c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d; 70d-72a; 235d237d
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71a- 74a

[682b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 3d to 3e Ethics, part III, prop 39, schol 408b-d; part
iv,  prop  8  426b-c;  prop 41-43 437a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv
[877-945]  171b31 Spinoza 173a 35 Locke: Human Uiiderstanding, bk ii, ch
xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; ch xxi, sect 43 188d; sect 55-56 192c-193b; sect 63
194d-195a;  ch  xxviii,  sect 5 229c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 173b-174a /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  259a-b;  265b / Practical Reaso7j',
298a-300a;  304a-307d;  314d-319b  esp  315c;  330c-331a;  338c-355d esp
341c342a   /   Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b-388a  /  Judgement,
478a-479d; 584d-587a; 588b
[fn 2]; 591b-592a; 594c-596c
43  Mill: Utilitarianism 445a-476a,c passim, esp 447b-457b, 461c-464d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  216c;  378a-b  49  Darwin:  Descent ofMan, 316b-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk iv, 88d; bk XI, 343d-344a 53 James:
Psychology,  94a-b;  808b-814b  esp 810a, 812b-814b 54 Freud: Instincts,
418d-420b  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 772a-c; 792 b-c 3e. Right
and wrong: the social incidence of the good; doing or suffering good and
evil  9  /  Leviticus,  19:9Old  Testament:  Genesis,  ^•17^33 / Exodus,
20:12-17; 22:21-28; 23:1 iS,^^-^6/ Numbers, 15:15/ Deuteronomy, 5 :i621;
10:17-19  /  /  Samuel, 24; 26— (D) / Kings, 24; 26 / Proverbs, 3:27-35;
12:21;  15:1;  17:13  /  Isaiah,  3:13-15; 10:1-3— (Z)) Isaias, 3:13-15;
10:1-3 / Ezel(iel, 18:5-22— (Z)) Ezechiel, 18:522 / Hosea, 4:1-3; 7:1-7—
(D)  Osee,  4:1-3;  7:1-7 / Amos, 2:6-8; 4:1-2; 8:4-7 / ^iicah, 6:8— (D)
Micheas,  6:8  /  Zechariah,  7:9-10—  (D)  Zacharias, 7:9-10 Apocrypha:
Tobit,   1:1-2:9;   4:1-20—   (D)   OT,   Tobias,   1:1-2:9;   4:1-20  /
Ecclesiasticus,  7-8;  12-14  ^sp  12:3,  14:5-7;  28; 34:21-22— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  7-8;  12-14  esp  12:3, 14:5-7; 28; 34:25-27 / Susanna—
{Di)  OT,  Daniel,  13  New  Testament:  Matthew, 5-7 passim, esp 7:12 /
LuJ{e,  6:27-38  /  Romans,  12:1^-21 / I Corinthians, 6:1-11 / I Peter,
2:13-21; 3:8-18 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[941-1093] 50b-51d / Agamemnon 52a-69d esp
[i 331-1673]
66b-69d  / Choephoroe 70a-80d esp [235-651] 72c-76b / Eutnenides 81a-91d
5  Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus [255-291]
116c-d;
[11521207] 124d-125b / Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax
143a-155a-c esp
[1045-1421]
152a-155a,c / Electra 156a-169a,c / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides:
Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Suppliants
[195-250]
260a-c / Electra 327a-339a,c esp
[880-1359] 335a-339a,c / Phoenician Maidens
378a-393d esp
[260-645] 380b-383d,
[1628-

[683a]
Chaptkk  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  3e to 3/ 1684] 392b-d / Orestes [491 715I
399a-401a  /  -  Iphigenia  at Atdis 425a 439d 6 Hi.Roixnus: History, hk
111,     93c-d;     uk    vi,    201d    202c;    bk    mi,    2l7d    6
'liiLCYDUMis-.Pelopo/i/iesian  [Vur, hk v, 505b-c 7 Plato: Apology, 203c
204c; 206d / Crito, 213d-214a; 215d-216c / Gorgias, 262a 267c / Republic
295a-441a,c csp uk i ii, 300b 315a, BK X, 436c 437c / Lau's, bk 11, 656d
658b;  BK  V,  687c-689a;  bk  ix, 747b-d / Seventh Let ter, 805d-806a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk v 376a-387a.c / Poetics, CH 25 [1461*4-9] 697b-c
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 28 133b134d; bk II, CH 10 148c-150a;
bk  hi,  ch  ^  178d-180a;  ch  18 192a-c; cii 24 203c-210a; BK IV, cH I
213a-223d;  ch 5 228a-230b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk 11, sect i 256b,
d;  sect 16 259a; bk iv, sect 10 264c; bk v, sect 6 269b-d; bk vii, sect
36  282b;  bk viii, sect 55 290b; BK IX, sect 4 292a; sect 16 293a; sect
38 295a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 19 5d / Christian Doctrine,
bk  i, ch 36 634d-635b 19AoL-iNAs: Surntna Theologica, fart i, q 21, A I
124b-125b;  part  i-ii,  q  21,  aa  3-4  718d720a,c  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 59, aa 4-5 48c-49d; q 60, a 2 50d-51b; q 97, a
i,  rep  3 236a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi 15a- 16b; purgatory,
XVI
[58-129] 77c-78a; xvii
[91139] 79b-d
22  Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 30-31, 413b414a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  78b-c; 86b; part II, 149b-c; part iv, 272c 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc v 12d14a / 2nd Henry VI, act hi, sc i [223-281]
49c50a  /  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  hi [140-147] 334b 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc II [163-188] 115b-c; ACT v, sc iii
[16-24]
137b / King Lear, act iv, sc 11 [2-68] 270b271b / Henry VIII, act hi, sc
11
[428-450]
573c-d  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 68b-73a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 74b-c; 81d82a; 93c-94a 32 Milton: Cow?«5 33a-56b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch ii, SECT 5-6 105a-c; bk ii, ch xxviii,
sect  9-13  230b-231c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk hi, llc-d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 351b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 149d-150a / Practical
Reason,  306b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 391d-392a / Science of
Right,  397a-399c; 400b,d-401b 43 Federalist: number 41, 132b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,   302d-323a,c   passim   /   Utilitarianism,  448a;  452b-455a;
455c-456a; 465c471b passim

[683b]
625  44  I^osu I.I.I. : Johnson, 315b c 46 H i: ( ; I. L : Philosophy of
Right,  i  • \ h r i , pa r 81 34c d; par 89 35c d; par 92 35d 36a; pari
ii,  par  112 41c d; par 129 132 45d47a; par 1^8 48c-d; par 140 49b 54a;
part  in,  par 218 72c-d; par 223 73c-d; par 2^^ 75d; additions, 59 125c
d; 71 127b c; 89 129d-130a; 92-100 13 Id 133a; i ^8 139a- b / Philosophy
of History, INTRO, 165c-166b 48 Milville: Moby Dic{, 292a 297a; 375a376b
49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 310a 316a; 317c d; 319d; 322c; 592d 593a 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 194a-195a; 214c 216d; bk viii, 304b-305a;
bk  xiv. 611a c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 33c34b; bk hi,
73a-b; bk v, 123b 127b; bk vi, 153d 157b; 165c; 168c-169c; bk xh, 398a-d
54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 792a793a 3/. The sources of
evil  in  human  life  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3  /  Exodus,  23:8  /
Deuteronomy,  16:19;  30:15-20  esp  30:15  /  Job I Ecclesiastes, 9:3 /
Isaiah,  45:7—  (D)  Isaias,  45  :7  / Lamentations, 3 :38 / Amos, ^ :6
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:12-16; 2 esp 2:23-24; 14:27— (D) OT,
Bool^  of  Wisdom,  1:12-16; 2 esp 2:23-25; 14:27 / Ecclesiasticus, 8:2;
10:9;  11:16;  14:1-10;  15:10-20;  20:29;  27:i-2;3i  :5-ii  —  {D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,   8:2-:^;  10:9-10;  11:16;  14:1-10;  15:10-21;  20:31;
27:1-2; 31:5-11 New Testament: Matthew, 6:13,19-24; 13:2430,36-43,47-51;
15:10-20; 16:26; 19:16-30 / Marl{, 1:13; 4:1-20; 7:14-23; 8:36; 10:21-30
/  Luke,  4:1-13;  8:1-15;  9:25;  12:13-21; 16:1-13; 18:22-30 / Romans,
5:12-19;  7:15-25  /  /  Corinthians,  6:10  /  Ephesians,  'y.'y  /  II
Thessalonians,  2:1-12— (D) // Thessalonians, 2:1-11 / / Timothy, 6:9-10
/James,  1:12-15  /  /  Peter,  5:8-9  /  I  John,  2:7-23 esp 2:15-17 /
Revelation,  12—  (D)  Apocalypse,  12  5  Sophocles: Antigone [284-308]
133c-d 5 Aristophanes: Plutus
[77-185] 630a-631a
7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /  Republic,  bk  h,  318c-319a; bk iv,
354d-355c;  bk  vi,  377a379c;  BK  VII,  389d-390b;  bk  x, 431b-434a /
Timaeus,  466a-b  /  Theaetetus, 530b-531a / Latvs, bk hi, 669a-670c; bk
viii,  733a-734a;  bk  IX,  751b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[31-93]  30b-31b;  bk  v  [1412-1435]  79b-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d  12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 25 129d131b; BK II, ch 22 167d-170a; ch
26  174c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; BK VII, sect
22  281b;  bk ix, sect 42 295c296a,c; bk xii, sect 12 308b-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  iii,  51b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii, ch 5, 29a-c /
Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 13 73d-74b / Third

[684a]
626  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (3. The moral theory of the good: the distinction
between  the moral and the metaphysical good. 3/. The sources of evil in
human  life?)  Ennead, tr ii, ch 4-10 84c-88b; ch 14-18 89b-93a / Fourth
Ennead,   tr  hi,  ch  16  150c-d;  TRIV,  CH  18,  167b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii, par 9-18 lOd13a; BK VII, par 4 44b-c; bk viii, par
22-24  59a-60a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch 24, 283a-b; BK X, CH 21
311c-312a; bk xii, ch 21-22 357a-c; bk xiii, ch 13-15 366a-d; bk xiv, CH
10-15  385b-390a;  bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 17, A I, ANS lOOd-lOld; q 48, a 6, ans 264a-d; q 49, A I, REP
3  264d-265d;  q 67,, a 9, rep i 333b-d; q 114, a 3 583b-d; part i-ii, q
20,  A  I  712a-d;  q  21, a 2 718a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, qq 75-84 137c-178a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, viii
[65]-ix
[103] llc-13b; xxiii [139-144] 34c; xxvii [55136] 40a-41b; xxxiv [28-36] 51c; purgatory,
V [85-129] 59d-60c; viii [1-108] 64a-65b; xvi
[58-129] 77c-78a; xvii [82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c;
xxviii
[91-96] 97a; paradise, vii 115a-116c;
VIII
[91-148]
117d-118c; IX
[127-142]
120a; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b; xviii
[115-136]
134d135a;  xxix  [49-66] 150d-151a 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [2453-2469]
200a-b / Prologue of Pardoner's Tale
[12,263-268]
372a  /  Pardoner's  Tale [12,778-828] 380b-381b / Tale of Melibeus, par
18,  408a;  par 'j^-jj, 430b-431a / Parson's Tale, par 20 508b-509a; par
57-59 528b-529a; par 62-64 530a-531a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 153b
25   Montaigne:  Essays,  218c-219a;  231d-238d;  326b-327b;  381b-c  26
Shakespeare:   Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  ii,  sc  III  [15-30]  296c  27
Shakespeare:  Timon of Athens, act iv, sc III [1-44] 410c-411a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  17d-18a; 80b-81a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
appendix  369b-372d;  PART  IV,  appendix,  VI  447c-d  32 Milton: Comus
33a-56b  esp  [331-489]  40b44a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk i [157-168] 97a;
[209220] 98a; bk ii
[496-505]
122a;
[629-870]
125a-130a; [890-1009] 130b-133a; bk hi
[56134] 136b-138a; bk iv
[505-535] 163b-164a;
BK  Vii  [519-549]  228b-229a; bk viii [316-337] 239a-b; bk ix [679-784]
262a-264b; bk xi [8498] 301a; BK XI [334]-bk xii
[649] 306b-333a
/ Samson Agonistes
[38-59] 340b;
[521-540]
351a  b  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b;  409b-410a  33  Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  116a-b;  140a;  162a  /  Pensees,  850  340a  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  58-70  193d-197b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect viii, div 76-81 485a-487a

[684b]
3//0  ^b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 338b-c; 347d-348a; 350c; 351c-352a;
360c-361c;  363a-366d  40  Gi^ho^:  Decline  and  Fall,  81b-c  43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  451b-452b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 18
16c-d;  PART  II, par 139-140 48d-54a; additions, 14 118c-d; 90 130b-d /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 237d-238c; part iv, 346a'C; 354a-c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 3b-4a; 204a-205a; 209b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  v,  214c-215a  esp  215a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi,
53b-54b; bk v, 122c-123b; 130b-135d; bk vi, 164b-166a; bk xi, 307c-310c;
344a-d  54 Freud: General Introduction, 531d-532a / Civilization and Its
Discontents 767a-802a,c esp 787a-788b 4. Divisions of the human good 4a.
Sensible and intelligible goods 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 69a-71a / Phaedrus,
120a122a  /  Symposium,  162d-167d  /  Phaedo^ 224a-c; 230c; 242c-243a /
Republic,  bk  vi, 386b'd; bk vii, 397c-398b; bk ix, 423b424d / Laws, bk
v, 689c-690c; bk viii, 735c736c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch 6-9
24a26a  passim;  tr  viii,  ch  2 27c-d / Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15-18
74d-77d  /  Third  Enneady TR V, CH 7 104a-105a / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch
12-13  234a-235b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 20 24b-c; par 24
25b-c;  bk  vi,  par  26  42d-43a; bk vii, par 23 50b-c; bk x, par 43-66
82a'88b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 63, A 4, ans 328b-329a;
q  80, a 2, rep 2 428a-d; q 82, a 5, ANS 435c-436c; part i-ii, q 2, a 6,
ANS 619d-620d; q 3, a 4, ans 625a-626b; Q 4, A 2, rep 2 630b-631a; q ii,
a 2, ans 667b-d;. q 13, a 2, ans 673c-674c; q 30, A I, ANS 749a-d; q 31,
a  5  755c-756c; a 6, ANS 756d-757c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part
iv,  362b-c  4b. Useful and enjoyable goods: good for an end and good in
itself 5 Aeschylus: Persians [153-171] 16d-17a 7 Plato: Lysis, 22c-24a /
Protagoras,  60d-62d  /  Euthydemus, 69a-71a; 74b-76b / Meno, 183d184b /
Gorgias, 262a-264b; 266d-267a / Republic, BK I, 298a-299a; bk ii, 310c-d
8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 15 [106^1-9] 149d; BK III, CH I
[116^28-^7] 162d-163a;
[116^37ii7^a] 163c; ch 2 [118^6-16] 164d-165a; ch 3
[118^27-36] 165d-166a; bk iv, ch 4 [124*15-20]
172d; BK VI, CH 9 [147*33-^1] 201b-c; ch 12
[149^31-39] 204b-c; BK VII, ch 3 [153^36-154*
2]  209b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  2 [1013*32-^3] 533c; [1013^25-28]
533d-534a

[685a]
4<r  to  ^d  Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2
339a d; en 5 [1096*5-10] 341a-b; ch 6 (1096^8-26] 341d342a; ch 7
[i097"i5-*'22l
342c-343a: ch 9
[1099^25-32] 345b; BK VIII, ch 2 [1155^16-22]
407a-b; bk x, ch 6 [ii76''3o-^8] 430d-431a / Politics, BK VII, ch I
[132^*23-^13]
527a-c: ch 13 [1332*10-25] 536d; ch 15
[i334»i2-''7]
539a-b; bk viii, ch 2-3 542b 543d passim / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355*39-^'^] 594d; ch 5
[1361*12-24] 601c-d; CH 6-7 602d-607d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  14, 189c-d; CH 24 203c-210a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr ii, ch 3-4 7c-8c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  ii,  par  9-18 lOd13a / City of God, bk viii, ch 4 266d-267c; CH 8-9
270a-271a;  bk  xix,  ch  1-5  507a-514b; ch 17-20 522b-524a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 35 634c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5,
a  6 27c-28b; q 62, a 9, rep 2 324a-325b; part i-ii, Q 2, A I 615d-616c;
q 3, a i, ans 622c-623a; Q 7, A 2, REP I 652d-653c; q 8, aa 2-3 656a657c
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i, 62a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
27c-d;  71a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, appendix, v 447c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  63  194d-195a 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandv, 538a-539a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236d-237a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b;  257c-d;  266a267d; 268b; 271c-279d esp
273d-277b  / Practical Reason, 314d-315c; 327d-329a / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  367c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387b-388a /
Judgement,   477b-c;   478a-479d;  586a-b;  591b592d;  595a-d  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  446dA'\8a;  "^610-464(1  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 183 64a / Philosophy ofHistory, part ii, 267a-268b 53 ]AMES
-.Psychology,  725b-726a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents,
779d780b  4r.  Goods  of  the  body  and  goods  of  the  soul  7 Plato:
Protagoras,  40b-41a  /  Symposium,  162d-167d / Meno, 178c-d / Apology,
205d206d;  209b-212a,c  /  Crito,  215a-d  /  Phaedo,  224a-c / Gorgias,
260a-270c  /  Republic, bk i, 295d-296c; 309b-310b; bk hi, 334b-339a; bk
IX,  421a-425b  /  Timaeus, 474b-476b / Sophist, 556d-558d / Laws, bk i,
643c-d; bk ii, 656d658b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246*10248*6] 329c-330d
9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk i, ch 7 [io97*»23-io98* 17] 343a-c / Politics,
bk   vii,   ch   i   [1323*22-^^21]  527a-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5
[1360^19-1361*12]  601a-c;  [1361*^3-27]  602a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d

[685b]
627  12  I'picTETUs:  Discourses,  bk  i,  cm  20 126c-127b; BK IV, CM I
213a-223d 17 Pi.oTiNi's: First Ennead, tr iv 12b I9b csp CH 2 7 12d-16a,
ch  14-16 I8a 19b; tr vii, ch 3 26d 27a 18 Ai;(;i'stine: Confessions, hk
x,  par 4^66 82a88b / Ctty of God, bk i, ch ii 19 136d I42a; bk viii, ch
8  270a  d;  hk  xv,  ch 22 416a c; bk XIX, ch 1-3 507a-511a 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i ii, q 2, AA 5-7 618d-621c; q ^ a 3 624b 625a; q
31,  A  5  755c-756c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, purgatory, xvi [85114]
77d-78a; xxx
[55]-xxxi
(90]  100a lOld 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  234a-235a  25  Montaigne:  E^jajyj, 538a-d 31
Descartes:  Discourse, part i, 41d-42a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 263c-d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 338c-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448a-450a; 471a-b
44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  378a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkv,
130b132b; BK VI, 164b-165a 53 James: Psychology, 198b-199b 4d. Intrinsic
and  external  goods:  intrinsic  worth  and  extrinsic  value  7 Plato:
Apology, 206a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[1098^12-19]
344a;  bk  vii,  ch  13 [1153^13-24] 405a; bk ix, CHI [1163^31-1 164*13]
416b,d;cH 9 423a-424b; bk X, CH 8 432d-434a esp [1178^33-1179*16] 433c-d
/ Politics, bk iv, ch ii
[1295*^2-34]
495c-496a; bk vii, ch i 527a-d; ch 13 [^^2* 18-27] 536d-537a / Rhetoric,
bk i, ch 5 600d602d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  bk  v  [1113-1135]  75c-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16
156b158d;  BK  III,  CH  20  192d-193d;  ch  24  203c210a;  BK  IV, ch 4
225a-228a;  ch  10  238d-240d  12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 51
279b-c; BK VII, SECT 3 279d-280a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 74c-75c / Pericles,
121a122b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 10 lla-b/ City of God, bk
i,  ch  10 135b-136c; bk viii, CH 8 270a-d; bk xv, ch 22 416a-c; bk xix,
ch  3,510c; CH 20 523d-524a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 103,
A  2,  rep  1-2 529a-530a; part i-ii, q 2, aa 1-4 615d-618d esp a 4, ans
618a-d;  q  4,  aa 5-7 632c-636a esp a 7, ans 635b-636a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, vii
[1-66] 9c10b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b-c;  93b-c  25  Montaigne: Essays,
107a-112d  esp  108c-109c;  126b-128c;300c-306a  30  Bacon:  Advancement
ofLearning, 74b-c; 81d82a

[686a]
(4.  Divisions  of  the  human  good.  4d. Intrinsic and external goods:
intrinsic  worth  and extrinsic value. ^ 33 Pascal: Pensees, 462 255a 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch v, sect 37 33a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
538a-539a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 263c-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
ofMorals,  256b;  274d-275b/  /«/ro. Metaphysic ofMorals, Z%1 6.- 388a /
Judgement,  591b-592a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-d  44 BoswEi.1.:
Johnson, 349a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 45 23c-d; par
49  24c-25a; par 63-65 28b-29a; par 67-69 29c-31a; additions, 29 121c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194d 53 ]AMES -.Psychology, 826a 4e,
Individual  and  common  goods 7 Plato: Crito 213a-219a,c / Republic, bk
iv,  342a-d;  bk  v,  364c-365d  /  Critias,  480a / Statesman, 588a-b 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  10  [1075*  11-24]  605d-606a  9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk vi, ch 8 [1141^28-1142^ 11] 390d-391a / Politics,
bk i, ch i
[1252^1-6]
445a; bk ii, ch 1-5 455b,d-460a; bk hi, ch 6-7 475d-477a; bk iv, ch ii
[1295*25-^1] 495b-c
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,   bk  i,  ch  19  125b-126c  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  hi, sect 4 260b261a; bk vii, sect 5 280a-b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60,  a 5, ANS 313b-314c; q 65, a 2, ans
340b-341b;  Q 92, a I, REP 1,3 488d-489d; q 96, a 4 512d513c; PART i-ii,
Q  I, a 5, ans 613a-614a; aa 7-8 614c-615c; q 19, a 10, ans 710b-711d; Q
21, AA 3-4 718d-720a,c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A
2  206b-207a;  a 3, ans and rep 3 207a-c; A 4, ANS 207d-208b; q 91, a 5,
ans  211c-212c; A 6, rep 3 212c-213c; q 93, a i, rep i 215b,d216c; q 94,
A 2, ans 221d-223a; a 3, rep i 223a-c; q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c; q 96, a
3, ans and rep 3 232b-233a; a 4, ans 233a-d; q 97, A 4 238b-239b; q 100,
a  2,  ans  252b-253a;  A  8, ANS and rep 3 259d-261a; q iii, a 5, rep I
355d-356c;  part  ii-ii,  q 39, a 2, rep 3 575b576b; Q 187, A 3, rep 1,3
666a-669b; part hi suppL, Q 96, A 6, rep ii 1058a-1061b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 87c-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learnifig, 71a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  ^56  434a-b  35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d / Civil Government, CH V
30b-36a  passim  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi, 112a-n3a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  114a-d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 369c-373b /
Science of Right, 438d-433a 43 Federalist: number 64, 197d

[686b]
628  THE  GREAT IDEAS 4(f to 5a 43 Mill: Liberty, 297a / Utilitarianism,
461d  44 Boswell: Johnson, 393a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i,
par  46 23d-24a; part hi, par 170 60d; par 199 67c; par 249 78c; par 287
97a; additions, 27 121b; 127 137b; 145 140b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[11,559-572] 281b
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316c-317a;  592d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk vi, 158b-159a 5. The order of human goods 5a. The supreme
good  or  summum  bonum:  its  existence  and nature 7 Plato: Symposium,
164c-167d / Gorgias,25^d255c / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-401d esp bk VI,
383d-386c  / Philebus, 635b-639a,c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 16
543a-b;  BK  XII, CH 7 [1072^13-29] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i,
ch 1-12 339a-347b esp CH 7 342c-344a; bk vii, ch 11-1:5 403c405b passim,
esp  ch  13  404d-405b;  bk  x,  ch 1-8 426a-434a esp ch 6-8 430d-434a /
Politics, bk I, ch I [1252*1-6] 445a; bk iii, ch 12 [1282'' 15-18] 480c;
bk vii, ch 1-3 527a-530a passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  bk  vi [1-42] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c;
bk  II,  CH  II 150a-151b; ch 19 162c-164b; bk hi, ch 2 177c-178d; ch 10
185d-187a:  ch 24 203c210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 34 273c;
BK  VI,  SECT 14 274d-275a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 4, 8a-b;
tr  VIII,  ch  2  27c-d  /  Sixth  Enfiead,  tr ix 353d360d esp CH 6-1 1
357a-360d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 24 25b-c; BK VII, par 7
45a-d;  bk  x,  par  29-34  78d-80c  /  City  of  God,  bk viii, ch 8-10
270a-271d;  bk  x,  ch  1-3  298b,d-301a;  ch  18  310b-d;  bk xii, ch I
342b,d-343c;  bk xix 507a-530a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
12,  a  I, ANS 50c-51c; Q 26 150a-152a,c; q 62, a i, ans 317d-318c; part
i-ii,  qq  1-5  609a-643d;  Q 34, A 3 770c-771c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvii
[127-139] 79d; PARADISE,
I [103-142] 107b-d; III
[82-90]
llOa-b; XXVI
[1-69]
145d-146c;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxiii  [145] 156a-157d 22 Chaucer: Troilus and
Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 1-7 54b-55b; stanza 250-253 87a-b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 76c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagrziel, bk i,
65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  149b  d;  279c281a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  70b-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 28
431c; PROP 36 434a-b; appendix, iv 447b-c; xxxii 450c-d; PART V, prop 42
463b-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 73 185a-b; 462 255a

[687a]
5b  Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL 629 35 Locke: Hitman Understanding, bk ii,
cm  xxi,  SECT  55-56  192c-193b:  SECT 62 194c-cl 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
236b-240b  csp 237d 238a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals 253a287d esp
256a-257d,  258d-259a,  263a  b,  266a-c,  267b-d, 273d-277b, 282b 283d.
286a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  297a  31  4d  csp  298a-300a,  304d-307d:
338c-355d  esp  344c  348b  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics,
365b-366d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of'  Morals,  387b-388a  /  Judgement,
584d-588a;   591b  592c;  594c-597d  esp  595a-c;  604d  605c  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism   445a-476a,c  esp  448a,  450b-c,  461c-464d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 238c-d; PART III, 307b-308a 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 771d772c 5b. The judgment of diverse
types  of  good:  their  subordination  to  one another Old Testament: /
Kings,  3:5-14—  (D)  ///  Kings, 3:5-14 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) //
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  /  Psalms,  49;  52; 119:72— (D) Psalms, 48; 51;
118:72  /  Proverbs,  10:2;  11:4,23-31; 22:1-5 / Ecclesiastes, 5:10-19;
6:27—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  5:9-18; 6:2-7 / Jeremiah, 9:23-24; 17:11— (D)
Jeremias,  9:23-24;  17:11 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 13:24-26— (Z)) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  13:30-32  New  Testament:  Matthew,  8:21-22; 10:34-39;
13:22,44-46;  16:24-28  / Marl{, 8:34-38; 10:1731 / Lu{e, 9:23-27,59-62;
12:51-53;  18:18-30  /John,  6:6^—  (D)  John,  6:64  / Romans, 8:1-27 /
Galatians,  5:16-26  /  Philippians, 3:7-21 / / Timothy, 6:9-12 / James,
4:1-10  /  I  John,  2:15-17  / Jude 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c-8a 7
Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  / Symposium, 165b-167d / Meno, 183b-184c /
Gorgias, 254d255c; 262a-264b / Republic, bk ii, 310c-311a; BK vii, 401b;
BK  IX,  421a-427b  / Philebus, 635b-639a,c / Latvs, bk i, 643b-644a; bk
ii,  656d-658d;  660b-662a;  bk  hi,  674b;  bk v, 686d-688c; 689c-690c;
694d-695a; bk ix, 751b-d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 22 [68*
25-^8]  89d-90a  /  Topics,  bk i, ch 5 [102^14-21] 145c; BK III, CH 1-4
162a-166b; bk viii, ch 2
[157^17-24] 214a / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[1072*^13-29] 602d-603a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; ch 4 [1095*14-29] 340b-c; CH 5
340d-341b; ch 6
[1096^8-26] 341d-342a; ch 7 342c-344a; bk v,
ch I
[1129^1-10] 376d-377a;
bk x, ch 6-7 430d-432c / Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252*1-6]
445a; ch 9
[1258*2-18] 452a-b; bk
ii, ch 9
[1271^1-9] 467d; BK
III,  CH  12  480c-481b;  bk  vii,  CH  I  [i323*22-'^2i]  527a-c; ch 13
[13^2*827]  536d-537a;  ch  14  [i333^i7-37]  538a-b; ch 15 [1334^14-28]
539c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 3
[1359*17-25] 599b; ch 7 604c-607d

[687b]
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, dk iv
[10581078] S7d-58b; bk v [1113-11^5] 75c d
12  RpKrr f.tus- Discourses, bk ii, ch 9 147c 148c; CM \i) 162c 164b; hk
hi, ch 14 189c 190a; i»k IV, CM 5 228a 230b 12 ArRKLius: Meditations, bk
m,  sect  11  262a b; BK V, SECT 16 271c-d 14 Plutarch: Solon, 74c-75c /
Pericles,  121a 122b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv 12b 19b csp CH 2-7
12d-16a,  CH  14-16  18a  19b  /  Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15 74d 75b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 9-18 lOd 13a; BK X, par 43-66 82a 88b
/  City of God, BK I, ch 8-10 133a-136c; bk iv, ch 33-34 206c-207a,c; bk
xi,  ch  16 331a-c; bk xii, ch 8 346d-347b; bk xv, ch 22 416a-c; bk xix,
ch  1-3  507a  511a;  ch  13-17  519a  523a; ch 20 523d-524a / Christian
Doctrine, bk i, ch 3-4 625b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5,
a  6,  REP  3 27c-28b; part i-ii, q i, a 5, rep i 613a614a; a 6, rep 1-2
614a-c;  a 7, ans 614c-615a; QQ 2-4 615c-636c; q 20, aa 1-4 712a-715b 21
Damte:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii  [82] -xviii [75] 79b-80c; xxx
[55]-xxxi [90] 100alOld; paradise, vi
[112-126]
114d-115a; xi
[i-i2]122a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  hi,  stanza  197-199 80a-b 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii, 24b-c; ch xix, 26a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  62a; part ii, 155b-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
iv, 234a-235a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d; 69d-75a esp 70d72a; 107a-112d
passim;  125a-c;  126b-131a  passim;  216c-219a;  231d-238d;  279c-281a;
300c306a esp 300c-d; 368d; 489b-490c; 538a543a,c 26 Shakespeare: Richard
HI,  act  hi, sc iv [96103] 128a-b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida,
act  ii,  sc  II  [51-96]  114a-c  30  Bacon:  Advancem,ent of Learning,
70b-76a;  86b-c;  91d-92b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 65-66 444b-d
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  94a-97a / Pensees, 233 213b-216a; 793
326b-327a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi, SECT 55-56
192c-193b;  sect  62  194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c  38  Rousseau: Political
Economy,  373c-374a  / Social Contract, bk ii, 396b-d; 400a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 32a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b;
257c-d;  266a-b;  271c-272b;  273d277b csp 274d-275b / Practical Reason,
316a31  7d;  337a-355d  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 377d /
Judgement, 478a-b: 584d587a: 588b [fn 2]; 591b-592a; 594c-596c

[688a]
(5. The order of human goods. 5h. The judgment of diverse types of good:
their subordination to one another.^ 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448a-450c;
455c-456a;  461c-464d;  471a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  378a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part hi, 307b308a; part iv, 365b-c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
164b-165a  53  James  :  Psychology,  198b-204b  esp  199b-203a  5c. The
dialectic  of  means and ends: mere means and ultimate ends 5 Sophocles:
Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50127] 182d-183c
6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk v, 504c507c 7 Plato: Lysis, 22c-24a
/  Laches,  29c  /  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  / Crito 213a-219a,c / Gorgias,
262a-264b;  280b-d  /  Republic,  bk  i-ii, 300d315d esp bk ii, 310c-d /
Philebus,  632a-d  /  Laws,  BK  V,  694d-695a; bk ix, 751c 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk hi, ch i
[ii6''22-36]
163b-c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12
[292*14-^26]
383d-384b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii, ch 2 [994^816] 512d-513a; bk v, ch 2
[1013*32-^3] 533c;
[1013^25-28] 533d-534a / Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433*12-17] 665d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; ch 5 340d-341b esp [1096*5-10]
341a-b; ch 6 [1096^ 8-26] 341d-342a; ch 7
[1097*15-^22]
342c343a; ch 9
[1099^25-32] 345b; bk hi, ch 3
[1112^12-1113*2] 358c-359a; bk vi, ch 2 [1139*
17-^5] 387d-388a; ch 5 389a-c passim; ch 9
[1142^17-35] 391d-392b /
Politics,  bk  vii,  ch I [1323*22-^21] 527a-c; ch 13 [1331^26-1332* 27]
536b-537a  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6-7 602d607d; ch 8 [1366*3-16] 608b-c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 10 185d187a; ch 13-14 188b-190a; ch 24
203c-210a; bk IV, CH 4 225a-228a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 16
271c-d;  BK  VI,  SECT 40-45 277d-278c; bk vii, sect 44 282b'C; bk viii,
sect  19-20  286d-287a  14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades, 160b-161b / Lysander,
357a-b  /  Crassus-Nicias,  456d-457c  /  Agesilaus, 491a-b / Cleomenes,
660b-661a  17  Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr ii, ch 3-4 7c-8c; TR IV, CH 6
15a-b  /  Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15 74d-75b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  viii,  ch  4 266d267c; CH 8-9 270a-271a; bk xix, ch 1-3 507a511a; CH
11-17  516d-523a;  ch  20  523d-524a  / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 3-4
625b-c;  ch  22  629b-630a; ch 31-33 633b-634b; ch 35 634c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, A3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 2, rep 2
109c-110b; a 5, ans and rep 1,3 112d-113c; q 22, a i, rep 3 127d-128d; q
23, a 7, ans 138d-140a; q 65,

[688b]
630  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5r  A 2, ans and rep 1-2 340b-341b; q 82, aa 1-4
431d-435c;  q  83,  a  4,  ans  439c-440b; part i-ii, Q I 609a-615c; q 4
629c-636c;  q  5, a 6, REP I 641a-642a; q 8, aa 2-3 656a-657c; q 11, A 3
667d-668d;  q  12,  aa  2-4  670b-672a;  q  13, A 3 674c-675a; q 14, a 2
678b-c; q 15, a 3 682c-683b; q 16, a 3 685b-686a; q 20, aa 1-4 712a-715b
20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 54, A 2, REP 3 23d'24c; q
107,  a  i, ans 325c-327b; Q 114, A 4, REP I 373a-d; part ii-ii, q 27, a
6,  ANS 524c-525c 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xviii,  25d-26a  23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53a-b; 76c-d;
90a; part hi, 237d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d; 52c-53c; 330b332a; 368d;
381a-388c passim, esp 381c-d, 388a-c 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act ii,
sc  hi [140147] 334b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 75d-76a; 91d-92a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 371b-c; PART IV, PREF 422b,d-424a
passim;  def  7  424b;  PROP  65-66  444b-d; appendix, v 447c 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters,  94a-97a  /  Pensees^ 98 190b; 505 261a-b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 52-53 191d-192b; sect 62 194c-d
36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 538a-539a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 245a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 234c-240b esp 235a-b, 236c-d, 238c-239a / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b; 257c-d; 260a-c; 265c-267d; 268b;
271c-279d   esp   273d-277b;   282b-283d  /  Practical  Reason,  307a-d;
315b-317b;  318c321b  esp  320c-321b;  327d-329a; 337a-355d; 357c-360d /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  367c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals^  387d-388a  /  Science  of Right, 397b-398a / Judgement, 477b-c;
478a-b; 557d
[fn 2];
586a-b; 588b
[fn2]; 591b-592d; 594b-595d;
605d-606b  [fn  2]  43  Federalist: number 23 85a-87a passim, esp 85b-c;
number 31, 103c-d; 104b-c; number 40, 129a-b; number 41, 132b-c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445c'd;446d-^7a;461C'  464d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of
Right,  part i, par 45 23c-d; par 61 27b-c; part ii, par 1 19-128 43b45d
esp par 122 44a; par 140 49b-54a; part hi, par 182 64a; par 191 66b; par
223 73c-d; par 328 108b-c; par 340 llOb-c; par 348 Hid; additions, 38-39
122c-d;  76-81  128a-129a;  116  135c-d  / Philosophy of History, intro,
162a-164c;  166b-168d;  part ii, 267a-268b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiii,  586d587d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c 53
James:  Psychology,  4a-6b  passim; 14b-15a; 199b-201b; 203a; 381b-382a;
788a-789a

[689a]
5d Chapter 30: GOOD AND FA'IL 531 5d. The supremacy of the individual or
the  common  good:  the relation of the good of the individual person to
the  good  of  other persons and to the good of the state Old Testament:
Proverbs,  ri:io-ii  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes 27a 39a,c esp
[1048-1084] 38d-39a,c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c csp
[1-76] 99a-d / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[158210] 132c-d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [1045-1421]
152a-155a,c / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[8:54-1018]
385c-387b;  [1582-1684]  391d-392d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 5
Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 99a;
bk  vti,  253b-257c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397d398c;
402b-c;  bk  vi,  511c-d;  520c-d 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 75c-76b / Apology
200a212a,c  esp 207a-208a / Crito 213a-219a,c esp 216d-219a,c / Gorgias,
262a-270c / Republic, BK I, 302c-306a; bk iv, 342a-d; bk v, 364c365d; bk
vi, 379d-380b; bk vii, 390b-391b; 401a-b / Laws, bk v, 692d-693a; bk vi,
707c708a;  bk  vii,  721d;  bk  ix, 754a-b; 754d755c; BK XI, 775d-778a /
Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[1094^7-9]
339c-d; bk v, ch i
[1129^11-1130*13] 377a-c;
bk  VI,  cH  8  [1141^28-1142*11]  390d-391a;  bk  IX,  CH  6  [1167V15]
420d-421a;  ch 8 [1168^281169*11] 422b-d; ch 9 423a-424b; ch 11 425a-d /
Politics, bk I, ch I
[1252*1-6] 445a; ch 2
[1253*18-38] 446c-d; bk
ii,  ch  1-5  455b,d460a;  bk  hi, ch 4 473c-475a; ch 7 476c-477a; CH 12
[1282*^15-18] 480c; CH 13 481b-483a; ch 17
[1288*15-32] 486d-487a;
bk vii, ch 1-3 527a-530a esp ch 2
[1324*5-24] 528a-b; ch
13
[1332*32-38]
537a; ch 14
[1333^29-37]
538c-d;  bk viii, ch i [1337*28-30] 542b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  19,  125d;  bk  II,  CH  5, 143d-144a; ch 10, 148c-149a; bk hi, CH 7
182b-184a;  ch  22  198c-199d  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 4
260b261a;  bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk v, sect 6 269b-d; sect 16 271c-d; sect
22  272b; bk vi, sect 14 274d-275a; sect 45 278c; sect 54 279c; bk VIII,
sect  12  286b-c; sect 23 287b; bk ix, sect i 291a-c; sect 23 293c; sect
42  295c296a,c;  bk  x,  sect  6  297a-b;  bk  xi,  sect 21 305d-306a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  44d-45c  / Solon, 71b; 71d / Cato the
Younger,  626d-627b;  632b-c; 646b / Demosthenes, 699c-700a 15 Tacitus :
///>/or/<fi-,  bk  ii, 226d-228a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 5
513d514b;  CH 8 515c-516a; ch 12-14 517b-520d; CH 16-17 521d-523a; ch 19
523b-d;  ch 26 528d-529a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 60, A 5
313b-314c; q 65, a 2 340b-341b; Q 92, a i,

[689b]
rep  ^ 488d 489d: o 96, a 4 512d 513c; part i-ii. o 4, A 8 636a-c; o 19,
a  10,  ans  7l0b711d;  (.)  21,  A^  718d 719c; a 4, ans and rip 3 719d
720a,c;  o 52, aa 5 6 762a 763c 20 Aocinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
g  90,  A  2  206b  207a;  a  ^,  ans  and ri:p ^ 207a-c; q 91, A 5, ans
211c-212c; a 6, rep ^ 212c 213c; Q 92, A r, ans and rep i,v-4 213c 214c;
q  9^,  A I, REP I 215b,d 216c; (j 94, a 2, ans 221d223a; q 95, a 4, ans
229b-230c; o 96, a ^, ans and REP 3 232b 233a; a 4, ans 233a-d; a 6, ans
235a'd;  o 97, a i, ans and ri:p ^ 236a-d; a 2, ANS and rep 2 236d-237b;
a 4 238b 239b; Q 98, a I, ANS 239b 240c; q 99, a 3, ans 247a248a; q 100,
a 2, ans 252b-253a; a 8, ans and rep 3 259d-261a; a ii, rep 3 263c-264d;
q  105,  A 2, ans and rep 1,4 309d-316a; a 3, ans and rep 5 316a-318b; q
hi, a 5, rep i 355d356c; PART ii-ii, Q 17, a 3 458c-459a; q 26 510b-520d
passim;  q  39, a 2, rep ^575b-576b; Q 187, A 3, REP 1,3 666a-669b; part
hi  suppl,  Q  71  900d-917b;  q  94  1040d-1042c;  q  96,  a  6, REP II
1058a-1061b;  a 7, rep 3 1061b-1062a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xv  [4081]  75d-76a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 91b-92b; 93d-94a; PART
II,  105c-d;  157b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 381a-388c esp 381c-d, 388a-c;
480b-482b; 487b-488b 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act hi, sc i
[223-281] 49c-50a / Henry V, act i, sc ii [183213] 535d-536a
27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida  103a141a,c  esp  act  i, sc hi
[78-134]  109a-c  / Coriolanus, ACT I, sc i [67-167] 352a-353a 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 71a-75a esp 74b-d; 81d-82a; 94b-95b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, prop 35, corol 1-2 433c-d; prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a
32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a  esp  [843-870]  358a-b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 456 254a; 474-481
256b257b  35  Locke: Toleration, 15d-16a; 16d-17b / Civil Government, ch
vii, sect 87-89 44a-d; ch VIII, SECT 95-99 46c-47c; ch ix 53c-54d; ch XI
55b-58b  passim;  ch  xiv  62b-64c;  ch  xv,  SECT  171  65a-b  /  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  CH  II,  SECT  2 104a-b; sect 6 105b-c 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part i, 29b; part hi, 112a115b esp 112a-113a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  291d-292a;  330b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 21a; bk
XIII,  96a-b;  bk xxiv, 203a; bk xxvi, 221c222a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
323a-328a,c csp 323b325b; 343d-345c; 363a-366d esp 363b 364a / Political
Economy, 368d-377b f Social Contract, BK I-II, 391b-400c; bk ii, 405a-c;
bk  hi,  417c418a;  bk  iv,  425a-d  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
109d-110d;  bk  II, 140b; bk iv, 193a-194b esp 194a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 193c-194a

[690a]
(5.  The order ofhuman goods. 5d. The supremacy of the individual or the
common  good:  the  relation  of the good of the individualperson to the
good  of  other  persons  and  to the good of the state. ^ 42 Kant: Vure
Reason,  114b-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 272d-273a / Practical
Reason,  304b-305c  /  Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 369c-373b;
373d;  375d-376b  /  Science  of Right, 438d-439b 43 Constitution of the
U.S.:  amendments, i-x 17a-d 43 Federalist: number 45, 147c-148a; number
64,   197d;   number   85,  256d-257a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-274a;
293b-323a,c  esp  322d-323a,c  /  Representative Govern?nent, 392b396d /
Utilitarianism,  450b-455a;  455c-456a;  460a-461c;  463a-b;  469b-470c;
473c-476a,c  passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 221d-224a; 261c-d; 304c; 393a-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 46 23d-24a; part ii, par
125-126  44d-45b;  par  134 47b; PART III, par 155 57c; par 170 60d; par
183  64a;  par 192 66b-c; par 199 67c; par 240 76d; par 249 78c; par 254
79c; par 261 83a-d; par 277 92b-c; par 294 98b-d; par 308 102c-103a; par
323  107a;  additions,  27 121b; 47 124a-b; 117 135d-136a; 127 137b; 141
139c; 145 140b; 148 140c-d; 151 141b-c; 158 142d / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro, 164b; 192d-193a; part i, 236a-c; part ii, 271c-d; 276a; PART III,
298c-299a;  part  iv,  320c-321a;  363c-d;  365b-c; 367d-368a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii [11,559-572] 281b 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 310a-319a esp
312a313a,  314b-315d,  316c-317c;  321b-322d  esp  322c-d; 592d 50 Marx:
Capital,  237a  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 429b-c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  67d-68c;  72d74a;  bk  v,  214c-216d;  bk vi,
260a-262a;  bk XI, 475b-476c; 505a-511b passim, esp 509d510a; 514b-515a;
bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xiii,  577b-c;  bk  xv, 634a-635a; epilogue i,
670d671c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 158b-159a; 164a-167b;
bk  xii, 370b-d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 452c-d; 573b-c / War and
Death,   757b-759d  esp  759c-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,
780b-781d; 799a800a / New Introductory Lectures, 853a-b 6. Knowledge and
the  good  6a. Knowledge, wisdom, and virtue: the relation of being good
and knowing what is good Old Testament: Genesis, 3 / Proverbs, 1-2; 7-8;
9:9; 10:8,31; 11:12; 14:16-18,22,29; 15:21; 28:7; 29:8

[690b]
632 THE GREAT IDEAS 6 to 6a Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1-7 ^^P ^-4?
6;  8-io-(D) OT, Boo{of Wisdom, 1:1-7 esp 1:4; 6; 8-10 / Ecclesiasticus,
19:22-24;  39:1-  "5 43-33; 50:28-29— (£)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 19:19-21;
39:1-15; 43:37; 50-30-31 New Testament: /o;^«, 3:17-21 / Romans, 7:152.^
/   James,  ^wj  5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [375-430]  228b-d  7  Plato:
Charmides,  7b-c;  12a-13c  /  Laches  Ida37d  /  Protagoras  38a-64d  /
Euthydemus,  69a71a / Cratylus, 86c-d / Meno 174a-190a,c esp 183b-190a,c
/  Phaedo,  225d-226c;  230d-234c  /  Republic,  bk i, 306c-308a; bk ii,
314d-315a;  bk  III,  333b-334b;  337b-d;  bk  iv, 354d-355a; bk vi-vii,
383d-401d  esp  bk  vii, 389d398c; BK X, 439b-441a,c / Critias, 485b-c /
Laws, BK I, 643c-d; bk hi, 669a-670c; bk ix, 754a-b; bk xii, 788d-789a /
Seventh Letter, 806a-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 6
[120*26-31]
168a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [121^24-122^]  169d-170a;  CH3 [124*10-14] 172d 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; bk II, CH 4 350d-351b; bk vi,
ch  8  390d-391c;  ch  12-13  393b-394d;  bk vii, ch 2-3 395c398a; ch 10
[1152*7-24] 403a-b; bk x, ch 5
[1176*15-29] 430c-d; CH 8 [1178*16-18] 432d;
CH  9  [1179^4-1180*13]  434b-d  /  Politics, bk vii, CH I [1323*^21-36]
527c-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 5 llOb-c; ch 17 122d-124a; ch
26  131b-132b;  ch 28 133b134d; BK II, CH 22 167d-170a; ch 26 174c-d; BK
IV,  CH I 213a-223d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b,d; sect
17  259b-d; bk vii, sect 22 281b; sect 26 281c; SECT 62-63 283d-284a; bk
vih, sect 14 286c; bk ix, sect 42 295c-296a,c; bk xii, SECT 12 308b-c 14
Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b / Aristides, 265c-d / Agesilaus, 490d-491b
/  Demetrius, 726a-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 6-7 9a-10a; TR
III,  CH  6 lld-12b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 27 51d52c; BK
VIII,  par  lo-ii  55c-56b  /  City  of  God, bk VIII, CH 3 266a-d; ch 8
270a-d;  bk  ix,  ch  20  296a-b;  bk xi, ch 28 338a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q i, a 6, REP 3 6b-7a; part i-ii, q 2, a i, rep i
615d616c;  A 2, rep 3 616d-617b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  57,  A  4,  ANS  38a-39a; a 5, ans 39a-40a; q 58, a 2 42a-43a; aa 4-5
44a-45d;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  3-4  70b-72a;  part  ii-ii, q 18, a 4, ans
464c-465a;  q 24, A II, ans 498b-499c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xix
[4066]
135c-d; xxvi
[1-69]
145d-146c; xxviii
[106-114] 150a
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  59c-60a;  69d-75a esp 70d-72a; 208a; 478c-480c;
514a-b 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i, sc ii [13-23] 408b-c

[691a]
6^  to 6c Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure,
act I, sc 1
[33-41]
174d;  ACT  11,  sc  iv  (2-17I  184d 30 Bacon: Advancement of learning,
26c-27a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  r,  43c;  part hi, 49d-50b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, pari iv, prop 14-17 428a d; prop 18, scHOL 429a-d; prop
23-24  430c-d  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [=519-510] 228b229a; bk
viii [316-337] 239a-b: bk ix
[679779] 262a-264a; bk xi [84-98] 301a / Samson
Agonistes [38-59] 340b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, cii hi, SECT
16,  117a;  bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 35 186b d; sect 64 195a-b 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  100 432b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28b-29a;
part   iv,  159b-160a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  182a-c  38  Rousseau:
Inequality, 343b-345c esp 345a-c / Social Contract, bk iv, 434c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 149d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 265b; 282b-283d /
Practical Reason, 326b-327a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 458b-459b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  139140  48d-54a  / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  168b-d;  part  ii, 280b-c 53 James: Psychology, 82a-b;
806a-808a  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 560c-d; 625a-b €b. The need
for experience of evil 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 337b-d / Latvs, bk VII,
727c-d  14  Plutarch:  Demetrius,  726a-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
viii,  ch 7, 204b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 54-57 85a86a 19
Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, a 3, REP3l30d-131c 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell la-52d esp i
[112-136]
2b-c, xxviii
[43-51]
41d;  purgatory,  I  53a-54c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  167a-169a passim;
200d203b;235c-236a;509b-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 75b-c 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [505-535] 163b164a; bk vii
[519-549]
228b-229a; bk viii
[316-337] 239a-b; bk ix [679-779] 262a-264a;
bk XI [84-98] 301a / Areopagitica, 389a-396a esp 390b-391a, 394b-395a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  237d238c; part iv, 354a-c 47
Goethe:  Faust, prologue [340-343] 9a 48 Melville : Moby Dic){, 4b-5a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  481a482a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov, bk hi, 53b-54b; bk v, 122c-125a; 132a-135a: bk xi, 344a-d

[691b]
m  6c.  The  goodness  of  knowledge or wisdom: the use of knowledge Old
Testament:  /  Kings,  3:5  15;  10  -{D)  III  Kings,  3:5-15;  10 / //
Chronicles, 1:7-12; 9:1 ~ y— (D) II Paralipomenon, i :7-i2; 9:1-7 / Job,
28:12-20  /  Proverbs, 1-4; S; 9:10-12; 10:1; 12:8; 14:24; 15:24; 16:16;
17:16;   19:2,8;   20:15;   23:15-16,23-25;   24:1-14;   27:11;  28:2  /
Ecclesiastes,  1:17-18;  2:12  26;  6:8;  7:1112,16-19;  9:11,13-18— (D)
Ecclesiastes,   1:1718;  2:12-26;  6:8;  7:12-13,17-20;  9:11,  13-18  /
Ezcf^tel, 28:2-7-(D) Ezechiel, 28:2-7 Apocrypha: Wisdom ofSolomon, 6-10—
(D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  6-10  /  Ecclesiasticus, i :i6-i9; 4:11-19;
6:18-37;  ii:i;  14:20-15:8; 2r:i213,21; 24:1-22; 25:10; 34:8; 37:24,26;
40:25;  41:14-15;  51:13-28—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:20-24; 4:12-22;
6:18-37;  ^i-^I 14:22-15:8; 21:14-16,24; 24:1-30; 25:13; 34:8; 37:27,29;
40:25;  41:17-18;  51:18-36  New  Testament:  /  Corinthians, i :i7-3i 5
Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [300-462]  102a103c / Antigone [632-765]
136c-137d;
[13481353] 142d
7  Plato:  Charmides, 8b / Lysis, 16c- 18b / Laches, 28a-b / Protagoras,
40a-41a;  61d-62b  /  Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b / Meno, 183d-184c /
Phaedo,  226a-b  /  Gorgias,  272b273b;  291c-292b  /  Republic,  bk vii
388a401d esp 389d-398c; bk ix, 421a-425b / Timaeus, 476a-b / Theaetetus,
525c-526a;  528c-531a  / Philebus 609a-639a,c esp 635c639a, c / Laws, bk
i,  643c  ;  bk  hi,  669d-670c;  bk  xii, 792c-d; 794c-799a,c / Seventh
Letter, 801b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch i
[ii6*i3-23]
162b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*22-28]
499a;  ch  2  500b-501c  esp  [982^4^83"!  i]  SOOd501b;  BK  xii,  ch 7
[i072''i3-29]  602d-603a  / Soul, BK I, CH I [402*1-7] 631a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk vi, ch 12
[1143^171144*6] 393b-c; bk x, ch 2 [1172^28-32] 426d427a; ch 7-8 431d-434a / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 6
[1362^10-26] 603b-c
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [62-79] Id2a; BK II [48-61] 15c-d;
bk v [1-54] 61a-d; bk VI
[r-42] 80a-d
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  20,  192d193a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  9  270b-c; bk X, SECT 12 298c-d 14 Plutarch:
Pericles,  121a-122b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 54-57 85a86a /
City  of God, bk viii, ch 8 270a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  5, a 4, REP 3 25d-26c; part i-ii, q i, a 6, rep 1-2 614a-c; q 2, a i,
rep 2 615d-616c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 45, A 3, rep
3  600c-601a;  part hi suppl, q 96, A 7 1061b-1062a; a ii, ans and rep 5
1063d1064d; A 12 1064d-1065b

[692a]
(6. Knowledge and the good. 6c. The goodness of knowledge or wisdom: the
use  of  knowledge.) 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv 5c-7a; purgatory,
III  [16-45]  56a-b  22 Chaucer: Prologue [285-308] 164a-b 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 55d-62a; 69d-75a esp 70d-72a; 231d-242d; 502c-504c; 509a-512a 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv, sc ii
[83-117] 58c-59a; sc vii [26-81] 61c-62a
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d;  16d17a, 26a-27d; 30b-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  41d-42a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
appendix,  iv  447b-c;  part v, prop 25-27 458d-459b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk iv [505-535] 163b164a; bk vii
[519-549]
228b-229a; bk viii
[316-337] 239a-b; bk ix [679-779] 262a-264a;
bk  XI  [84-98]  301a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, intro, sect 5-6
94b-95a;  bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 44 ISSd189b; BK IV, ch xi, sect 8 356b-d
passim  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 2-3 405 b-c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect i 451a455b passim 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
236b-238a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  284a-c  42 Kant: Judgement,
591b-592a 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b passim / Utilitarianism, 455c-456a
44  B0SWEL.1.: Johnson, 118a; 256c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
ii, 280b281b; PART III, 304d-305b 47 Goethe: Faust esp part i
[354-373] lla-b,
[1022-1067]
26a-b,
[1224-1237]
30b,
[18512046] 44a-48a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  78a-b;  255a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents, 777a779a esp 777a-b 6d, The possibility of moral knowledge:
the  subjectivity  or  conventionality  of  judgments of good and evil 5
Euripides:  Hecuba [798-805] 359d / Phoenician Maidens [499-522] 382 b-c
5  Aristophanes:  Clouds [882-1 114] 499b-502b 6 Herodotus : History, bk
hi, 97d-98a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 58a-62d / Meno, 183b184c; 187d-190a,c /
Euthyphro,  193d-194b  /  Gorgias,  271b-277c  passim  / Republic, bk v,
357d-358a;  bk  vi,  383d-386c  /  Theaetetus,  525c-526a;  527b-532a  /
Statesman,  594a-595a / Laws, BK X, 759d-760c / Seventh Letter, 809c810d
esp 810c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 7
[1098*25-^^8] 343d'344a;
bk ii, ch 2
[1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 4 359a-c; bk v,
CH 7
[1134^18-1135*4] 382c-d; bk
vi, ch 8 390d-391c; ch 9
[1142^17-35]
391d-392b; ch II 392c-393b; bk x, ch 5
[1176*3-29]
430c-d

[692b]
^34  THE GREAT IDEAS 6d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 7 145b-146a;
CH  II  150a-151b;  bk  hi,  ch  3  178d-180a;  bk IV, CH 5 228a-230b 12
AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 4 264a; sect 18 264d 14 Plutarch:
Themistocles, 99b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 58b-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr iv, ch 43-44 181b-182b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
13  16c-d  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 39-40 654c656a; bk hi, ch 10,
661d-662a; ch 14 663c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, a 3,
ANs  308b-309a;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a 7, ans 614c-615a; q 2, a i, rep i
615d-616c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, A 4 223d-224d;
part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  11, ans 498b-499c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
57d-58a;  61d-62a;  65a;  75a-b;  78b-c;  91a-b;  96a-b;  part ii, 140b;
149b-c;  part  iv,  272c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 46b-47c; 93b-c; 102a103a;
115b-d;  122a;  124c-d;  146b-c;  149b-d;  279c-284c; 307b; 424d-426b 27
Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  11  [248-272]  43a-b  / Troilus and
Cressida,  act ii, sc ii [5196] 114a-c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 105c
31  Descartes:  Discourse, part ii, 46b-c; part III, 48b-50b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part i, appendix, 371b-c; part III, THE AFFECTS, DEF 27 419a-b;
PART  IV,  PREF,  423c-d;  prop  8  426b-c;  prop  64  444b  32  Milton:
Areopagitica,   390b-391a  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  29b-44a  /
Pensees, 309 228b; 312 229a; 325 230b-231a; 385 238b239a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  90a-d;  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect 8-12 105d-107d; sect 20-27
llOc112c  passim,  esp  sect  22-23  lHa-c; bk ii, ch XXVIII, SECT 10-13
230b-231c; bk hi, ch xi, sect 15-18 303b-304b esp sect 16 303c-d; BK IV,
CH  III,  SECT i8-2o 317d-319c; ch iv, SECT 7-9 325b-326b; ch xh, sect 8
360c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  100 432 b-c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d passim, esp div 132,
509c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165a-166a  36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  257a-266b  esp  261a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 362a-d / Social
Contract,  BK  IV,  434c  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 41a; bk v,
346c-347a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 149d-150a; 236d-237a; 239a-b / Fund.
Prin.   Metaphysic   of  Morals^  253d-254b;  260d-261d;  263a;  264b-d;
265c266d; 270d-271a; 271c-272b; 278a-279d; 282d-283d / Practical Reason,
301a; 304d305a; 307d-310d; 317a-b; 319c-d; 330d-331a / Pref Metaphysical
ElemetUs of Ethics, 368d;

[693a]
6d  Chapter  30: GOOD AND EVIL 635 377c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
387a49  Darwin: D«rr«/o/M<?n, 305a; 313b d; 314c388a / Science of Right,
397b-398a  315d;  317a d; 592d 593b passim 43 Mill: Liberty, 269b-271c /
Utilitarianism,   50   S\\r\V.si,ei.s:   Communist   Manifesto,  427a-b;
445a-447b;  448a-450a; 456d-462a; 463c-d; 428b d 471b-476a,c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, rk i, 15d-16a; bk 44 Boswell: Johnson, 197a-b; 198b-d v,
194a  195a; 214c-d; bk vim, 304b 305a; bk 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
pref,  2b-c;  xi,  514c-d;  bk  xii. 542d; bk xiv, 611a-c; INTRO, par i8
16c-d;  part  ii,  par  ni-132  epilogue i, 645a-646c; epilogue ii, 689b
46a-47a;  par  138  48c-d;  par  140  49b-54a;  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk 11, 33cpart hi, par 150-152 56c-57b; par 339 110b; 34b; bk
xi,  314b-c  additions,  I  115a-d;  86  129c;  89  129d-130a; 53 James:
Psychology,  190a-191a; 886b-888a CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other statements
of  the  metaphysical  theory  of good and evil, see Being ^^h; Cause 6;
Change 14; Desire i ; God 5b; World 6b, 6d; for the relation of the good
to  the  true and the good of the state, see Citizen i ; Happiness 5-5b;
State  2f.  Philosophy  4b-4c; Science ib(i). ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not included in Great BooI{s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into  two groups: L Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. Epictetus.
The  Manual Malo, q i Augustine. Divine Providence and the Problem of F.
Bacon.  "Of  Goodness,  and  Goodness  of  NaEvil  ture,"  in  Essays  .
Concerning  the  Nature of Good Hobbes. The Whole Art ofRIietoric, bk i,
ch 7

[693b]
Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles,  bk  hi,  ch  1-16  L . . Quaestiones
Disputatae, De Veritate, q 21 ; De

[694a]
636  THE GREAT IDEAS Hume. An Inquiry Concerning the Principles ofMorals
A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of Moral Sentiments, part VII Kant. Lectures on
Ethics  Hegel.  The Phenomenology of Mind, vi . Science ofLogic, vol ii,
sect  ii, ch 3; sect hi, CH 2(b) . The Philosophy of Mind, sect ii, sub-
sect  b  Melville.  Pierre  DosTOEvsKY.  Crime  and  Punishment Tolstoy.
Resurrection  II.  Epicurus.  Letter to Menoeceus Cicero. De Finibus {On
the  Supreme Good) Sextus Empiricus. Against the Ethicists . Outlines of
Pyrrhonism,   bk   hi,  ch  21-32  BoETHius.  Quomodo  Substantiae  {How
Substances  Can  Be  Good  in  Virtue  of  Their Existence Without Being
Absolute  Goods)  . The Consolation of Philosophy, bk iii-iv Maimonides.
Eight Chapters on Ethics . The Guidefor the Perplexed, part hi, ch 10-12
BONAVENTURA.  BrCvUoquium,  part III (i) Duns Scotus. Tractatus de Primo
Principio  {A  Tract  Concerning  the First Principle) Al.bo. The Boo\of
Principles  {Sefer  ha-l%arim),  vol  IV, CH 12-15 SuAREZ. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  iii,  x-xi, xxiii-xxiv Malebranche. De la recherche de la
verite,  bk iv, CH 1-4 Leibnitz. Theodicy HuTCHEsoN. An Inquiry into the
Original  of  Our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and Virtue, 11 Voltaire. Candide .
"Good—The   Sovereign   Good—A  Chimera,"  "Good,"  in  A  Philosophical
Dictionary  . The Ignorant Philosopher, ch 31, 38 T. Reid. Essays on the
Active  Powers  of  the Human Mind, III, PART III, ch 1-4; v Bentham. An
Introduction  to  the  Principles ofMorals and Legislation J. G. FicHTE.
The  Vocation  ofMan  T.  Carlyle. Sartor Resartus Dickens. Oliver Twist
WhewELL.  The  Elements of Morality, bk i Baudelaire. Flowers of Evil H.
SiDGwicK. The Methods of Ethics, bk i, ch 9 Clifford. "On the Scientific
Basis  of  Morals,"  "Right  and  Wrong:  The Scientific Ground of Their
Distinction," in vol ii, Lectures and Essays T. H. Green. Prolegomena to
Ethics, bk iii-iv

[694b]
Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil  .  The Genealogy of Morals, i C. S.
Peirce,  Collected  Papers,  vol  i,  par  573-677;  VOL  V, par 120-150
Brentano.  The  Origin  ofthe  Knowledge  ofRight  and  Wrong, par 14-36
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough, part vi; part vii, ch Wilde. The Picture of
Dorian Gray Bradley. Ethical Studies . Appearance and Reality, bk ii, ch
17, 25 H. James. The Turn of the Screw Royce. Studies of Good and Evil .
The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  ii (8-9) Santayana. Reason in
Science,  ch  8-10  Croce.  The Philosophy of the Practical Scheler. Der
Formalismus  in  der  EthiJ^ und die materiale Wertethi\ Wassermann. The
World's  Illusion  McTaggart.  The  Nature of Existence, ch 64-67 Moore.
Principia  Ethica,  ch 4, 6 . Ethics, CH 3-4, 7 . Philosophical Studies,
ch 8, 10 GiDE. The Counterfeiters N. Hartmann. Ethics Dewey. "The Good,"
"The  Ethical  W^orld," "The Formation and Growth of Ideals," "The Moral
Struggle,"  in Outlines of a Critical Theory of Ethics . "Nature and Its
Good,  A  Conversation,"  in  The  Influence  of  Darwin on Philosophy .
Reconstruction  in  Philosophy, ch 5, 7 . Human Nature and Conduct, part
iii-iv . Experience and Nature, ch 3-4, 10 . The Quest for Certainty, ch
10  J.  S.  Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lectxv Ross. The Right
and  the  Good,  iii-vii  Bergson.  Two Sources of Morality and Religion
Westermarck.  Ethical  Relativity  Malraux. Man's Fate A. E. Taylor. The
Faith  of  a Moralist, series i (2, 4-5) . Philosophical Studies, ch i i
Laird.  An  Enquiry into Moral Notions B. Russell. Philosophical Essays,
ch  i  .  The  Scientific  Outlook^, ch 17 . Religion and Scie?ice, ch 8
Adler.  a  Dialectic of Morals A, Huxley. The Perennial Philosophy C. I.
Lewis. An Analysis of Knowledge and Valu' ation Ewing. The Definition of
Good Maritain, Saint Thomas and the Problem of Evil . The Person and the
Common Good

[695a]
Chapter   IT.   GOVERNMENT   INTRODUCTION   THE   usual  connotation  of
"government"  is  political. The word is often used interchangeably with
"state."  But  there  is  government  in  a  university,  in an economic
corporation,  in the church, in any organization of men associated for a
common  purpose.  The  theologian speaks of the divine government of the
universe,  and  the moralist speaks of reason as the ruling power in the
soul which governs the appetites or passions. In ail these contexts, the
notion  of  government  involves the fundamental relations of ruling and
being  ruled,  of  command  and obedience. Though the character of these
relationships  varies  somewhat  with the terms related, there is enough
common  meaning  throughout  ^  to permit a general consideration of the
nature  of  government.  But  that is not the way in which government is
discussed  in  the  great  books.  For  the  most  part,  government  is
considered in one or another of its special settings —as it functions in
the  family or the state, in the soul or the universe. The common thread
of meaning is noted only indirectly, by the way in which comparisons are
made  or analogies are drawn between the various modes of government. In
view  of  this,  we have found it convenient to restrict this chapter to
government  in the political sense, treating domestic and ecclesiastical
government  under Family and Religion, economic government under Wealth,
divine  government  in  the chapters on God and World, and government in
the  soul  in the several chapters which consider the relation of reason
to  the  passions,  such as Desire and Emotion. Government and state are
often  used  as  if  they  •were  interchangeable  terms.  Some  writers
differentiate  their  meanings by using "state" to signify the political
community itself, and 637

[695b]
"government"  to  refer to the way in which it is politically organized.
Yet  the  two concepts tend to fuse in traditional political theory. The
kinds of states, for example, are usually named according to their forms
of  government.  The  great  books  speak  of monarchical and republican
states,  as  we  today  speak  of  the  fascist or the democratic state.
Nevertheless,  we  recognize  the  distinction  between  a state and its
government  when  we  observe  that  the state can maintain its historic
identity   while  it  undergoes  fundamental  changes  in  its  form  of
government.  The state is not dissolved by a revolution which replaces a
monarchy by a republic, or conversely. There is a sense in which Rome is
the  same  state  under  the Tarquins, under the Republic, and under the
Caesars.  In  contrast, some rebellions, such as the War of Secession in
American  history,  threaten  to  dissolve the state itself. Despite the
fact  that  government involves a relation between rulers and ruled, the
word  is  often used to designate one term in that relationship, namely,
the  rulers.  When the citizens of a republic speak of "the government,"
they  usually  refer  to  the officialdom— not the body of citizens as a
whole,  but only those who for a time hold public office. But government
cannot  consist  of governors alone, any more than education can consist
of   teachers   alone.   The   different  forms  of  government  can  be
distinguished  as readily by looking to the condition of the ruled as to
the  powers  of  the  rulers. Furthermore, the same individuals may both
"rule  and  be  ruled by turns," as Aristotle observes of constitutional
government.  Though  the  notion  of government includes both rulers and
ruled,  the  word  usually appears in political literature with the more
restricted meaning. When writers refer to the branches or departments of
government, or when they

[696a]
638  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  speak  of  the sovereignty of a government, they
direct  attention  to the ruUng power, and to the division of that power
into  related  parts. The great books of poHtical theory ask a number of
basic  questions about government. What is the origin of government, its
nature  and  necessity? What ends does government serve and how do these
ends  define  its scope and limits? What is the distinction between good
and  bad  government,  between  legitimate and illegitimate, or just and
unjust,  government  ?  What  are  the  forms  of  government,  of  good
government,  of  bad  government  ?  What are the various departments or
branches of government, and how should they function with respect to one
another ? These questions are related. The origin, nature, and necessity
of  government  have  a  bearing  on  its  ends  and  limits. These same
considerations  enter  into the discussion of the legitimacy and justice
of  governments.  They  also have a bearing on the classification of the
forms  of government, and on the evaluation of diverse forms. The way in
which  the  several branches of government should be related is affected
by  the  way  in  which  the  various  forms of government differ. These
questions are not always approached in the same order. Some of the great
political  theorists—for example, Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau—find their
fundamental principles in the consideration of the origin of government.
They  start with such questions as, What makes it legitimate for one man
to govern another? Is the exercise of political power both justified and
limited  by the end it serves ? In answering these questions, they imply
or  make  a distinction between good and bad government and indicate the
abuses  or  corruptions  to  which  government  is  subject. Though they
enumerate the various forms of government in a manner which reflects the
traditional  classifications, they do not seem to regard that problem as
of  central  importance.  Other  eminent  political  thinkers  make  the
classification  and  comparison  of diverse forms the central problem in
the theory of government. Plato and Aristotle, Montesquieu and Mill, are
primarily  concerned  with the criteria by which the justice or goodness
of a govern-

[696b]
ment  shall  be judged. They compare various forms of government as more
or less desirable, nearer to the ideal or nearer to the opposite extreme
of  corruption.  In  the  course  of  these  considerations  they answer
questions   about  the  necessity,  the  legitimacy,  and  the  ends  of
government  in  general. There seems to be considerable agreement on one
point,  namely,  that government is necessary for the life of the state.
It is generally held by the authors of the great books that no community
can  dispense  with  government,  for without government men cannot live
together  in  peace.  None  is  an anarchist, like Thoreau or Kropotkin,
although  Kropotkin  claims  that War and Peace and even Mill's Essay on
Liberty  contain  "anarchist  ideas."  Marx  and Engels may be the other
possible  exception  to  the  rule. If Marx and Engels take the opposite
view,  they  do  so  simply  on  the  ground  that  with the advent of a
classless  society  after  the  communist revolution, the class war will
come  to an end and there will no longer be any need for government. The
state  can  quietly  wither  away.  But,  according  to Aquinas, even if
society  were  free  from  all injustice and iniquity, even if men lived
together  in  a  state  of  innocence and with the moral perfection they
would  possess  if  Adam  had  not sinned, even then government would be
necessary.  "A  social life," he thinks, "cannot exist among a number of
people  unless  government is set up to look after the common good." The
great books do not agree about the naturalness of the state. They do not
agree about the way in which government originates historically or about
the  functions it should and should not perform. They do not all reflect
in the same way on the good and evil in government. Nor do they all give
the  same  reasons  for the necessity of government. In consequence they
set  different limits to the scope of government and assign it different
functions,  which  range from the merely negative function of preventing
violence  to  the  duty  to  provide  positively  lor human welfare in a
variety  of  ways.  On  all  these  things  they  differ,  but  with the
exceptions  noted  they  do  concur  in thinking that anarchy— the total
absence of government — is unsuitable to the nature of man. Man be-

[697a]
ing  what  he  is,  "any  form  of government," in Darwin's opinion, "is
better  than none." Some, hke Hobbes and Kant, identify anarchv with the
state of nature which is for them a state of war. Some, Hke Locke, think
that  the  state  of  nature  is  not  a  state  of  war, yet find great
advantages  to  Uving  in  civil  society  precisely  because government
remedies  the  inconveniences  and ills which anarchy breeds. But though
they  often  write  as  if men could choose between living in a state of
nature  or in a civil society, they do not think man has any option with
respect  to  government if he wishes the benefits of the civilized life.
They  cannot  conceive  civil  society  as existing for a moment without
government.  The  general  agreement  about  the necessity of government
tends to include an agreement about the two basic elements of government
authority and power. No government at all is possible, not even the most
attenuated,  unless  men obey its directions or regulations. But one man
may  obey  another either voluntarily or involuntarily—either because he
recognizes  the  right  vested  in  that other to give him commands * or
because  he  fears  the consequences which he may suffer if he disobeys.
These  two  modes  of obedience correspond to the authority and power of
government.   Authority   elicits  voluntary  compliance.  Power  either
actually  coerces  or,  by  threatening  coercion,  compels  involuntary
obedience.  Authority  and  power are the right and might of government.
Either  can exist and may operate apart from the other; but, as Rousseau
points  out,  when  right is lacking, government is illegitimate; and as
Hamilton  points  out,  when  might  is lacking, it is ineffective. In a
famous  passage,  the  Federalists  explain that rule by authority alone
might  work  in  a society of angels. But since men are men, not angels,
their  obedience  must be assured by the threat of force. In any society
in  which some men are good, some bad, and all may be either at one time
or  another, force is the only expedient to get the unwilling to do what
they  should  do  for  the  common  good.  Even when the institutions of
government  have  their authority from the consent of the governed, they
cannot function effectively without the

[697b]
CiiAPTiiu  31:  GOVERNMENT  «9  use of power or force. For this reason I
larnilion  dismisses  "the  idea of governing at all times by the simple
force of law" as having "no place but in the reveries of those political
doctors   whose   sagacity  disdains  the  admonitions  of  experimental
instruction." It authority without force is ineffective for the purposes
of  government,  might  without right is tyrannical. "Wherever law ends,
tyranny  begins,"  Locke writes, "and whosoever in authority exceeds the
power  given him by the law, and makes use of the force he has under his
command  to  compass  that  upon  the  subject which the law allows not,
ceases  in  that  to be a magistrate." The use of unauthorized force may
take the form of either usurpation or tyranny. If it is "the exercise of
power  which  another hath a right to," Locke declares it is usurpation;
if  it  is  "the exercise of power beyond right, which nobody can have a
right  to,"  it  is tyranny. The distinction between legitimate rule and
all  dominations  by force rests not on the use of power, but on whether
the  power  which  must be employed is or is not legally authorized. The
notion  of  sovereignty  involves considerations of authority and power.
The  word  itself  is  mediaeval  and feudal in origin. It signifies the
supremacy  of  an  overlord  who  owes  allegiance to no one and to whom
fealty  is due from all who hold fiefdoms under him. Since the supremacy
of  the  sovereign  lord  is clothed with legal rights, according to the
customs  of feudal tenure, sovereignty seems to imply the union of power
with  authority,  not  the  use  of  naked The political philosophers of
antiquity  do  not use the term sovereignty. But their discussion of the
distribution   of  political  power  is  certainly  concerned  with  the
possession  of  authority  as  well as the control of force. Aristotle's
question,  for  example,  about  "what is to be the supreme power in the
state—  the  multitude  ? or the wealthy ? or the good ? or the one best
man  .?"  deals  with  the  same problem which modern writers express by
asking where sovereignty resides. As Aristotle sees the conflict between
the  oligarchical  and  the democratic constitutions, the issue concerns
the legal definition of the ruling class: whether the constitu-

[698a]
640  THE  GREAT  IDEAS tion puts all the political power in the hands of
the  rich  or in the hands of the freeborn, rich and poor alike. It does
not  seem  to be too violent an interpretation for modern translators to
use  the  word "sovereignty" here, for sovereignty can be said to belong
to  whatever person or class holds the supreme power by law. Within this
meaning of sovereignty the basic difference between absolute and limited
government, or between the despotic and the constitutional regime, leads
to a distinction between the sovereign man and the sovereign office. The
ruler  who  holds  sovereignty in his person is an absolute sovereign if
his power and authority are in no way limited by positive law. According
to  some  political  philosophers,  sovereignty must be absolute. In the
opinion  of  Hobbes,  for  example,  the notion of a limited sovereignty
seems  to  be  as self-contradictory as that of a supremacy which is not
supreme.   After   discussing   the  absolute  rights  which  constitute
sovereignty,  Hobbes  goes  on  to  say that "this great authority being
indivisible  .  .  . there is little ground for the opinion of them that
say  of  sovereign  kings,  though  they be singulis majores, of greater
power  than  every one of their subjects, yet they be universis minores,
of  less  power than them all together. For if by all together they mean
not  the  collective body as one person, then all together and every one
signify  the same, and the speech is absurd. But if by all together they
understand  them  as one person (which person the sovereign bears), then
the  power  of all together is the same as the sovereign's power, and so
again  the  speech  is  absurd."  It makes no difference, Hobbes argues,
whether  the sovereignty is held by one man or by an assembly. In either
case  "the  sovereign  of a commonwealth ... is not subject to the civil
laws.  For  having  the  power  to  make and repeal laws, he may when he
pleases,  free himself from that subjection by repealing those laws that
trouble him." The sovereign therefore has absolute power, which consists
in  the  absolute  right or liberty to do as he pleases, for "he that is
bound  to  himself only is not bound" at all. Aquinas seems to be taking
the same view when he admits that "the sovereign is . . .

[698b]
exempt  from the law as to its coercive power, since, properly speaking,
no  man  is  coerced by himself, and law has no coercive power save from
the  authority  of  the  sovereign."  But Aquinas differs from Hobbes in
thinking  that  the authority, if not the power, of the prince is Umited
by  the  constitutional character of the kingly office. In the mediaeval
conception  of  monarchy,  the  king  is  bound not to himself alone, as
Hobbes  insists, but to his subjects. Their oath of allegiance to him is
reciprocated  by his coronation oath, in which he assumes the obligation
to  uphold  the  customs  of  the  realm.  Where  Aquinas  conceives the
sovereign  prince  as  one element— the other being established law—in a
government  which  is therefore both absolute and constitutional, Hobbes
conceives  the  sovereign as identical with a government which is wholly
absolute.  The  distinction  here implied—between a mixed regime and one
that  is  purely  absolute—  is  more fully discussed in the chapters on
Constitution  and  Monarchy.  In contrast to both, a republic, or purely
constitutional  government,  substitutes  the  sovereign  office for the
sovereign  man. It denies the possession of sovereignty to men except in
their capacity as office-holders. According to the republican notions of
Rousseau,   not   even  government  itself  has  sovereignty  except  as
representing the political community as a whole, which is the sovereign.
Sovereignty,  he  whites, is vested in the government "simply and solely
as  a commission, an employment in which the rulers, mere officials I of
the  Sovereign,  exercise  in their own name the power of which it makes
them depositaries." Since this power is not theirs except by delegation,
it  can  be  limited,  modified,  or  recovered  at  pleasure,  "for the
alienation of such a right is incompatible with the nature of the social
body,  and contrary to the end of association." The unity of sovereignty
is  not  impaired  by  the  fact  that  a number of men may share in the
exercise  of  sovereign  power, any more than the unity of government is
destroyed by its division into separate departments or branches, such as
the  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial.  Since  in  a  repubUc the
government (in all its branches or offices) derives its power and

[699a]
CnAPTLK 31: GOVERNMENT authority from the constitution (or what Rousseau
calls "the fundamental law"), and since it is the people as a whole, not
the ollicials of government, who have the constitutive power, the people
are  in  a sense supreme or sovereign. Popular sovereignty may mean that
tiie  people  as  a  whole  govern  themselves  without  the services of
magistrates of any sort; but this would be passible only in a very small
community.  It  is  questionable  whether  a  people  has ever exercised
sovereignty  in  this  way  in anv state of historic importance. Popular
sovereignty  more  usually  means  what  is  implied  by Aquinas when he
conceives  the  magistrate  or  ruler  as  merely  the vicegerent of the
people.  "To  order  anything  to  the common good," he writes, "belongs
either  to  the whole people, or to someone who is the vicegerent of the
whole  people.  Hence  the  making  of a law belongs either to the whole
people  or  to a public personage who has the care of the whole people."
Similarly,  the  exercise  of  coercive  force  "is vested in the w^hole
people  or  in  some  public  personage,  to  whom it belongs to inflict
penalties."  The  notion  of  a  public personage, as Aquinas uses it in
these  passages, is clearly that of a surrogate for or representative of
the whole people. The people as a whole have, in the first instance, the
authority  and power to perform all the functions of government. Only if
for  convenience or some other reason they constitute one or more public
personages  to  act  in  their  stead, do individual men exercise sovci-
eignty,   and   then   only   as  representatives.  Locke's  fundamental
principle—that   "men   being   ...  by  nature  all  free,  equal,  and
independent,  no  one can be put out of this estate and subjected to the
political   power   of  another  without  his  own  consent"—is  another
expression  of  the  idea  of  popular  sovereignty. It reappears in the
Declaration  of Independence in the statement that since governments are
instituted  by  men to secure their fundamental rights, they must derive
"their  just  powers from the consent of the governed." Hegel objects to
the sense "in which men have recently begun to speak of the 'sovereignty
of  the  people'  " as "something opposed to the sovereignty existent in
the monarch. So op-

[699b]
641  posed  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  monarcii,"  he  writes,  "the
sovereignty  o(  the  people is one ol the conlused notions based on the
wild  idea  oi  the  'people.'  " If the sovereignty of the people means
nothing more than the sovereignty of the whole slate, then, he says, the
sovereignly  \N  hich "is there as the personality of the whole . . . is
there,  in  the real existence adequate to its concept, as the person of
the monarch." But republican writers would reply that the sense in which
they  speak  of  the  sovereignty of the people cannot be opposed to the
sovereignty of government, so long as that government is constitutional,
not  absolute.  When  the  sovereignty of the people is conceived as the
source or basis, not as the actual exercise, of the legitimate powers of
government,  there  is  no  conflict  between  these  two  locations  of
sovereignty  in  the  state.  Yet the supremacy of the government always
remains limited by the fact that all its powers are delegated and can be
withdrawn  or  changed at the people's will. The question of absolute or
limited  sovereignty  and  the  connected question of unified or divided
sovereignty  have  a  difl^erent  meaning in the case of the relation of
governments  to one another. The theory of federal government, discussed
in  The Federalist and in Mill's Representative Government, contemplates
a  division  of  sovereignty,  not  as  between  the  people  and  their
government,  but  as  between two distinct governments, to each of which
the  people  grant certain powers. Distinguishing between the government
of  a  national  state  and  the  government of a federal union, Madison
writes:  "Among a people consolidated into one nation . . . supremacy is
completely  vested in the national legislature. Among communities united
for  particular  purposes, it is vested partly in the general and partly
in the municipal legislatures. In the former case, all local authorities
are  subordinate  to  the  supreme;  and may be controlled, directed, or
abolished  by  it  at  pleasure.  In  the latter, the local or municipal
authorities  form distinct and independent portions of the supremacy, no
more  subject, within their respective spheres, to the general authority
than  the  general  authority is subject to them within its own sphere."
The federal or general and the

[700a]
642  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  state  or  local  governments  draw  on the same
reservoir of popular sovereignty, but the sovereignty which each derives
from that source is limited by the definition of matters reserved to the
jurisdiction  of  the  other.  The  fundamental  difference  between the
condition  of  states  in  a  federation  and  the condition of colonial
dependencies  or  subject  peoples  is  that  imperial government, unUke
federal  government,  claims  an  unUmited  sovereignty.  The  issues of
imperialism which arise from the exercise of such power are discussed in
the chapters on Tyranny and Slavery. The one remaining situation is that
of   independent   governments,   the  governments  of  separate  states
associated with one another only by treaties or alliances, or at most in
the   kind  of  loose  hegemony  or  league  represented  by  the  Greek
confederacies  or  the  American  Articles  of  Confederation.  In  this
situation,  the  word  *'sovereignty" applied to independent governments
signifies  supremacy, not in the sense of their having the authority and
power  to command, but in the opposite sense of not being subject to any
political  superior.  This  radical  difference in meaning is explicitly
formulated   in   Hegel's  distinction  between  internal  and  external
sovereignty.  After  stating  the  conditions  of the sovereignty of the
state  in  relation  to  its  own  people,  Hegel  says,  "This  is  the
sovereignty  of  the  state at home. Sovereignty has another side, i.e.,
sovereignty vis-a-vis foreign states." The state's individuality resides
in  its  awareness  of its own existence "as a unit in sharp distinction
from  others";  and  in  this  individuality  Hegel  finds  the  state's
autonomy,  which  he  thinks  is  "the  most fundamental freedom which a
people possesses as well as its highest dignity." But from the fact that
"every state is sovereign and autonomous against its neighbors," it also
follows,  according  to  Hegel,  that such sovereigns "are in a state of
nature  in  relation  to  each  other." It is this state of nature which
Hobbes  had  earlier  described  as  a  state  of war. Precisely because
independent states have absolute sovereignty in relation to one another,
"they  live  in the condition of perpetual war, and upon the confines of
battle,  with  their  frontiers armed, and cannons planted against their
neighbors round about."

[700b]
In  their  relation  to one another they are, writes Kant, like "lawless
savages."  Following  Rousseau,  he  thinks it is fitting that the state
"viewed in relation to other peoples" should be called "a power." Unlike
sovereign governments which unite authority with power in their domestic
jurisdiction,  sovereign  states  in  their external relations can exert
force  alone upon each other. When their interests conflict, each yields
only  to  superior  force or to the threat of it. A fuller discussion of
these  matters  will be found in the chapters on Law, State, and War and
Peace.  As ALREADY INDICATED in scvcral placcs, the materials covered in
this chapter necessarily demand a study of many related chapters dealing
with   political  topics.  This  is  peculiarly  true  of  the  problems
concerning  the  forms  of  government. Separate chapters are devoted to
each  of the traditionally recognized forms, m., Aristocracy, Democracy,
Monarchy,   Oligarchy,   Tyranny.  Each  of  these  chapters  defines  a
particular  form,  distinguishes  it  from  others,  and  compares their
merits.  In  addition,  the  chapter  on Constitution deals with what is
perhaps the most fundamental of all distinctions in forms of government,
that  between  a republic and a despotism, or between government by laws
and  government  by  men.  Here,  then,  it  is  necessary only to treat
generally  of  the  issues  raised  by the classification and comparison
ofdiverse  forms  ofgovernment.  They can be summarized in the following
questions.  What  are  the criteria or marks of good government.? Is the
goodness  of  government  determined by the end it serves, by the way in
which  it  is instituted, by its efficiency in promoting whatever end it
serves? Are such criteria of good government as justice, legitimacy, and
efficiency,  independent  or interchangeable } What is the nature of bad
government.? Can a distinction be made between the abuses or weakness to
which  good  government  is  subject in actual operation, and government
which  is  essentially  bad  because perverse or corrupt in principle as
well  as  practice.?  Are there several forms of good government? Of bad
government.? How are they differentiated from one another.? Are all good
forms

[701a]
Chapter  31:  GOVERNMENT  equally  gcxxl, all bad forms equally bad ? If
not,  what is the principle in terms of which some order of desirability
or  undesirability  is  established  ?  For example, is one good form of
government  better  than  another,  one  bad form worse than another, in
terms of degrees of justice and injustice, or in terms of efficiency and
inefficiency?  To  put this question in another way, is one form of good
government  better  than  another because it achieves a better result or
merely  because  it  achieves the same result more completely ? If there
are  several  distinct  forms  of good government, are there one or more
ways in which these can be combined to effect a composite or mixed form?
If  a  mixed  form  is  comparable  with the pure forms it unites, is it
superior  to  all,  to  some,  to none of them? On what grounds? In what
circumstances?  While  proposing what they consider to be the ideal form
of  government, some political philosophers admit that the ideal may not
be  realizable  under  existing  circumstances  or with men as they are.
Plato,  for  example,  recognizes  that  the  state  he  outlines in the
Republic   may   not  be  practicable;  and  in  the  Laws  he  proposes
institutions  of  government which represent for him something less than
the  ideal  but which may be more achievable. The/Athenian Stranger says
of  the state described in the Republic that, "whether it is possible or
not,  no  man,  acting  upon any other principle, will ever constitute a
state  which  will  be  truer  or better or more exalted in virtue." The
state  which  he  is discussing in the Laws "takes the second place." He
refers  to  "a  third  best"  which, far from being even the practicable
ideal,  may  be  merely  the  best form of government which now actually
exists.  Aristotle  also  sets  down  the various ways in which forms of
government  can  be judged and compared. We may consider, he writes, "of
what  sort  a  government  must  be  to  be  most in accordance with our
aspirations,  if  there  were  no external impediment," but we must also
consider  "what  kind of government is adapted to particular states." In
addition,  Aristotle  thinks  it  is  necessary  "to  know  the  form of
government which is best suited to states in general" as well as "to say
how a state may be constituted under any given conditions."

[701b]
643  Most  important of all, it is necessary to know "not only what form
of  government  is  Ik-si, but also what is possible." Though "j^ohtical
writers   have  excellent  ideas,"  Aristotle  thinks  they  "arc  often
impractical."   Since   "the  best  is  often  unattainable,"  the  true
legislator  "ought  to  be  acquainted not only with what is best in the
abstract,  but  also  with what is best relative to circumstances." Both
Montesquieu and Mill later apply this basic distinction between the best
form  of  government  considered  absolutely or in the abstract, and the
best  form  relative  to particular historic circum.stances. Among these
are   a   people's  economic  condition,  level  of  culture,  political
experience, geography, climate, and racial characteristics. Montesquieu,
for  example,  thinks  that government by law, absolutely considered, is
better  than  despotic  government,  yet  he  also  holds  that despotic
government   is  better  for  certain  peoples.  Mill  thinks  that  the
institutions  of  a representative democracy represent the ideal form of
government, but he acknowledges that absolute monarchy may be better for
a  rude  or  uncivilized  people  who  have  not  yet  advanced far from
barbarism.   The  great  question  here  is  whether  the  circumstances
themselves  can be improved so that a people may become fit or ready for
a  better  form  of  government,  and  ultimately  for  the best that is
attainable,  that is, the form relative to the best possible conditions.
Since  Montesquieu  emphasizes  what  he  considers  to  be fixed racial
characteristics,  such  as  the  servility of the Asiatics, whereas Mill
stresses   conditions   which  are  remediable  by  education,  economic
progress,  and  social  reforms, these two writers tend to give opposite
answers. The issue is more fully discussed in the chapters on Democracy,
Monarchy,  and  Progress.  Still  other  questions  remain and should be
mentioned  here.  Are  the  ideal state and the ideal form of government
inseparable, or can one be conceived apart from the other? How shall the
ideal  government be conceived— in terms of the best that is practicably
attainable,  given  man  as he is or can be; or in terms of a perfection
which  exceeds  human attainment and which men can imitate only remotely
or  imperfectly,  if  at all? Does divine government, for example, set a
model which human govern-

[702a]
644  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ment  should  aim  to approximate? Is that human
government  ideal which is most like the divine; or, on the contrary, is
the  perfection of human government measured by standards drawn from the
nature  of man and the difficulties involved in the rule of men over men
?  The  traditional  enumeration  of  the  functions  of  government  is
threefold:  the legislative, the judicial, and the executive. Locke adds
what  he  calls  "the federative power," the power of making treaties or
alliances,  and  in  general  of  conducting  foreign affairs. It may be
questioned  whether  this function is strictly coordinate with the other
three,  since  foreign,  like  domestic,  affairs  may  fall  within the
province of the executive or the legislature, or both, as in the case of
the   Constitution   of   the   United  States.  In  our  own  day,  the
multiplication   of  administrative  agencies  and  the  development  of
planning  boards  have  been  thought  to  add  a  new  dimension to the
activities  of  government, but again it may be questioned whether these
are not merely supplemental to the functions of making law, applying law
to  particular  cases,  and  regulating  by  administrative decree those
matters  which fall outside the domain of enforceable law. The executive
branch  of  government  seems  the  most difficult to define, because it
involves  both  law  enforcement  and  the administration of matters not
covered  by legislative enactment or judicial decision. If the threefold
division  of  the  functions  of  government is exhaustive, the question
remains  how  these distinct activities shall be related to one another,
and  by whom they shall be performed. In an absolute monarchy, in I. The
general  theory  of  government  with paternal or despotic rule tinction
between  dejure  and  defacto  government  le.  The  attributes  of good
government if. The abuses and corruptions to which government is subject

[702b]
which  the  king  is  the government, all powers are in the hands of one
man.  Though  he mav delegate his powers to others, they act only as his
deputies  or  agents,  not  as  independent  officials.  This  does  not
obliterate    the    theoretical    distinction   between   legislation,
adjudication,  and  execution,  but  in  this  situation there can be no
practical  separation  of the three powers, certainly no legal system of
checks  and  balances.  It  is  the  separation  of powers, according to
Montesquieu,  that is the basis of political liberty. "Power should be a
check  to  power,"  he  writes.  In  a  system of separated powers, "the
legislative  body being composed of two parts, they check one another by
the  mutual  privilege  of  rejecting.  They  are both restrained by the
executive power, as the executive is by the legislative." Whether or not
Montesquieu  is right in attributing this aspect of constitutionalism to
the  limited  monarchy  of  England  in his own day, his argument can be
examined  apart from history, for it raises the general question whether
government  by  law  can  be  preserved from, degenerating into despotic
government  except  by  the  separation  of  powers.  For  the  American
Federalists,  the  system  of  checks  and  balances,  written  into the
Constitution,  so  contrives  "the  interior structure of the government
that  its  several  constituent parts may, by their mutual relations, be
the  means  of  keeping  each  other  in their proper places." This they
consider  the  prime advantage to be gained from Montesquieu's principle
of  the  separation of powers. The principle itself they hold to be "the
sacred  maxim  of  free  government."  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE 646 lb.
Comparison   of   political  or  civil  government  with  ecclesiastical
government  and  647  648  id. The elements of government: authority and
power, or coercive force; the dis649 650

[703a]
(i) The sovereign person: sovereignty vested in the individual ruler (2)
The  sovereign  office:  the  partition of sovereignty among the offices
created  (3)  ^^c  sovereign  people:  the  community  as  the source of
governmental  sovereignty  2.  The forms of government: their evaluation
and  order  2a. Tlie distinction and comparison of good and bad forms of
government  2b.  The  combination  of different forms of government: the
mixed  constitution,  the  2c.  The  absolute and relative evaluation of
forms  of  government:  by reference to the nature of man or to historic
circumstances  2e. The ideal form of government: the distinction between
practicable  and  Utopian ideals 3. The powers, branches, or departments
of  government: enumerations, definitions, and ordehngs of these several
powers  3^.  The  separation  and  coordination  of  the several powers:
usurpations  and  infringe3^.  The relation of the civil to the military
power  (i)  The  powers  and  duties  of the legislature (2) Legislative
institutions  and  procedures (i) The powers and duties of the judiciary
(2) Judicial institutions and procedures ^e. The executive department of
government:  the  enforcement  of  law;  administra-  (i) The powers and
duties  of  the executive (2) Administrative institutions and procedures
4.  The  support and the expenditures of government: taxation and budget
659  5. The relation of governments to one another: sovereign princes or
states  as in a condition of anarchy 5^. The government of dependencies:
colonial  government;  the  government  of  conquered  peoples  5r.  The
relation  of  local  to  national  government:  the  centralization  and
decentraliza5<^.  Confederation  and  federal  union:  the  division  of
jurisdiction   between  state  and  federal  governments  6.  Historical
developments in government: revolution and progress 662

[703b]
Chaptlr  31  : GOVERNMENT 645 I'ACK by a constitution C)<yi mixed regime
653  ments by one branch of government upon another 655 tive decrees 658
tion of governmental functions 661

[704a]
646  THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e^., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. 1. The general
theory  of  government  7  Plato:  Republic  295a-441a,c  esp bk ii-viii
310c-416a / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk III 663d-677a; bk iv, 679a-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8 [1141^24-1142* 12] 390d-391a / Politics
445a-548a,c  esp  bk i, CH 5 447d-448c, bk hi, ch i 471b,d-472c, CH 6-13
475d-483a, bk iv, ch 14-16 498b502a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
v
[11361160] 76a-b
12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  i, sect 14 254b-c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b162d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d; bk xix, ch 13-17
519a-523a;  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c;  ch  26 528d-529a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  96,  A 4 512d-513c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i-ii,  84c-104d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,
94b-95a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 291-338 225a-233a passim 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c /
Civil  Government  25a-81d  esp  ch  vii,  sect  87-89 44a-d, ch viii-ix
46c-54d,  CH xi, sect 136 56c-d, ch XV, SECT 171 65a-b, ch xix, sect 211
73d- 74a

[704b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 78a-b; part hi, 112a115b; PART IV, 157a-158a
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i  la-3d 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy  367a-385a,c  / Social Contract, bk hi, 406b,d-410a; 423a424d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 309a-311c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
435a-437c;  450a-452a  43  Declaration  of  Independence: [7-25] la-b 43
Constitution of the U.S.: preamble lla,c 43 Federalist: number 31, 104b;
number  45, 147d-148a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 327b,d-341d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part iv, 364d365a 54 Freud: Civilization
and   Its   Discontents,  780b781a  la.  The  origin  and  necessity  of
government: the issue concerning anarchy New Testament: Romans, 13:1-8 /
/  Peters  2:13-15  5  Aeschylus: Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles:
Antigone [332-372] 134a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23b-d 6 ThuCYBiBES
: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 436d438b

[705a]
la  to  \b Chapter 31 : GOVERNMENT 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44c - d / Crito,
216b  217d  / Gorgias, 271b- 272b / Republic, bk ii, 316c319a / Laws, bk
hi, 663d-667b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, en i
[487^^2-488«i5] 8d-9a / Ethics, bk viii, cm 12
[1162*16-25] 414c;
BK IX, CH 9 (1169^18-22] 423b / Politics, bk i, ch 2 445b-446d csp
[125^*29-39] 446d; BK
III, CH 6 [i278''i5-29] 475d-476a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c; [1136-1160] 76a-b
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 23 128c-d , 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 14 Plutarch: Cato the Younger, 638b-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  hi, 51b-c / Histories, BKi, 211c-212d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d;  BK XII, CH 27 359c-360a,c; bk xix, ch 14-17
520a-523a;   ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 96, A 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 95, A I 226c-227c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, vi
[76151] 61c-62c; xvi [85-105] 77d; paradise, viii
[115-117] 118a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 58c-d; 77a; 77c 84c-87b; 91a-b; 96a-b;
part  ii, 99a-102a 104b-d; 109b; 112b-d; 113c; 124c-125a 131a-c; 159d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  462c-465c  26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act i, sc ii
[183-220]  535d-536b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, scfiii
[78-134]  109a-c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  454a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37,
schol  2  435b-436a  . 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vi [169-188] 200a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  304  227b-228a;  306  228a;  330  231b-232a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  4c-d;  16a-c / Civil Government, ch I, sect I 25a-c; ch ii,
sect  13-cH  III,  SECT  20  28a-29d;  ch vi, sect 57 36d-37b sect 74-76
41b-42a;  ch  vii, sect 87-CH x sect 132 44a-55b; ch xi, sect 136 56c-d;
ch XV, SECT 171 65a-b; ch xvi, sect 175 65d CH XIX, SECT 212 74a-b; sect
219  75b-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv 135a-184a : 36 Sterne: Trz^rmm
Shandy,  214b-217b  esp 216b 261b-262a; 410a-411a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk  i  la-3d  BK viii, 52a 38 Rousseau : Inequality, 333b-d /
Political  Econ  omy,  370b  /  Social Contract, bk i, 391b-393c BK III,
406b,d-407a;  419b;  423a-424a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,
309a-311c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
87a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  222b-c  /  Science of Right, 433c-434d;
435c-436b; 437c-d; 450d-451c

[705b]
647  43  Dkclaration of Indrpendencf: [7-25] lab 43 (constitution of the
U.S.:  preamble  lla.c  43  I'^oeralist: number 2, 31a-b; number 4, 36a;
number  15, 63a-d; 65b-c; number 16 66c 68d passim; number iS 20 71a 78b
passim; number ^8, I2Ib 122a; number 51, 163b c; 164c d; numbir 85, 258d
259a.c  43  Mh.l:  Liberty, 267d 268a; 269c; 302d 303a / Utilitarianism,
472b-c 44 Bns\\\.iA.: Johnson, 172d 173a 46 HEfiEL: Philosophy of Right,
additions,  47 124a-b / Philosophy of History, intro, 173a175c; part ii,
262a-c;  part  iv,  342c-d  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310a-c; 321b c 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 680b684a 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents, 780b-d lb. Comparison of political or civil government
with  ecclesiastical  government  and  with  paternal or despotic rule 5
Sophocles:   Antigone   [631-680]   136c-137a  5  Euripides:  Andromache
[464-492]  319b-c  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 107c-108d; bk v, 178a-
180a  7 Plato: Crito, 217a-c / Statesman, 581a-c / Laws, BK HI 663d-677a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10
[1160^
23-1161*9] 413a-b / Politics, bk i, ch 1-2 445a-446d; ch 3
[1253^15-22]
447a; ch 5 447d-448c; ch 7
[1255^16-22]
449b-c; ch 12-13 453d-455a,c; bk hi, ch 4
[1277*33-
^24] 474c-d; ch 6
[1278*^30-1279*221 476a-c;
BK VII, CH 2
[1324^23-41] 528d-529a; ch
3
[i325»i8-''i3] 529b-d; ch 14 537b-538d
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  bk  hi,  51b-c; 61c-62a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk xix, ch 13-17 519a-523a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 92, a I, rep 2 488d-489d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 109c-lllb; 121a; 155b; part hi, 198a-199a;
part  iv,  249a;  266a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 34a; 101a 32
Milton:  New  Forcers  of Conscience 68a- b 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a-5d;
14b-15a  /  Civil Government, CH I, SECT 2 25c; CH II, SECT 13 28a-b; ch
iv  29d-30b; ch vi-vh 36a-46c; ch xiv-xviii 62b- 73c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy, 214b-217b; 410a411a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3b; bk
II,  4a;  7c-9a,c;  bk  hi, 12a-13c; bk iv, 15a-c; bk V, 25d-31b; bk vi,
33a-35a;  36a-37a; bk VII, 50d; BK viii, 54a-b; bk xix, 137c-d; bk XXIV,
202b-c; bk xxvi, 214b,d-215a; 218a-b; 218d-219a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
357a-c  /  Political Economy, 367a-368c; 370a-379b / Social Contract, bk
i, 387d-388a; 391a; bk hi, 415d; 418a419c; bk IV, 436d [fn i]

[706a]
(1.  T&e  general  theory  of  government. \b. Comparison ofpolitical or
civilgovernment   with   ecclesiasticalgovernmentand   withpaternal   or
despotic  rule.) 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 348a-351a 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and  Fall,  194a-197a  passim;  299b-304d  passim;  412c-d  43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b passim 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-269c;
271c-272a  /  Representative Government, 339a-341a; 341d-355b; 436b-437a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 349 llld-112a; par 355
112d-113a;  additions,  hi  134d-135a  /  Philosophy of History, part i,
211b-213a;  part  hi,  310a-c; part iv, 330b331d 52 Dostoevski: Brothers
Karamazov,  bkv,  127b137c passim \c. The ends and limits of government:
the  criteria  of  legitimacy  and  justice  Apocrypha:  Rest of Esther,
13:1-2—  (D)  OT,  Esther,  13:1-2  New  Testament:  Matthew, 22:15-22 5
Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108d 7
Plato:  Protagoras, 44c-d / Republic, bk i, 300b-310c; bk viii 401d-416a
/  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Latvs,  bk  hi, 670c-672c; 673d674c; bk iv,
681d-682c; bk vi, 707d-708a; 710d-711a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*29-39] 446d; bk hi, ch 3
[1276*7-16] 473a; ch 6-7
475d-477a; ch 9-10 477c-479a; bk iv, ch 4
[1292*30-34] 491d; bk VII, ch 3 [1325*18-^13]
529b-d;  ch  14  [1332^17-41]  537b-d / Rhetoric, bk I, ch 8 [1366*3-16]
608b-c  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c; bk VI, sect 30
276d-277a  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [851-853] 234a 14 Plutarch: Tiberius
Gracchus,  678b-d  18  Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; BK
XIX,  ch  13-17  519a-523a;  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch 23-24, 528a-c; ch 26
528d529a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92,  a I, REP 2
488d-489d;  q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 90, a I, rep 3 205b-206b; q 105, a i 307d-309d; part ii-ii, q 10, a 10
434c-435c;  q  12,  a  2 443b-444b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 86c-87d;
90a-b;  91a-96b;  part  ii,  99a;  100c-104d; lllb-lj7b; 125b'c; 131a-c;
137c-138b;  140a; 142b-c; 149d-150b; 153a-159c; 163b-d; part hi, 167b-c;
171a-172a;  177c-180a;  187b-188a; 191b; 198a-246a,c esp 198a-199a; part
iv,  248a-249b; 273c-d; 274c-d 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
i, sc III [78-134] 109a-c

[706b]
d  648  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Ic  to  Id 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i,
193a-b;  PART  II,  352d-353a  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [769-799]
192a-b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  109a/  Pensees, 332 232a-b 35
Locke:  Toleration, 3a-4b; 8c-10d; lla-21c passim / Civil Government, ch
i,  sect  3  25d; CH VI, SECT 57 36d-37b; ch vii, sect 87-94 44a-46c; ch
viii,  sect  99  47c;  sect  107-112 49b-51b; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi, sect
136-139 56c-58a; ch xiii, sect 149 59b-d; sect 158 61d-62b; ch xiv, sect
163  63a-b;  ch  xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch xvii-xviii 70c-73c; ch XIX, sect
221-222 75d-76c; sect 229 78a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 72b-80b; part
iv,  149b-159b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws, bk iv, 16a-17a; BK XI, 69c-d; bk xix, 138c; bk xxiii, 199b-d; BK
XXVI,  214b,d-215a;  218a-b;  218d-219a;  221c-222a;  223c  38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  368d-370b;  374a-375b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,
388d-389a;   391b-393c;   bk   ii,  396d-398b;  400a;  405a-c;  BK  III,
406b,d-409a; 419b-c; 423c-424a; 424d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii,
149d-150a;  BK  V,  348c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 435a-439a; 445a-c;
450d-452a   43   Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43  Articles  of
Confederation:  ii-iii 5a-b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: preamble lla,c;
article  I,  sect  8  [i92]-SECT  10  [303] 13a-14a; article III, SECT 3
[507-511]  16a;  article  iv, SECT 4 16b-c; amendments, i-x 17a-d; xiii,
SECT  I  18c;  XIV, SECT I 18c 43 Federalist: number i, 30a-b; number 3,
33b-c;  NUMBER  6,  40a-b; number 8, 45a-b; number 23, 85a-c; number 25,
91b-d;  number  30,  102c-d; number 31, 104b-105c; number 33, 107b-109a;
number  34,  llOa-b;  number 41, 132b-c; 133a; number 43, 143b-c; number
44,  144a-145c; number 45, 147d148a; number 51, 164a-165a passim; number
53,  167d-168b; number 54, 171b-c; number 57, 176d-177a 43 Mill: Liberty
267a-323a,c   passim,   esp   271c273d  /  Representative  GoverTime77t,
332d-350a;  362c-363a;  380c-382c;  422b  44  BoswELi.:  Johnson,  220b;
221d-224a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 780c- \d. The
elements  of  government:  authority  and  power, or coercive force; the
distinction   between  de  jure  and  defacto  government  5  Aeschylus:
Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[631-680] I36c-137a
/  Ajax  [666-676]  148d;  [1052-1090] 152a-b 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War, bk hi, 432b-c 7 Plato: Gorgias, 285a-287b / Laws, bk hi, 670c-671c;
bk iv, 679c-681a

[707a]
\dto \e Chapter 31 : GOVT.RNMENT 649 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i25:5*2(>-^q)
446d: CH 6 [1255*7-25) 448c-d; bk hi, cm ^
[i276«7-i6] 473a;
cii 15 .[1280^28-40) 485b; BK V, CH II
[1314*35-1315^11] 517a-518c: hk
VI,  CH 8 [1321^40-1322*28] 525d 526a; hk vii, CH 2 [1324^24-39] 528d 13
Virgil:  Aeneid, bk vi [851-85^] 234a 14 Plutarch: CleoineneSy 659d-660a
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; BK IV, CH 4 190d; bk
xix,  ch  21  524a525a;  cii 23-24, 528a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q 90, A I, REP 3 205b-206b; a 3 207a-c; q 95, a 5 233d-234d
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 71d-73a; 89b; 91a-b; part i-ii, 96c-105c
esp  part ii, 99a-b; 109b-c; 112b-d; 117d; 122b-124b; 131d-132a; 145a-b;
148d-149b;  159d; part hi, 191b; 225c-d; part iv, 273a-c 26 Shakespeare:
//<?7?r>'  V,  act  i, sc ii [183-220] 535d-536b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus
and Cressida, act i, sc III [78-134] 109a-c / Measurefor Measure, ACT I,
sc  II  [120-127]  176b-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2
435b-436a;  prop  51,  schol 439d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 294-308 225b-228b;
311  228b;  878  345a-b  35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a-4a;  16a-c  / Civil
Government,  CH  I, SECT 2-3 25c-d; ch ii 25d-28c passim; ch iv, sect 21
29d;  ch  vi,  sect 69-71 40a-c; ch vii, sect 87-89 44a-d; ch viii, sect
95-99  46c-47c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xii,  sect  143-CH XIII, sect 149
58c-59d;  ch xiv 62b64c passim; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch xviXIX 65d-81d
passim,  esp  ch  xix,  sect  219 75b-c / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxviii,  sect  4-17  229b-232d  passim,  esp sect 6 229d, SECT 9 230b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  261b-262a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xii,  84b  38  Rousseau:  Political  Eco7iomy,  367b;  370b372b / Social
Contract,  bk  i,  389a-393b;  bk  II,  396d-397a;  bk  hi, 406b,d-409a;
418a-419c;  bk  IV,  433a-434b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,
309c-311c;  349a-c  42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 389a- b; 392b;
393c  43  Federalist:  number  2,  31a-b;  number 15, 64b-65d; number 16
66c-68d  passim,  esp  67d68c;  number  20-21,  78a-d; number 23, 85d87a
passim;  number  27-28,  94d-96c;  number  29, 98c-99b; number 31, 104b;
number  33,  108d-109a;  number 37, 118d-119a; number 39, 127a-d; number
41,  132b-c;  number  43,  141a-142d;  number  44, 145c-147a; number 59,
182a-b   43   Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative  Government,
327b,d-332d;  333c-334a;  350b355b;  362c-363a; 429a-c / Utilitarianism,
472b-c

[707b]
b 46 I Ii:(.j.l: Philosophy of Right, part iii, par 20921 3 69d 71a; par
2^0  237 75c-76c; par 278 92c 93a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epil(h.(i'.
n,  680b  688a  52 DoaroEvsKY: Brothers Karamazov, bkv, 127b 137c passim
le. The attributes of good government 5 Fa:ripides: Suppliants [399-456]
261d-262b  6 Herodotus: History, bk iii, 107c 108d 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iv,  342a 350a / Statesman, 598b 604b / I^ws, bk iv, 681b 682c; BK VIII,
733b  734a  esp  733d  734a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 11, ch i [1103^2 6]
349a; BK VIII, CH lo-ii 412c-413d / Politics, bk ii, ch 2
[1261*23-^6] 456a-b; ch 9 [1269*29-33)
465b-c; bk hi, ch 6 [i279*i7]-ch 7 [1279^10) 476c-477a; bk vi, ch 4
[1318^21-1319*3)
522b-c; bk vii, ch 2
[1324*24-25)
528b; ch 14
[1332^12-41] 537b-d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i, sect 14 254b-c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  ii, ch 21 161b162d; bk IV, ch 3-4 190a-d; bk xix, ch 24 528b-c
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANS 229b-230c; q
105,  a  i,  ans 307d309d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xii, 18a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d;  112b-d;  153a-159c  29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  193a;  part II, 331a-336a; 352d-353a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  ix,  sect  131  54d;  CH  XI, sect 134-CH xii, sect 143
55b58d;  CH  XIII,  SECT 158-cH xiv, sect 168 61d64c; ch xviii, sect 205
72a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part ii, 74a-76b; 78a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  216b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  i,  3b-d; bk VI, 39b; bk xi, 69a-75a; bk xii, 84b,d-85c; BK
XIII,  96a-b;  bk  xix,  135d-136a;  138a-c;  bk xxiii, 199b-c; bk xxvi,
214b,d;  bk  xxix,  262a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-328a,c; 360b-c /
Political   Economy,   368c-372b;  375b-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,
411c-412c;  417c-418a;  424a-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 50a42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right, 408c-409c; 438d-439a; 450b-452a
/  Judgement,  586a-587a  43 Declaration of Independence: [7-23] la-b 43
Federalist: number i, 30a-b; number 22, 84c-d; number 23 85a-87a; number
30, lOlb-c; number 31, 104b; number 37, 118d-119b; number 39, 125a-126b;
number 41, 132b-c; number 45, 147d-148a; number 47 153c-156d; number 57,
176d-177a;  177d178a;  number  62,  190c;  number 68, 206b-c; number 70,
210c-d; number 71, 215b; number 78, 232d-233c; number 83, 250d-251a

[708a]
650  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (1.  The  general  theory of government, le. The
attributes of good government.) 43 Mill: Liberty, 272d-273d; 322a-323a,c
/  Representative Government, 332d-350a; 356d357a; 362C'370a; 380c-382c;
387c-d;  436b437a;  439b-c  44  Bosw  "El.!.: Johnson, 182c-d; 204b-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  165  145a-b  / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  174a175c;  PART I, 208b-c; part ii, 275a-b; 276a; PART
IV, 342a-343a 47 Goethe: Faust, PART II
[10,252-259] 249b250a
1/.  The  abuses  and  corruptions  to  which  government is subject Old
Testament  :  /  Samuel,  8  '.7,-20—  {D)  I Kings, 8:3-20 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  436d-437d  7  Plato:  Republic, bk viii-ix
401d-427b / Laws, BK IV, 681d-682c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[1266^361267*^10] 462c-463b; bk
hi, ch 15
[1286^31t'S] 484c-d; ch 16 [1287^1-^8] 485b-486a; bk
V,  CH  2-3  503b-505b;  ch  8  [1308^31-1309*32]  511a-c  passim; ch 12
[1316*1-^27]  518d-519d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 4 [1360*17-29] 600c 15
Tacitus:  Histories, bk ii, 224d-225a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch 6 514b515a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi [58-75] 9a; xxvii
[19-54] 39d-40a; purgatory,
vi
[76151] 61c-62c; XVI [58-126] 77c-78a; paradise,
XVI  130a-132a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 78b-d; part ii, lOOa-c;
104b-d;  116c-d;  148c-153a; 164a,c; part IV, 273a-b; conclusion, 279a-c
25 Montaigne: Essays, 381b-d; 384b-c 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure
174a'  204d  32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax 68b-69a / Samson Agonistes
[237-276]  344b-345b / Areopagitica, 412b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
xi,  sect  138  57b-c;  CH  xiii, sect 149 59b-d; ch xviii, sect 199-201
71a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  lib;  15b-16b;  28b29a; part ii,
74a-76b;  part  hi, 120a; part IV, 152b-154a; 157a-158a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  lOOd-lOla;  268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk vi, 39c;
bk viii, 51a-55c; bk xi, 69a-c; bk xxviii, 259b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
360b-361c  /  Political  Economy,  372b-373a  /  Social Contract, bk hi,
433a-434b 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk ii, 148b-c; 149d150a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  35a;  521d;  622d623a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
307a-c; 586c-587b

[708b]
y  \fto \g{\) 42 Kant: Science of Right, 435a-441d esp 435c436b, 437c-d,
438d-441d;  450a-c  43  Federalist: number 10 49c-53a passim; number 15,
65c-66a; number 16, 68c-d; number 22, 82c-83d; number 28 96c-98b passim;
NUMBER  37,  120d-121a;  number  41, 132b-c; number 51 162d-165a passim;
number  62,  190a-b;  number 66, 201d-202a 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-269c /
Representative   Government,  328d-330c;  350d-351a;  362c370a;  376a-c;
387c-d  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 120a-c; 178b-c; 195c-d; 261c-d; 374b-c 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4772-4811]
118b119b; [10,242-284] 249b-250b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkv,
127b137c  passim  Ig.  The  sovereignty  of  government:  the  unity and
disposition   of   sovereignty  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  6
[1278^9-14] 475d; CH 7 476c-477a; ch 10 478d-479a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^27-1366*2] 608a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a
3  207a-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 97c-98a,c; part H, 100c-105c;
112b-c;  114b-c; 116c-d; 117b-d; 122b-124b; 130d; 131d-132a; 148b; 150b;
151a-152a;  153b;  159c;  part  hi,  228b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[769-799]  192a-b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk ix, 58b, d60a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 323d / Political Econ- ^* amy, 368c-369a / Social
Contract, bk i, 392a393b; bk ii, 395a-398b; bk hi, 406b,d-409a; 420d; BK
IV,  423a-424b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b passim, esp 28a-b;
521b  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-b; 437c-d; 438b-c; 439a-441d;
450d-451b;  452a-d  43 Articles of Confederation: ii 5a-b 43 Federalist:
number  9, 48b-49c esp 49b; NUMBER 15, 63d-66b; number 16-20 66c-78b esp
number  20,  78a-b;  number  32  105c-107b  passim, esp 105d; number 33,
108d-109a;  number 39, 126b-128b; number 42, 138c; number 44, 146d-147a;
number  62,  189c-d;  number  81,  240d-241a; number 82, 242b-c 43 Mill:
Representative  Government, 331c-332d; 355b-356b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par 276 92b; par 279 93a-94d; par 285 96b; par 321322
106c-107a;  additions,  168 145c-d; 178 147d-148a; 187 149b / Philosophy
of History^ PART IV, 355c-d; 365a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue h,
680b684a   1^(1)   The  sovereign  person:  sovereignty  vested  in  the
individual ruler Old TESTXME^iT: I Samuel, 8:4-20— (D) I Kings 8 :4-2o

[709a]
lg(2)  to  1^(3)  Chapter  31  :  GOVERNMFNT  651  4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[188-206]  12a  5  Sophocles: Antigone [631-765] 136c- 137d 5 Euripides:
Suppliants
[429 456]
262a  b  /  Andromache  [464-492] 319b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23b
24b;  bk  hi,  107c-108c  7  Plato:  Laws, bk iv, 679c-681a 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  10  [1281*29-38]  479a;  ch  14  [i285^29]-ch 17
[1288*34] 484a487a; bk iv, ch 10 495a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a;
3a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, A 4 512d-513c; q 103, a
3  530a-c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 90, A I, REP 3
205b-206b;  a  3  207a-c; q 96, a 5, ANS and REP 3 233d-234d; q 105, a i
307d309d  23Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 71d-73a; 74b-c; 97c-d; part ii,
100c-106d; 113d-114b; 130b-d; 131d-132a; 149d-150a; 153a-158a 30 Bacon :
Netv  Atlantis,  208a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [587-612] 106a-b;
BK II [1-42] llla-112a; bk vi [169-188] 200a 35 Locke: Toleration, 14b-d
/  Civil  Government,  ch I, sect I 25a-c; ch ii 25d-28c; ch vi, sect 53
36b-c;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch xix, SECT 232-239 78c-81b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laivs, bk i,
3b;  bk  II, 4a; 7c-d; 8d-9a,c; bk hi, 12b-13c; bk v, 26d-27b; 30a-c; bk
vi, 36a-b; bk xh, 94c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323d / Social Contract bk
hi,  406b,d-407a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 24b,d-28b passim, esp
26b-27d;  51a-d  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 74c-d; 320d-321a 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 437c-d; 439a-441d; 445a-c; 450a-b; 450d-452a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  267d-268a  /  Representative Government, 341d-344a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  120a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 275 92a-b;
par  279  93a'94d;  par  320  106c;  additions, 167 145c / Philosophy of
History,  part  HI,  300a-301c;  part  iv,  325a-b;  342a-343a;  355c-d;
365c-366b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 680b684a 1^(2) The
sovereign ofl&ce: the partition of sovereignty among the offices created
by a constitution 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 697a-705c 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk ii, ch 2
[1261*23-^6]
472a-c; ch
[i287'»ii-b7]
456a-b; bk hi, ch i [i275*22-''2i II
[1282*25-^14]
480a'C; ch 16 485c-486a; bk iv, ch 3 [1290*3-13] 489a; ch 4
[1292*30-37] 491d; CH 15 499c-501c; bk vi, ch
8  525b'526d  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 153a-159c

[709b]
b  35 L()t:KH: Civil Government, ch ix, sect 127 i ^i 54a-d; en xi, sect
134  55b-d;  ch xiii 59b62b passim; ch xiv, sect 163-166 63a 64a 36 Swii
r:  Gulliver,  part  ii, 71a-76b 38 NfoNTESQUiEu: Spirit of Imws, bk xi,
69d75a  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk ii, 395a-d; hk III, 419b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  lab;  25a-28a  passim, csp 28a 41 (iiBBON:
Decline  and  Fall,  564a42 Kant: Science of Right, 436b-c; 444c 445a 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i-hi lla-16a 43 Federalist: number 22,
84c-d;  number ^9, 125c-d; NUMBER 47-51 153c-165a; number 53, 167d-168b;
number   64,  197a-b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  355b-356b;
362c-363a;  401d-402b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 269
84d; par 271 89c; additions, 161 143a b / Philosophy ofHistory, part iv,
342b-d;  368c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d 1^(3) The
sovereign   people:   the   community  as  the  source  of  governmental
sovereignty  Old Testament: /«%<?5, 8 :22-23 / / Samuel, 8— (D) / Kings,
S/  II  Samuel, 2:4-(D) // Kings, 2:4 / / Kings, 12:1-20— (D) /// Kings,
12:1-20  Apocrypha: / Maccabees, 14:25-47— (D) OT, I Machabees, 14:25-47
5    Euripides:    Suppliants    [429-456]    262a-b   5   Aristophanes:
A!'m^/r/j470a-487a,cesp  [13161408] 486a-487a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk
hi,  107c-108c  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [1270^20-22] 466d; BK
HI, CH i [1275*22-^21] 472a-c; ch 3
[1276*40-^^1]
473b; CH 7 476c-477a; ch ii 479b-480c; ch 17 486c-487a; bk iv, ch 4
[1291^30-1292*37] 491a-d; ch 9 [1294^34-39]
494d;  CH  12 496d-497b; ch 14 498b-499c 14 Plutarch: Tiberius Gracchus,
678b-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 90, A 3 207a-c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 100c-102c; part HI, 200a-b 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  CH VII, SECT 87-94 44a-46c; ch vih
46c-53c  passim;  ch ix, sect 127-cH x, sect 132 54a55b; cH XI, SECT 141
58a-b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149 59b-d; ch xiv, sect 163-168 63a-64c; ch xv,
sect 171 65a-b; ch xvi, sect 179-184 66d68d; SECT 190-192 69b-d; ch xvh,
sect  198  70d-71a;  ch  xix  73d-81d  passim, esp sect 240-243 81b-d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii, 4a-6b; bk XV, 109c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  323d  /  Social  Contract,  BK I, 391b-393b; bk ii, 395b-c;
396d-398a;  400a;  401a-c;  bk  hi, 406b,d-410a; 420a-421c; 423a-424b 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, lOOd; 241b

[710a]
652  THE GREAT IDEAS (1^. The sovereignty of government: the Ufiity a^id
disposition of sovereignty. 1^(3) The sovereign people: the community as
the  source  of  governmental  sovereignty.)  42 Kant: Science of Right,
436c;  437c-d;  439a441d; 450a-b; 450d-452a esp 451c-452a 43 Declaration
OF Independence: [1-25] lab;
[43-47I 2a
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble na,c; AMENDMENTS, IX-X 17d 43
Federalist:  number 22, 84d-85a; number 33, 108b-c; NUMBER 39 125a-128b;
number  46,  150b-c;  NUMBER  49, 159c; number 53, 167d-168b; number 84,
252b-c   43   Mill:  Liberty,  267d'269c  /  Representative  Government,
341d-350a passim, esp 344d; 355b356b; 380c-382c; 386d-393a esp 387c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 279 93a-94d; par 308 102c-103a
/ Philosophy of History, part ii, 272b-273a; part hi, 300a301c; PART IV,
365c-366b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 680b684a \h. Self-
government:  expressions  of  the  popular  will;  elections; voting Old
Testament: Judges, 21 :24 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1266*5-30]
461c-d;   CH   9   [1270^7-34]   466d-467a;   [1271*917]   467b;  CH  12
[1273^36-1274*22]  470c-d;  bk  HI,  CH  II  479b-480c;  bk  iv,  ch  14
498b-499c;  bk  VI, CH 2-3 520d-522a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8 [1365^32-33]
608a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35c  / Coriolanus, 180b-d / Tiberius
Gracchus,  676b-681a,c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A
3,  ANs 207a-c 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp ACT II, sc ii-
iii  364a-369a 32 Milton: Sonnets, xii 65a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  viii,  sect 95-99 46c-47c; ch xiii, sect 154 60c-d; ch xix, sect 216
74d;   sect  222  75d-76c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b-74b  38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Latus, bk ii, 4a-6b; bk XI, 71a-c; bk xix, 142a-d
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 324c-325b / Social Contract, bk i, 393a-b; bk
ii,  396b-d;  bk  iv,  425a-432b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 241 b-c;
521a-523a,c  passim 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b; 562c-564b; 587a 42
Kant: Science of Right, 436d-437c; 451c452a 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
preamble lla,c; article i, sect 2
[5-10] lib; sect 2
[i7]-sect
3
[66]
llb-12a; sect 4
[96-102],
sect 5
[107-109]
12b; article ii, sect i
[321-374]
14b-d; amendments, xii 18a-c; XVII 19b-c; XXIII 20d

[710b]
\h  to  la  43  Federalist:  number  39, 125a-b; number 49-50 159b-162c;
number   51,   164d-165a;  number  52-61  165a-188d  passim;  number  68
205b-207a;   number   84,   252b-c   43   Mill:   Liberty,  268d-269a  /
Representative  Government, 370a-406a 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part
hi,  par  308311  102c-104a / Philosophy of History, intro, 172d-173a 2.
The  forms of government: their evaluation and order 2a. The distinction
and  comparison  of  good  and  bad  forms  of  government  5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [399-456] 261d-262b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c 6
Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 396c-d; BK III, 432b-c; bk vi,
520b-c;  bk  viii,  587a-b  7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 301c-d; bk viii-ix,
401d-421a / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk III 663d-677a esp 669d-672a,
672c; bk iv, 679c-682c; bk v, 692c-693a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch
io-ii  412c413d  /  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [1275*35-^2] 472b; CH 6-7
475d-477a; ch ii [1282^8-14] 480c; ch 15 [1286^5-7] 484d; bk iv, ch i-io
487a-495b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 608a-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus-Numa
61b,d-64a,c / Dion, 800c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b; bk iv, 72a-b 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANS 229b-230c; q 105, a
i,  ans 307d309d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch i 3a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  104b-109a  esp  104d-105a;  114b-115a;  129b-130a; 150c-151a;
154b-c;  158b-c;  part  hi,  228b;  part  iv,  273a-b  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch  vii, sect 90-91 44d-45c; ch x, sect 132 55a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii, 78a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b 37 Fielding:
Tom Jones, 268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii-iii 4a13d; BK
IV, 15a-c; bk v, 25d-31b; bk vi, 33a35a; 37d-38b; bk viii, 54a-b; bk xi,
69a-c;  bk  XV,  109a-b;  bk xix, 145d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-b /
Social  Contract,  bk  III,  410b-415b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 113b-115a /
Science  of  Right, 439c-440a; 441 b-c; 450a-452a / Judgement, 586a-587a
43 Federalist: number 10, 51c-52d; number 14, 60b-61a; number 22, 83b-d;
number   39,   125a-126b;   number  48,  157c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  332d-355b  44  ^osw\Li.i.: Johnson, 195c-d; 260b; 390a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 273 90c-92a / Philosophy of
History, intro, 203b206a,c

[711a]
1h  to Ic Chapter 31 : GOVERNMENT 2b. The combination of different forms
of  government:  the  mixed  constitution, the mixed regime 5 Aeschylus:
Suppliant   Maidens   [^59  422J  5b6b;  [600-624]  8d-9a  5  Euripides:
Suppliants  [339-358]  261b-c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk iv, 152d I53b
OThucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vim,  590a-b  7 Plato: Statesman,
598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk hi, 667a-676b; BKiv,680d-681a; bk vi,699d-700b 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265*^261266*4] 461b-c; CH
II
[i272^23]-cH 12 [1274*
13]  469b-470d;  bk  hi,  ch  15-16  484b-486c esp CH 15 [i286^3i]-cH 16
[1287*8] 485b-c; bk IV, CH 8-9 493c-494d; ch 11-12 495b-497b; BK V, CH 7
[1307*5-28]  509a-b; ch 8 [1308^101309*32] 510d-511c; CH 11 [1313*18-33]
515d516a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 [1365^39-1366*2] 608b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  34b-35d / Dion, 800c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d; bk iv,
72a;  bk VI, 97b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANS
229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans 307d-309d 23 Machiavelu: Prince, ch iv 7a-8a;
ch xix, 27a-b; 29c-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 103d-104b; 106d107c;
151c-152a;  part  hi,  228a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vh, sect 94
46a-c;  ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch xi 55b-58b; CH xiii-xiv 59b-64c passim;
ch  xviii,  sect  199-206  71a-72c;  ch xix 73d-81d passim, esp sect 213
74b-c  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 266d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c-8c; BK III, llc-12b; 13c; bk vi,
36a-b;  bk  ix,  58b,d-60a;  bk  xi  68b,d-84d;  bk  xix,  142a146a,c 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 357b-c / Social Contract, bk III, 410c; 414d-415b;
bk  iv,  427a428a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b; 26d-28b; 622d-623a;
630b,d-631a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 71 d; 81c-d; 218c219a; 403b-d
esp  403c;  404c-d;  428a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 439c-440a; 441 b-c;
450a-452a  43 Federalist: number 39, 125c; number 43, 141a-d; number 47,
154a-c; number 69 207a210c passim; number 70, 213b-c; number 71, 216a-b;
number  84,  252b-c  .  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c  / Representative
Government,   343c-344a;  351a-c;  353d-354b;  355b-356b;  401d-402b  44
BoswBhh:  Johnson, 178a-b; 255a-d; 390a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  273  90c-92a;  par  275-286  92a-97a; additions, 170-172
145d-146d  /  Philosophy of History, part IV, 368c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d

[711b]
65?  2c. The absolute and relative evaluation of forms of government: by
reference  to  the  nature  of  man  or  to  historic circumstances Oi d
Tkstament:  /  Samuel,  8—  (Dj / Kings, S 6 Hi-kodotus: History, bk hi,
107c  108d;  120b  c;  BK  V,  178a  180a;  bk  vh, 233a c 6 Tm cyoides:
Peloponnesian  War,  uk vni, 587a b; 590a b 7 Plaio: Republic, bk hi-iv,
339b 356a; bk VIII IX 401d 427b / I^ws, bk hi 663d 677a; bk IX, 754a-b 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, cm 12 453d-454a; BK HI, cii 15
[1286*^8-22] 484d 485a; ch
17  486c-487a; bk iv, ch i 487a 488b; cii 2 [1289*' 13-20] 488c-d; ch 12
496d-497b 14 Plutarch: Phocion, 605a-d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 193c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104b d; 105c106b; 129b-130a 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 46d 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc i-ii 568b,d-572c 27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  hi,  sc  i [131161] 370d-371a 32 Milton:
Samson Agonistes
[241-276] 344b345b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii, sect 13 28a-b; ch vh, sect 90-94
44d-46c;   ch   vih,   sect   105-112   48c-51b   36   Swift:  Gulliver,
PARTiii,112a-113a;  118a-121b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk i, 3b-c;
bk  IV,  15c;  BK  V,  29a-b;  bk  xiv, 107a-d; bk xvi, 118b-c; bk XVII,
122a-124d;  bk xviii, 125a-c; 126b-c; BK XIX, 135a-b; 135d; 140d-141a 38
Rousseau  :  Inequality,  359a-b  /  Political  Economy,  371c  / Social
Contract,  bk  h,  405c-d; bk HI, 407c; 409a; 410c; 415b-417c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  32b-34a,c  csp  33c;  68b,d-69a; 90d-91d; 513b-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  222d-224a;  320d321b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
114b-d   /  Science  of  Right,  438d-439a;  450b-d  43  Declaration  of
Independence:  [7-23]  lab  43 Federalist: number 6, 40a-41a; number 10,
51c-52d;  number  15,  65b-66b;  number 55, 174c-d; NUMBER 85, 257a-c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  272a  /  Representative Government, 327b,d-355b passim;
366a-369b;  436b437a  44 Bosw ELI.: Johnson, 195c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
ofRight,  part  hi,  par  273274  90c-92a;  additions,  165-166 145a-c /
Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 173c- 175c; 203 b206a,c; part i, 207d-209a;
243b-c;  part ii, 271c-d; 273d-274a; part hi, 285b-d; 300a301c; part IV,
344a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 107a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
BKV,127b137c passim 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 883d-884c

[712a]
(2.   Theforms  ofgovernment:  their  evaluation  and  order.)  2d,  The
influence  of  diflferent  forms of government on the formation of human
character  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  175b;  bk  vii,  232d-233d 6
Thucydides  : Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396c-d; bk viii, 564a-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viii  401d-416a  /  Laws, bk viii, 733b-734a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  viii, ch io-ii 412c413d; bk X, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics,
bk  III,  CH  4-5  473c-475d; bk iv, ch 7 [i293''5-6] 493a-b; bk v, ch 9
[1310*12-35] 512b-c; bk VII, ch 2 [1324*5-^23] 528a'd; ch 14 [1333*1115]
537d-538a  10  Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23
18a-c  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  34b-37c  / Numa Pompilius,
59c-60b / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c / Cleomenes, 659d-660a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  60c-61d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [246-257] 116b / Samson
Agonistes  [241-276] 344b-345b / Areopagitica, 384b-385b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii-v,  8d19d;  BK  V, 26c-27a; bk xix, 138c-140d;
142a146a,c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy , 372a-b / Social Contract, bk
ii,  400d-401a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 23c-24a,c; 79c-d; 91c-92b;
523d-524a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  161c-162b; 202b-c 42 Y^a^t:
Judgement,  586b-c  43  Mill: Liberty, 298d / Representative Government,
341d-350a passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273 90c-92a
/  Philosophy  of History, intro, 174a175c; PART III, 285b-d 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue i, 668a669d 2e. The ideal form of government:
the  distinction  between practicable and Utopian ideals 5 Aristophanes:
Birds  542a-563d  /  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d  esp [553-729] 621b-623c 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 107c-108c 7 Plato: Republic 295a-441a,c esp
bk  ii-vii 310c-401d / Timaeus, 442b-443b / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws,
bk  iv, 681b-d; bk v, 692c693a; 696a-b; bk vii, 722d-723c; bk ix, 754a-b
/  Seventh  Letter, 806b-807b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7 [1135*2-4]
382d  /  Politics, bk ii, ch i [i26o'^28]-ch 9 [1269*37] 455b,d-465c; bk
iv, ch i 487a-488b; ch 2
[1289*30-35] 488b; ch 7 [1293^1-21] 493a-b;
CH II 495b-496d; bk v, ch 12
[1316*1-20]
518d-519a;  bk  vii,  ch 4-15 530a-539d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix,
sect 29 294a-b

[712b]
654 THE GREAT IDEAS Id to I 14 Plutarch: L^<:«r^«^ 32a-48d 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk xix, ch 21 524a525a; ch 23-24, 528a-c 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xv,  22b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 112b-d; 164a,c 25
Montaigne: Essays, 318c-319b; 462c-465c 27 Shakespeare: Tempest, act ii,
sc  i  [143-168]  532d-533a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95a /
New  Atlantis  199a-214d  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  393a-b  36  Swift:
Gulliver, part i, 28a-31a; part ii, 76b80b; PART III, 112a-115b; part iv
135a-184a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
268c-269b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 68b,d75a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  323a-328a,c / Social Contract, bk ii, 400c-403a; 405a-c; bk
hi,  410d-411c;  417c-418a;  bk  iv,  427d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
68b,d-69a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Rights 438d-439a;
450b-452a /Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Federalist: number 6, 40a-41a; number
16,  68d; number 38, 122b-124a; number 41, 132b-c; NUMBER 43, 141d-142d;
number  49,  159d-160a; number 65, 200b-c; number 68, 206b-c; number 85,
257a-c;  258d-259a  43  Mill: Representative Government, 327b,d-355b esp
341c-d;  368c-370a;  380c-381a;  387c-d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
pref,  6c-d;  part  III,  par 185 64b-d; par 273 90c-92a / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  173c-175c; part i, 243b-c; 251b; part ii, 279c-d; part
hi,  300c-d;  PART  IV,  365c-d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
428d429c;  432d-433c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  245a-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 131c-d 54 Freud: New Introductory
Lectures,   883d-884c   .   The  powers,  branches,  or  departments  of
government:  enumerations,  definitions,  and orderings of these several
powers  7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 665d-666c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch
14-16  498b502a,c  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [1354*13-1355*3] 593b-594a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  122b-124b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vii,  sect 88-89 44c-d; CH IX 53c-54d; ch xi-xiv 55b-64c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69d75a  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v,
301a-357c passim 42 Kant: Science of Right, 436b-439a 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: article i-iii lla-16a passim 43 Federalist: number 37, 119b-d;
number  47-82 153c-244a esp number 48, 157c-d, NUMBER 64, 197a-b; number
78, 230b-d

[713a]
3«  to  3>b  Chapter 31 : GOVERNMENT 43 Mill: Representative Government,
355b  424c  passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 272-273
89d-92a;  additions,  164  144c-145a  /  Philosophy of History, part iv,
364d-365a;  365c-d  ^a.  The  separation and coordination of the several
powers:  usurpations  and infringements by one branch of gOYernment upon
another  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  hi, 671a-672a; bk ix, 754c-d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk iv, oh 14-16 498b502a,c / Athenian Constitution, ch 45, par
i  573d  14  Plutarch:  Solon,  70d-71c  /  Poplicola-Solon,  86d-87a  /
Agesilaus,  482a-c  / Agis, 650b-656d / Cleomenes, 660b-661a 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk i, la-2a; 3a-b; bk iv, 65a-c; bk xi, 101c; bk xiii, 126c-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 95, A I, rep 2-3 226c-227c 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part ii, 103d-104a; 150b; 151c-152a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  ii-iii  25d-29d  passim; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch
viii,  SECT 107 49b-d; ch xii-xiv 58c-64c; ch xviixviii 70c-73c; ch xix,
sect  212-219  7^^' 75c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 6b-8c; bk
v,  29a; bk vi, 36a-37b; bk xi 68b,d-84d esp 69d-75a; bk xix, 142b-143a;
bk  xxviii,  259b  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 397b-c; bk hi,
406d-407a;  410d-411a;  415a-b;  422b-c; 423a; 423d; bk iv, 432b-433a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 311c-315a,c esp 314d-315a,c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 24b,d-28b esp 25a26a, 27a-b; 154a-b; 343c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 74b-75a; 75d-78b esp 76a; 586c-587a 42 Kant: Science
of  Right,  436b;  437d-439a;  440a-441b;  450d-452a  esp  451d-452a  43
Declaration of Independence:
[7-79] la2b passim
43 Articles of Confederation: ix
[192-197]
7b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 2 [45-47] lid; sect 3
[81-95] 12a-b; sect 7
[156-191] 12d-13a; article
ii, sect i
[335374] 14b-d; [383-393] 14d-15a; sect 2 [421]-
SECT  4 [458] 15b-c 43 Federalist: number 16, 68b-c; number 22, 83d-84b;
number  27,  96a-b;  number 47-49 153c-161b; number 51 162d-165a; number
52,  165c-167b;  number 62, 189d-191c passim; number 64-67 195b-205b esp
number  65-66  198a-203a;  number  71,  215a-216b;  number 73 218d-221c;
number  75-77  222d-229d;  number  78,  230a-232a;  number 81, 237d239c;
NUMBER 82, 242d-243a

[713b]
655  43  .Mill:  Liberty, 322a d / Representative Governmeru, 350d 351a;
353b  d; 355b 363a; 365b366a; 401d 402b 44 \U^s\\iA.\.: Johnson, 178b c;
255d;  41Ia b 46 Heghl: Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 27227^ 89d 92a;
par  297  99b;  par  300  100b;  par  ^02  lOla-c;  par  312-313 104a-b;
additions,  i()f  164  144c-145a;  174  146d-147b;  178-179  147d-148a /
Philosophy  of History, part iv, 365c-d 3A. The relation of the civil to
the  military  power  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk ii, 79a-c 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vii,  551b-d;  bk  viii,  582a-583c; 585d-586b;
587a589a;  590a-c  passim  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii-v,  340b-368d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 7 (1279*37-^3] 476d; BK IV, ch 13
[1297'
BK VI, CH 8 [i322*29-''6] 526a-b 11329*2-17] 533b-c 10-28] 497d-498a; BK
VII, CH 9 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 6b-15a; bk iv, 64a-b / Histories, bk
i,  190b-c; 194a-c; 195c-197d esp 197c-d; 210d-212d; bk ii, 239c-240a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xii, 18a; ch xiv 21b-22a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  103b;  159a-c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xii, sect 145148
58d-59b;   ch  xvi  65d-70c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  80a-b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk v, 30b; 31c-32b; bk xi, 74b-d; bk xix,
143c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 361a-b / Social Contract, bk III, 424b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 301a-309a,c esp 307d-308c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  25d-26d;  30a-b;  42b,d-43b; 50b-51a; 63a-64d; 68c;
76b-77b; 245d-246d esp 246c 43 Declaration of Independence: [60-61] 2a;
[65-67] 2b; [80-94] 2b-3a
43 Articles of Confederation: vi
[107-123]
6b-c;  VII 6d; ix [290-298] 8a; [318-365] 8b-d passim 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [226-242] 13b-c; ARTICLE II, sect 2 [409413]
15a; AMENDMENTS, III 17b 43 Federalist: number 8, 45b-c; 46a-47a; number
24-29  87b-101a passim; number 46, 152b-153a; number 74, 221c-d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government, 409d; 425c-d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 281d-282a
46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 326 107d-108a; par 329 108c;
additions, 163 144c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 325a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, bk hi, 138d; 144c; 146d; 153d-155a; bk v, 209a-c; bk ix,
346a365c  passim,  esp  353a,  355b,  361b-d;  bk  x, 404c-405a; bk xii,
533a-537b  esp 535d-53 7b; BK XIII, 565c-566d; bk xiv, 610d-611a; bk xv,
627d-630a

[714a]
656  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3.  The  powers,  branches,  or  departments of
government:  enumerations,  definitions,  and orderings oj these several
powers.) 3c. The legislative department of government: the making of law
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk iv, 344a-346a / Theaetetus, 531a-b / Statesman,
599c'600d  /  Laws^  BK III, 666b-c; bk iv, 679c-680d; 684b-686c; BK VI,
705d-706c;  bk  ix,  745c-746a;  754a-d; bk XI, 782a-b / Seventh Letter,
807a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, bk IV, CH
14  498b-499c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90  205a-208b;  Q  91,  a 3 209d-210c; q 92
213c215a,c;  qq  95-97  226b-239b  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 103a;
130d-131a;  131d-132a; 133d-134a; 151c-152a; part iv, 273d 29 Cervantes:
Do;;  Quixote,  part  ii,  363d-364a  30 Bacon: Advancement ofLear?iing,
94d-95b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294 225b-226b 35 Locke: Toleration, lib;
16a-c  / Civil Governinent, ch vii, sect 88-89 44c-d; ch ix, sect 127-CH
X,  sect  132 54a-55b; ch xi, sect 134CH xii, SECT 143 55b-58d; ch xiii,
sect 150 59d; ch XIX, sect 212-217 74a-75a 36 Svvtft: Gulliver, part ii,
73a-74b;  78b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk ii, 6b; bk XI, 69d;
71a-72b  passim;  bk  xxix 262a-269a,c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324c-d /
Political   Economy,   368c-369a;  372a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  II,
399b-402a;  bk  iii,  419d-420a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Pall, 151b-156a;
616d617b;  624b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 79d-80b; 96a-d; 108a-c 42
Kant:  hitro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  393c / Science of Right, 397a-b;
436b-c;  438b-c; 450d-452a esp 451c-452a 43 Declaration of Independence:
[29-47]  ^^' 2a; [62-64] [72-79] 2b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article
i,  sect  1-9 lla-14a 43 Federalist: number 10, 50d-51b; number 15, 64b;
NUMBER  33,  107d-109b;  number 44, 145c-146d; number 51, 163c-d; number
5266  165a-203a  esp number 53, 167d-168b, number 64, 197a-b; number 70,
212b;  number  75,  223a-c;  number  81,  239a-b 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  355b-409c  passim  44  BoswELh:  Johnson,  255d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 211 70a-c; par 298-314 99c-104b /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 271d-272a; part iv, 364d365a; 365c-d
3c(l) The powers and duties of the legislature 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv,
344a-346a / Theaetetus, 531 a-b

[714b]
3>c to 3c(2) 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 14 [i298*4-''ii] 498b-499a
35  Locke:  Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Governmenty ch IV, SECT 21 29d; ch
xi,  sect  134-CH xii, sect 143 55b-58d; ch xiii sect 150-153 59d60c; CH
XIX,  sect 212-217 74a-75a; sect 221222 75d-76c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv,  167a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 6b; bk v, 21d-22c; bk
xi,  69d-75a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 25d; 27d-28a; 130c-131a 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451c-452a  43  Declaration  of Independence:
[29-47]   Ib2a   43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  7a-9a  passim  43
Constitution  of the U.S.: article i, sect 1-9 lla-14a; article ii, sect
2 [421-435] 15b; article III, sect 3 [507]-ARTICLE IV, SECT I
[518]
16a; ARTICLE IV, SECT 3-ARTICLE V 16b-c; ARTICLE VI
[591-599]
16d;  amendments,  I  17a;  xii-xx 18a-20d passim 43 Federalist: xNumber
23-36  85a-117d  passim;  number  41-46  132a-153b  passim;  number 5266
165a-203a  passim, esp number 53, 167d168b; NUMBER 75, 223a-224a; number
77,  227b-229b;  number  78,  230d-231c; number 81, 237d-240b; number 82
242b-244a   passim;   number   83,  244c-245c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government, 355b-363a; 365c-366a; 401a-409c passim; 417c-424c; 431a-c 44
B0SV/E1.1.:  Johnson,  255d;  364c-365a;  370a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  298 99c; par 309-311 103b-104a 3c(2) Legislative
institutions and procedures 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 14
[1298^121299*2] 499a-c / Athenian Constitution, ch 4344 572d-573d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35c;  45c-46a  /  Solon, 71b-c 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk iv, 267d-268c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xi, sect 138
57b-c;  CH  xii,  sect 147 59a-b; ch xiii, sect 153-158 60b-62b; ch xiv,
sect  167-168  64a-c;  CH XIX, sect 215 74d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
73a-  74b;  part  iv,  167a-b  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 435b-436a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 4a-6b; BK V, 22a-c; bk xi, 71a-d;
72b-d  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 423d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 27d-28a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 7 Id-74b passim, esp 71d-72a,
73a-b;  587a  43  Declaration  of  Independence: [29-47] ^^' 2a; [62-64]
[72-79]  2b  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: article i, sect 1-9 lla-14a;
article iv, sect i 16a; article V 16c; article vi
[591-599]
16d; amend-

[715a]
d  3dio3d(2)  Chapter  31  : GOVERNMENT 657 MENTS, XIV, SECT 2 18d; XVTI
19b-C;  XX,  SKCT  1-2  IQd  43  Federalist:  number 15, 66a; number 22,
82a-83a;  84c-d;  number  37, 120d 121a; number 51, 163c-d; number 52-66
165a-203a passim 43 Mill: Representatwe Governmetu, 355b-362c; 370a-409c
passim;  417c-424c;  431c  d  44  Boswfll: /o/zz/jTo;;, 176a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 512314 104a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d;  260a-262a  3</.  The judicial department of
government:  the  application  of  law 5 Aristophanes: Wasps 507a-525d 7
Plato:  Statesman,  605be 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 16 485b-486c;
BK  IV,  CH 16 501c-502a,c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 15 619d-622d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, A 2, rep 7 309d-316a 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  103a-b:  123b-d;  132a-136b; 148a 27 Shakespeare:
Measure  for  Measure  174a204d  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii,
332d333b;   340d-343a;   353b-356d;  361a-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning, 94d-95b 35 Locke : Civil Government, ch ii, sect i 3 28a-b; ch
hi, sect 19-20 29b-d; ch vh, sect 87-94 44a-46c; ch ix, sect 125 54a; ch
xi,  sect  136  56c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 73b-75a; part iv,
152b-154a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 266a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk ii, 8b-c; BK VI, 33a-35c; bk xi, 69d-70a: 80c-83c; bk XX, 151d
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 309a-315a,c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  27d-28a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 438c43 Constitution of the
U.S.:  article  hi  15c16a 43 Federalist: number 17, 69d-70a; number 22,
83d-84b;  number  78-83  229d-251a  esp  number  82,  243b,  number  83,
244c-245d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 474d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight,
part  hi,  par 209228 69d-75b; additions, 141-142 139c-d / Philosophy of
History, part i, 250d-251a 3</(l) The powers and duties of the judiciary
Old Testament: Exodus, 18:13-26 / Deuteronomy, 1:16-17; 16:18-20 / Ezra,
7:25-26—  (D)  /  Esdras,  7:25-26 7 Plato: Apology, 200a-c; 208c-209b /
Statesman,  605 b-c .^ 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [i354'*i3-i355*
3] 593b-594a; ch 15 619d-622d 14 Plutarch: Solon, 70d-71b

[715b]
18  \i  GusriNi::  City of God^ bk xix, cm U 514b5I5a 20 .Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, ?'\ki in, Q 105, a 2, REP 7 309d 316a; pm<i hi suimm., Q 89,
A 2 csp Ri.i' ^ 1006b 1007c 35 Locke: Civil Government, cm i\, sf.ci 125
54a;  ch  xi,  sect 1^6 56c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 73b 75a: v\nv
iv,  152b 154a 37 I'ielding: Tom Jones, 65c-66a; 135c d 38 SUiSThSQUihu:
Spirit  ofI^us,  bk  ii,8b-c; bk XI, 73b d 40 CJibbon: Decline and Fall,
91d;  243b;  343a  c  41  CiiBBON:  Decline and Fall, 94c-95c; 403c-d 43
Articles  of Confederation: ix (192-197I 7b 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article hi, sect 2 15c-d; article vi
[58^-590] 16d; ami.ndMENTs, iv-viii 17b-d; xi 18a
43  Federalist:  number  17,  69d-70a;  number  22,  83d-84b; number 51,
162d-163a;  number  65, 199a-d; number 73, 221b-c; number 7883 229d-251a
esp number 78, 231b, number 83, 245b 43 Mill: Representative Government,
413d-414d;  421d-422c; 430a-431a / Utilitarianism, 466d467a 44 BoswELX.:
Johnson,  251d-252b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 219
72d-73a;  par 221 73b; par 225-226 73d-74b; additions, 139 139b; 141-142
139c-d 5d(2) Judicial institutions and procedures Old Testament: Exodus,
18:13-26; 23:1-3,6-9 / Numbers, 35:9-34 / Deuteronomy, 1:12-17; 17:2-13;
19;  25:1-3  / / Samuel, 8:5-6,19-22; 9:15-17— (D) / Kings, 8:5-6,19-22;
9:15-17 New Testament: Matthew, 26:46-27:26 / Acts, 5:16-40; 21:26-23:24
5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  81a-91d 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 95d-96b 7
Plato:  Apology,  209b-210b  / I^ws, bk vi, 704c-705c; bk xh, 786b-788c;
792a-793a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch8 [1267^56-1268* 6] 463d;
[1268^5-23] 464c; ch
12  (i273''36i274'*2i]  470c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  16  501c-502a.c / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  45 573d-574a: ch 48 574d-575b; ch 52-53 576b-577b; cm
57-59  579b-580c; ch 63-69 581d-584a,c / Rhetoric, BK I, ch 15 619d-622d
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,30b-c;  bk  xh, 123b-c; BK xiii, 132c-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-h,  q 105, A 2, REP 7 309d-316a 22
Chaucer:  Physician  s  Tale [12,055-146] 368a369b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  ii, 123b-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 204c-215c
26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice, act iv, sc I 425c-430b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning. 94d 95 b

[716a]
b  (3</.  The judicial department of government: the application of law.
3^(2) Judicial institutions and procedures.^ 36 Swift: Gulliver^ part i,
37a-b;  part  ii,  73b-  ^'  75a; part iv, 152b-154a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  266a-b  37  F1E1.BING  :Tom  Jones,  8c-10c;  65c-66a;  135c-d;
176d'177d;  217a-c;  267d-268b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk ii,
8b-c; BK VI, 33a-37d; bk xi, 70c-71a; 73b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  311c-315a,c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 243a-245d passim, esp
244d-245b;  251b-d;  617a-618d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 73d-74b;
94c-95c;  403c-404d;  458c-d;  586c-d  43  Declaration  of Independence:
[52-55] 2a;
[70-71] 2b
43 Articles of Confederation: ix
[198-274]
7b-8a  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  hi, sect 1 15c; SECT 2
[485-499] 15d; article hi, sect 3
[507]-ARTicLE
IV, SECT I
[518]
16a;  article  IV,  SECT 2 [522-528] 16a-b; amendments, iv-viii 17b-d 43
Federalist: number 22, 83d-84b; number 51, 162d-163a; number 65, 199a-c;
number  78-83  229d-251a  passim  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
336c-d;  337b-c;  413d-414d;  421d-422c 44 B0SWEI.1.: Johnson, 255a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  223  73c-d  / Philosophy
ofHistory,  part  iv, 326b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xh, 547b-d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ix  235b,d-271d  passim;  bk  xii
348b,d-401d  3^. The executive department of government: the enforcement
of  law;  administrative  decrees  9  Aristotle:  Politics, bk iv, ch 15
499c-501c  35  Locke:  Toleration,  "iai / Civil Government, cu 11, SECT
7-13  26c-28b;  ch  vii, sect 88-89 44c-d; CH IX, sect 126-131 54a-d; ch
xii,  sect 144-CH XIV, SECT 168 58d-64c; ch xviii, sect 203-210 72a-73c;
ch  xix,  sect  218-219  75a-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 157b-158a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi, 69d70a; 72b; 80a-c 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  414d-415a;  423a; 424a-b 42 Kant: Science of
Right,   438a43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.  :  article  ii  14b15c  43
Federalist:  number  15,  64b-66b;  number 16 66c-68d passim; number 21,
78b-d;  number  27-29,  94d-99b; number 48, 157c; number 67-77 203b-229d
passim   43   Mill:  Representative  Government,  350d-351a;  356b-359a;
409d-417c  44  Boswei^l:  Johnson, 178b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 287-

[716b]
b  658 THE GREAT IDEAS 3e to le{l) 297 97a-99b; additions, 174 146d-147b
/  Philosophy  of History, part iv, 325c-d; 364d365a ?(1) The powers and
duties  of  the  executive  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 101a-104d;
122b124b; 130d; 153a-159c 29 Cervantes: Do?i Quixote, part i, 193a; part
II,  331a-336a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect io-ii 27b-d; ch
xii, sect 144-148 58d-59b; ch xih, SECT 154-CH XIV, SECT i68 60c-64c; ch
xix,  SECT  218-219 75a-c; sect 221-222 75d-76c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv,  157b-158a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk vi, 36a-37a; 43c-d; BK
XI,  72b-73b;  73d-74c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 433a-434b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 319b-320a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
25d-26a;  26d-27c;  243b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 586d 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  448a43 Declaration of Independence: [28-61] Ib2a 43
Articles of Confederation: ix
[299-310]
8b;  X  9a  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: article i, sect 7 [156-191]
12d-13a;  article  ii 14b-15c 43 Federalist: number 8, 45b-c; number 48,
157c;  number  51,  163d;  number  66,  201a203a; number 67-77 203b-229d
passim  43  Mill:  Liberty,  319d-323a,c  /  Representative  Government,
356b-359a;  409d-417c; 421c-422c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  290296  97d-99b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part iv, 365c-d 3^(2)
Administrative  institutions  and  procedures  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,
700d-704c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 15
[1299*311300^4] 500a-501b; bk vi, ch 8 525b-526d /
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  43-52  572d-576d;  CH  54-61  577c-581b  15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, 22b; bk vi, 88d-89a 23 Machiavelli : Prince, ch
xxii-xxih  33a-34b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part ii, 122b-123a; 123d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  31b33a,c; bk xxvi, 224d-225a 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 403a-404a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
25d-27c  passim;  240b-246d;  248d-251a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
317d-318b;  563d564b; 586c-587a 43 Articles of Confederation: iv [37-44]
5d;  IX [299-310] 8b; IX [368]-x [395] 8d-9a 43 Constitution of the U.S.
: article ii 14b15c; amendments, xii 18a-c;xx 19d-20b;xxiiXXIII 20c-d 43
Federalist:  number  13,  59b-c;  number  66,  201a-203a;  number  67-77
203b-229d passim; number 84, 255a-b

[717a]
1  4/0  5  Chapter  31:  GOVERNMENT 659 43 Mill: Liberty, 319ci-323a,c /
Rcpresentatiie  Government,  337d-338a;  356b  359a; 364b366a; 409d-424c
passim;  439b  442d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 290 97d;
ADDITIONS,  174  146d 147b / Philosophy of History, part i, 213b-214d 4.
The  support and the expenditures of government: taxation and budget Old
Testament:  Genesis, 41:3^-^6 10:25-3 1 -(D) OT, Apocrypha: / Maccabees,
I  Machabees,  i o :2 5-3 5 Aristophanes: Knights [790-8:55] 479c-480b /
Wasps  [655-724]  515c-516d / Birds [27-48] 542c-d 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i,  43c;  bk  hi,  109d111b  6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i,
373b-c;  BK  III,  420d-421b  7  Plato:  Laws, bk xii, 791d 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk i, ch ii [1259*32-36] 453d; BK II, CH 9 [1271^10-17] 467d;
bk  vi,  ch  5 [1320*17-^16] 523d-524b; bk vii, ch 8 [1328^ 11-12] S32d/
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  47-48  574b-575b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 4
[1359^23-33] 600a 14 Plutarch: Aristides, 274c-d / Marcus Cato, 285c-d /
Lucullus,  409b-d  /  Cato the Younger, 625b-626d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
iv,  82d-83a;  bk  xiii,  139a-c  /  Histories,  bk i, 194d-195a; bk ii,
236d-237a;  bk  iv,  268c-d  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvi, 22d-23b
23Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78c-d;  part  ii,  152a-b; 156c-157a 27
Shakespeare: Cymbeline, act hi, sc i 463c464c / Henry Vlll, act i, sc ii
[18-101]  552d553d  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 129 134d135d 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch xi, sect 140 58a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
llb-12a;  part ii, 75a-b; part hi, 113b-114a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
485a-487a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  v,  23c-24b;  bk  xiii
96a-102a,c;  bk xix, 143b-c; bk xxii, 183b-184b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
365c-366a  /  Political Economy, 368d; 377b-385a,c / Social Contract, bk
II, 403a-b; bk hi, 415b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v 301a-421d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  41b-c;  65a-68a;  86a;  155d-156a; 162b-c;
249d-250c;  251d255c;  368a-b;  413a;  577d-578c;  658c-660c  41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 177a-b; 315b-317a; 417b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
441d-444c;  451d-452a  43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [62-69] 2b 43
Articles of Confederation: viii 6d-7a; ix
[286-290]
8a;
[311-318]
8b;
[350-367]
8c-d passim; xii 9b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect

[717b]
2  [17  29]  lib; sect 6 [i32-n5| 12c; [14^148) 12c d; si:cT 7 I152-155J
12d:  sect  8 [192 212) 13a-b; [226-229] 13b c; sictq [260-266] [275277]
13d;
[28^-288]
13d-14a; sect 10
[304315J 14a-b; article
ii, sect i [^94-400] 15a; ARTICLE III, SECT I [463-468] 15c; ARTICLE VI
[578-582] 16d; A.MENDMENTS, XIV, SECT 4 19a;
XVI  19b  43 Federalist: number 7, 43c 44a; number 12i^, 56d 60a; number
21,  79b-80c; number 30-36 101a-117d; number 41, 135b-c; number 4^, 142d
143a;  number  44, 145b c; nitm BER 45, 149b 150b; number 73, 218d-219b;
number  79,  233c-234a;  number  8^,  246b-c;  NUMBER  84,  253b [in i];
254c-256a  43 Mill: Liberty, 315c-d / Representative Government, 335a b;
356c d; 366d 367a; 383b d / Utilitarianism, 473a-c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
281d-282a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 299 99c-100b;
additions,  177  147d  / Philosophy of History, part i, 226d-227b; 243b;
part  hi, 299a-c; 310c; part iv, 324b; 325b-c; 335a336c; 364d; 365c-d 50
Marx: Capital, 65c-66a; 375a-b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 429a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c  5. The relation of
governments  to  one  another:  sovereign  princes  or  states  as  in a
condition  of  anarchy  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk xii, 788d-790d 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi, ch 9 [i28o*35-''i2] 478a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  86a;  part  ii, 114b-c; 159c 27 Shakespeare: Cymbeline, act hi, sc v
[1-27]  468d-469b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 14 28b-c; CH
XII,  sect  145 58d-59a / Human Understanding, BK I, CH II, SECT 10 106d
36  Swift: Gulliver, part i, 23a-25b; part iv, 149b-150b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  61b,d62b;  BK  XXVI,  223c-d  38  Rousseau  :
Inequality,  355b-c  /  Political Economy, 369a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 433d-435a,c; 520c521c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 427b-c 42 Kant:
Science   of   Right,  435a-b;  449c-458a,c  esp  452a-455a,  455c-456a,
457a-458a,c 43 Declaration of Independence:
[1-6]
la;
[109-119] 3a-b
43  Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d passim 43 Federalist: 29a-259a,c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  417c-442d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par 279, 93d; par 321-360 106c-114a,c; additions, 191
150b-c; 194 150c-d / Philosophy of History, part ii, 282d-283b; part iv,
357a358b

[718a]
(5.  The  relation  of  governments to one another: sovereign princes or
states  as in a condition of anarchy.) 5a. Foreign policy: the making of
treaties;  the  conduct  of  war  and peace Old Testament: Numbers, 31 /
Deuteronomy,  2:26-37;  9*i~45 ^o / Joshua, 9— (D) Josue, 9 / // Samuel,
3:12-21—  (D) // Kings, 3:12-21 / / Kings, 5:1-12— (D) /// Kings, 5:1-12
Apocrypha:   /   Maccabees,   8:   10;   12:1-23;   13-34-4^   14:16-24;
i5:i-9,i5-27-(D)  OT,  /  Machabees, 8; 10; 12:1-23; 13:34-41; 14:16-24;
15:1-9,15-27  / // Maccabees, 11:16-38— (D) OT, 11 Machabees, 11:16-38 5
Euripides: Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp [399598] 261d-263c 5 Aristophanes:
Acharnians
[61-173]
455d457b;  [497-556]  460d-461c / Peace [601-692] 532d-534a / Lysistrata
583a-599a,c esp [486613] 589a-591a,
[1072-1321]
596d-599a,c  /  Ecclesiazusae [193-203] 617b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
6a-b; 15d-16a; BK IV, 144b-d; bk v, 175b-c; bk vi, 193b; 206b-d; bk vii,
239a-247c  passim;  bk  viii,  286b-287d;  bk ix, 289a-290b; 310d-311a 6
Thucydides:  Pelopofinesian  War, bk i, 353d; 360c-d; 368c-d; 371b-372d;
378a-380d; bk III, 418d-420c; 425a-428d; 430c; 432b-c; bk IV, 450d-452d;
457c-d;  461b-463a; 468a469b; 476a-477a; bk v, 486c-500c; 502d508a,c esp
504c-508a,c;  bk  vi, 529b-533a; bk viii, 568a-c; 572c-573a; 578b-579a 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  318c-319a  /  Critias, 485a-b / Laws, bk hi,
667c-668d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk ii, ch 6 [1265^18-27] 460c; CH 7
[1267^18-21] 462d-463a; bk hi, ch 9
[1280^35-^12] 478a-b; ch
13
[1284*38-^3]
482c; bk vii, ch 2
[1324*35-1325*15] 528b529a; ch 6 531b-d; ch 14
[i333*'io-i334''io]
538c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 4 [i359''33-i36o* 18] 600a-c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk xii [172-2 ii] 358b-359b 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 21a-27c / Numa
Pompilius,  55c-56a / Pericles 121a-141a,c / Nicias, 427a-428c / Aratus,
834d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 34d-35c / Histories, bk iv, 286c-287c 18
Augustiije:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7 515a-c 20 Aquinas : Sum7v.a
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, A 3 316a-318b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
xxi,  32a-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 121b-c; 159c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 36d-38a; bk iv, 276a-d 26 Shakespeare:
Ist  Henry  VI, act v, sc iv [94175] 30c-31b / 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc i
[1-74]  33b,d-34c  /  King John, act ii, sc i [416-560] 384a-385c / 2?id
Henry  IV, act iv, sc ii 489d491b / Henry V, act v, sc ii 563b-567a,c 30
Bacon: New Atlantis, 204d-205a 35 Locke: Ciiil Government, ch v, sect 45
34d-

[718b]
660  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5a to 5b 35a: ch xii, sect 145-148 58d-59b; ch xvi
65d-70c  passim;  ch  xix,  sect 211 73d-74a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
21b-25b;  part ii, 75a-b; 77b-78b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 354a-355a;
449b453a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2d-3b,  BK  ix-x,
58b,d-62b;  bk  x,  63d-64a; bk xxvi, 223c-224a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
325c-d;  355c  /  Political  Economy,  380a-b  /  Social Contract, bk i,
390a-c;  bk  ii,  403c-404a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 319b-c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4a-b;  83b-85a esp 84d-85a;95b-96a;103c-d;
119a-c; 150d-152c; 174d-175b; 378b-d; 402b-404b; 431d-432d; 433d-435a,c;
491d-492b;  495d-496b;  503d507c  esp  504d-506a; 535d-537a,c; 543a-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  48d-49c; 283d284a; 428a-d; 503a-c 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 452c-d; 454a-455b 43 Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d
43  Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [201-203] [223-225] 13b;
SECT 10 [296-298] 14a; [314-320] 14b; article ii, sect 2 [421435] 15b 43
Federalist:  number  4-8  35a-47a; number 9, 47c-49c; number ii 53b-56b;
number  15,  64c-65a;  number  16,  66c-68a;  number 22, 80d-81c; 83b-d;
number 24, 88d-89b; number 25, 89c-91b; number 34, llOa-lllb; number 41,
132d-133b;  number  42,  136b-138c;  number 43, 142d; 143b-d; number 44,
144a145c;   NUMBER  62,  190d-191a;  number  63,  191d-192a;  number  64
195b-198a;  number 75 222d-225a passim; number 80, 235b-236c; number 81,
240b-c;  number  83,  248b-c;  NUMBER 84, 254b-c 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  428b-433b  passim;  434a-436b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight,
part  hi,  par  321329  106c-108c; par 332-337 109a-110a; additions, 153
141d;  188  149b-c / Philosophy of History, part ii, 278c-279b; part hi,
297a-d;  299a-c;  part iv, 343b-c; 357c-358b; 359c360a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  292a-295a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii, 83d-86a; bk V,
204a-206c; 208d-209a; 232a-234a,c; bk viii, 307d-309c; bk ix, 344b-355c;
bk  xiii,  565a-b;  572b;  573d-574a; 582a; bk xv, 629b630a; epilogue i,
645a-646c;  649c-650b  5b.  The  government  of  dependencies:  colonial
government; the government of conquered peoples Old Testament: Joshua, 9
esp 9:18-27— (D) Josue, 9 esp 9:18-27 / / Kings, 9:20-23— (D) /// Kings,
9:20-23 / // Kings, 23:30-35; 24:12-16; 25:5-30— (D) IV Kings, 23:30-35;
24:12-16; 25:5-30 / // Chronicles, 8:7-8— (D) // Paralipomenon, 8 17-8

[719a]
Chapter  31: GOVERNMENT 5h to 5d Apocrypha: / Maccabees, 8:i-i^— (D) OT.
/  Machabees,  S:i--i:^  /  II  Afaccabees,  5:11 -(D) OT, // Machabees,
5:11-7:42  New Testament: Acfs, 16:19-40; 21-28 passim 7:42 5 Aeschylus:
Persians  (852-908)  24b-d 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata [565-586J 590b d 6
Herodotus:   History,  dk  i,  31d-32a;  35c-36a;  BK  HI,  109d-lllb  6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 353d; 368b-369a; ftK 11, 403c-404a;
bk  hi,  425a428d; bk v, 504c-507c; bk viii, 579d-580b 7 Plato: Laws, bk
vi, 698c-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 13 [i284*:56-^3] 482c; BK V,
CH 7 [1307^19-24] 509d; bk vh, CH 2
[1324*35-1325*15]
528b-529a; ch 14
[i333^io-i334'io] 538c-d
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [254-296] llOa-llla; bk VI
[845-853]
233b-234a; bk viii
[714-731]
278a-b  14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 47d-48c / LucuUus, 409b-410d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk ii, 39d-40c; bk xi, 104a-c; 106a-d; bk xii, 122a-c; bk xiii,
139c-140d;  bk xv, 162c-163a / Histories, bk i, 191d-192a; bk iv, 290a-d
18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; bk IV, CH 14-15 196b-197a;
bk  v,  ch  12  216d219b;  CH  17  221b-222a;  bk  xix, ch 21, 524c-d 2i
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  iii-viii  3c-14c;  ch  XX  30a-31c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii, 106d-107c; 108d109c; llOb-llla; 119a-c; 126d-127a;
131c;  conclusion,  280b-281a  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
hi, 131b,d-133b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 40d 32 Milton: Samson
Agonistes
[241-276] 344b345b
35  Locke:  Toleration,  13c-d;  14c-15a / Civil Government, CH IV, sect
22-23  30a-b;  ch  vii,  sect  85  43c-d;  ch xv, sect 172 65b-c; ch xvi
65d-70c  passim;  ch  xix,  sect 211 73d-74a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
24b-25a;  part  iv,  182b-183a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk x
61b,d68d;  BK  XI,  83c-84c; bk xv, 109b-c; llOa-d; BK XXI, 170c-171d 38
Rousseau:  Political Economy, 380a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv,
239a-279b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 14d-15c; 18a; 26a-c; 134a-b;
245d-246d;  420b-d;  518b519a;  522c-523a,c;  550b-551b; 608b,d; 624b-c;
632d-633a; 638a-639a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 65a-c; 216c-d; 285a-c;
505b-c  42  Kant  :  Science  ofRight,  413d  ;  454a-455a ; 456c457a 43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b passim 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article iv, sect 3 [544-550] 16b 43 Federalist: number 43, 140d-141a

[719b]
661  43  .Mill:  Liberty,  272a;  281d  282b  [in  ^]  /  Repre<cntative
Government,  339a  341a:  353r;  4nb412a;  427a  428a  pnssim; 433b-442d
44B()swill:  Johnson, 179c; 364c 365a; 370a; 511cd 46 Hk(;el: Philosophy
of  History, pari i, 242d243d; PART ni, 299a c 5c. The relation of local
to  national  government:  the  centralization  and  decentralization of
governmental  functions 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 391c392a
9  .\ristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv, cm 15 [i299''i5-i81 500b 14 Plutarch:
Theseus,  9a-d  23 Hobbes: leviathan, part ii, 120d-121a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk v, 30a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk 11, 403a-c;
bk  HI,  412a-b; 420d-421a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 318d-319a;
420b-d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14c; 578b-c 43 Constitution of the
U.S.:  article  i, sect 4 12b; article iv, sect 1-2 16a-b 43 Federalist:
number  i,  30d-31a;  number  t^,  33d-35a;  number 14, 61b-d; number 17
69a70d; number 28 96c-98b passim; number 31, 105b-c; NUMBER 32 105c-107b
passim;  number  34 109b-llld passim; nuviber 36 I14c117d passim; number
39,  126b-128b;  number  43, 141a-d; number 44, 144a-145c passim; NUMBER
45,  148b-150b; number 46 150b153b passim; number 84, 253d-254b 43 Mill:
Liberty,   322a-d   /  Representuthe  Government,  417c-424c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 290 97d; additions, 174 146d-147b 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 421c-d 5d. Confederation and federal
union:   the   division   of  jurisdiction  between  state  and  federal
governments  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, dk i, 365a371b 7 Plato:
Laws,  bk hi, 667c-670a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 9 [1280*34-^32]
478a-c 14 Plutarch: Philopoemen, 296a-b / Aratus, 834c-d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b, d60a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
420b-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 103c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
218c-219a: 577b-c 43 Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.:  lla-20d  esp  article VI [583-599] 16d 43 Federalist: number
1-30 29a-103c passim, esp number 10, 52b-c, number 14, 61b-c, number 15,
65c-d; number 31-34, 104c-llld; number 36, 115a-117b; number 37, 119b-

[720a]
662  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  The relation of governments to one another:
sovereign   princes  or  states  as  in  a  condition  of  anarchy.  5d.
Confederation  andfederal  union:  the  division of jurisdiction between
state  andfederal governments.^ 120d; NUMBER 39, 126b-128b; number 41-46
132a-153b esp number 46, 150b-c; number 51, 164a-165a passim; number 52,
167a-b;  number  59-61  182a-188d  passim; number 62, 189b-d; number 80,
235a;  number  81,  239c241a; number 82 242b-244a; number 84, 253d-254b;
number  85, 258d-259a,c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 427d-433b 46
Hegel:   Philosophy   of   History,  part  ii,  278c279b  6.  Historical
developments  in  government:  revolution  and  progress  Old Testament:
Exodus,  18:13-26 / / Samuel, 8— (D) / Kings, ^ / I Kings, 12:1-25— (Z))
///  Kings,  12:1-25  /  //  Chronicles,  10— (D) II Paralipomenon, 10 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  12b-14c; 23b-24b; bk III, 107c-108d; bk v,
164d-165a  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 352c-d; 353c-d;
366d-367a;  bk ii, 391b-392a; bk hi, 434c-438b passim; bk iv, 458d-459c;
463a465c;  BK  VI,  523b-525d;  bk  viii,  568d-569a; 575c-576c; 577b-d;
579c-583c; 585d-586b; 587a-589a; 590b-c 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi 663d-677a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1181^12-24]
436c / Politics, bk ii, ch 8 [i268^23]-ch 12
[1274^28] 464d'471d; bk hi, ch i4483a-484a;
CH  15  [1286^8-22]  484d-485a;  bk  v  502a-519d  passim;  bk vh, ch 10
[i329^40-''36]  533d-534b / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-4 i 553a-572a 12
AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect 14 254b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[851-853]  234a 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 9a-10a; 13a-14c / Lycurgus 32a-48d
/  Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a,c  / Solon 64b,d-77a,c / Poplicola, 80d-82a /
Poplicola-Solon,  86d-87b  /  Agis,  650b'656d  / Cleomenes, 659b-660d /
Tiberius  Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  / Caius Gracchus 681b,d689a,c / Caius
and   Tiberius   Gracchus-Agis   and   Cleomenes  689b,d-691a,c  /  Dion
781b,d802a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a; 3a-b; bk hi, 51b-c; bk IV,
72a-b;  bk  xh,  123b-c;  bk  xih,  126c-d; 132c-133a / Histories, bk i,
190b-c; BK II, 224d-225a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b-

[720b]
162d;  BK  V,  ch  12  216d-219b; ch 21-26 226a230a,c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  Q  104, A 3 305d-306d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  vi  [28-1  ii]  113d-114d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  iv,
275a-278d  26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus 351a-392a,c / Henry VIII 549a-585a,c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  94d-95b  32  Milton  : New Forcers of Conscience 68a-b / Lord
Gen.  Cromwell  69a-b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect 100112
47c-51b  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect i, div 5, 453a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  hi,  117b-121b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi,
9b-d;  BK  IV,  15c;  BK XI 68b,d-84d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-362a
passim  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 402b-403a; bk hi, 418c-d [fn 2] 39
Smith:  Wealth ofNations, bk hi, 165b-181a,c; BK V, 348a-352a 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and  Fall,  24b,d-34a,c  esp  24b,d-28b;  50b-51d  esp  51c-d;
153c-156a;  240b-255d;  521a-523a,c;  622d-623c  41  Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  71d-79d; 199c-202d esp 202a-c; 215c-220a,c esp 217a-b, 218c-219a;
403b-404d;   427b-428a  esp  428a;  452d-453a,c;  562b-566c;  574b-582b;
586c-589a  42 Kant: Science ofRight, 450d-451a; 451d-452a 43 Declaration
of   Independence:  la-3b  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d  43
Federalist:  number i, 29a-b; number 9 47a-49c passim; number 14, 62a-d;
number 18-20 71a-78b; number 25, 91b-d; number 37, 120d-121b; number 41,
133a-d;  NUMBER  52,  165d-167b; number 70, 211b-d; NUMBER 84, 252b-c 43
Mill:  Liberty, 267d-272a / Representative Government, 367b-c; 434a-436b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 176 147c-d / Philosophy of
History, intro, 174a175c; 198b-199c; 203b'206a,c; part i, 207d208c; PART
II,  263a-d;  275b-276a; part hi, 295d-296c; part iv, 316c-d; 328b-331d;
342a343a; 355d-357a 50 Marx: Capital, 355d-364a esp 356a-357a, 359a-c 50
MarX'Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 420b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i, lOa-b; bk vi, 238c-243d

[721a]
\CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  The  basic context of the problems discussed in
this  chapter,  see State; for the discussion of see Religion 3c(2); for
the  discussion  of divine government, see God 7c; World ic; and for the
discussion of government in relation to economic affairs, see Wealth 9d.
Other  considerations  of the issues concerning anarchy, see Liberty ib;
Tyranny  3;  War  and  Peace  i.  Other  discussions  of  the  notion of
sovereignty  in  its  various forms or meanings, see DemocSovereignty in
relation  to  federal  government, and for the idea of world government,
see  State loe-iof; War and Peace iid. Justice, liberty, and property in
relation  to government, see Justice la, 6-6e, g~gc, lo-ioe; Liberty id,
if,  ih;  Wealth 7a. The relation of the ideal form of government to the
ideal state, see State 2e, 6-6b. The abuses or corruption of government,
see   Law   7d;  Monarchy  4e(3)-4e(4);  Tyranny  i-ic.  The  issues  of
Imperialism  in  the  government  of  colonies  or  subject peoples, see
Democracy 7b; Liberty 6c; Monarchy 5-5b; Revolution 7; Slavery 6d; State
lob;  Tyranny  6.  The  analysis  of particular forms of government, see
Aristocracy  i-2e;  Constitution  i-3b,  5-5b;  Democracy 1-4C; Monarchy
i-ia(2), 4-4e(i), 4e(3)-4e(4); Oligarchy 1-2, 4-5; Tyranny i-5d; and for
the  discussion  of  mixed  forms of government, see Constitution 3a-3b;
Monarchy  ib-ib(2).  The  condition  of the ruled under diverse forms of
government,  see Citizen 2b; Liberty if; Slavery 6a-6b. The institutions
of  self-government,  such  as  representation,  elections,  voting, see
Aristocracy 6; Constitution g-gh; Democracy 5a-5b(4). The problem of the
relativity of the forms of government to the character and circumstances
of particular peoples, see Democracy 4d; Monarchy 4e(2); Tyranny 4b. The
general discussion of political revolution and progress, see Liberty 6b;
Progress  Matters  relevant to the legislative branch of government, see
Law  5d.  Matters  relevant  to  the  judicial branch of government, see
Justice  lod;  Law  5g;  Prudence  6b. Matters relevant to the executive
branch  of  government,  especially  problems  of  law  enforcement  and
administration, see Law 5a, 6a, 7e; Monarchy ib(3). Other discussions of
the  separation  of  powers  and  the system of checks and balances, see
Constitution  7b;  Democracy  5c;  Liberty  ig. Other discussions of the
relation  between the civil and military powers, see State 8d(i), pefi);
War and Peace lo-ioa. The problem of the economic support of government,
see  Wealth  9e-9e(2).  The  consideration  of  the  art  and science of
government,  see  Education  8d; Knowledge 8c; economics, see Philosophy
2c; Science 3a; State 8d; Wealth 9.

[721b]
Chapter 3 1 : GOVERNMENT 663

[722a]
664  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I. Plutarch. "Political Precepts," "Of the Three
Sorts  of  Government—Monarchy,  Democracy  and  Ohgarchy,"  in  Moralia
Aquinas.  On  the  Governance  of  Rulers Dante. Convivio {The Banquet),
fourth   treatise,   CH  4-5  .  On  World-Government  or  De  Monarchia
Machiavelli. The Discourses . Florentine History F. Bacon. "Of Faction,"
in Essays iMiLTON. Defence ofthe People of England Hobbes. Philosophical
Rudiments  Concerning  Government  and  Society,  ch  6-7,  10- 11 . The
Elements  ofLaw,  Natural  and Politic, part I, ch 19; PART II, ch I . A
Dialogue  Between  a  Philosopher  and  a  Student  ofthe Common Laws of
England  Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus {TheologicalPolitical
Treatise),  ch  16-19 . Tractatus Politicus {Political Treatise), ch 3-5
Hume.  A  Treatise  ofHuman Nature, bk hi, part ii, SECT Vll-X A. Smith.
Lectures  on  Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms Marx. A Criticism of the
Hegelian  Philosophy  of  Right  Dostoevsky. The Possessed II. PoLYBius.
Histories,  vol  i,  bk  vi  Cicero. De Republica {The Republic) John of
Salisbury.  The  Statesman'  s  Boo\  Marsilius  of Padua. Defensor Pads
FoRTESCUE.  Governance  of England Erasmus. The Education of a Christian
Prince  T. More. Utopia Calvin. Institutes of the Christian Religion, bk
iv,  CH  20  BoDiN.  The  Six  Boof^es of a Commonweale Bellarmine. 77!^
Treatise  on  Civil  Government  {De  Laicis)  Hooker.  Of  the  Laws of
Ecclesiastical  Polity  A.  Sidney.  Discourses  Concerning  Governmejit
Burlamaqui.  Principles  of  Natural  and Politic Law Vattel. The Law of
Nations,  bk  i,  ch  1-13  Voltaire.  Letters on the English, viii-ix .
"Government," in A Philosophical Dictionary J. Wilson. Wor\s, part i, ch
ii, v, x Bentham. A Fragment on Government, ch 2, 4-5

[722b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo\s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  \^ II. Works by authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the  publication of the works cited, consult the BibUography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  J.  Adams.  A  Defense  ofthe  Constitutions ofGovernment of the
United  States of America Jefferson. The Commonplace Boo\ . Notes on the
State  of  Virginia  Burke.  An  Appealfrom  the New to the Old Whigs W.
Humboldt.  The Sphere and Duties ofGovernment Paine. Rights of Man . The
Age  of Reason . Dissertation on First Principles of Government J. Mill.
An  Essay  on  Government  Gogol.  The  Government  Inspector . The Nose
Whewell.  The Elements of Morality, bk iv, ch 6; BK V, CH 7-9 Calhoun. A
Disquisition  on  Government  .  A  Discourse  on  the  Constitution and
Government   of   the  United  States  Dickens.  Little  Dorritt  LoTZE.
Microcosmos, bk viii, ch 5 J. H. Newman. A Letter to the Dul^e ofNorfol\
TuRGENEV.  Fathers  and  Sons  .  Virgin  Soil T. H. Huxley. Methods and
Results, ix T. H. Green. The Principles of Political Obligationy (a,f,g)
Spencer.  The  Man  Versus the State Maine. Popular Government Maitland.
Justice  and  Police  W.  Wilson.  Congressional  Government  Kropotkin.
Anarchism  Bosanquet.  The Philosophical Theory of the State Bryce. "The
Nature   of  Sovereignty,"  in  Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence
SANTAYanA.  Rcasoit  in Society, ch 3 Chesterton. The Napoleon ofNotting
Hill  . The Man Who Was Thursday France. Penguin Island Morley. Notes on
Politics  and History Pareto. The Mind and Society, vol iv, ch 12 Laski.
Authority  in the Modern State Steffens. Autobiography Sturzo. The Inner
Laws  of  Society  F.  G.  Wilson.  The  Eleinents of Modern Politics B.
Russell. Proposed Roads to Freedom, ch 5 . Power Maritain. Scholasticism
and  Politics,  ch iii-iv Simon. Nature and Functions of Authority A. J.
Carlyle.  Political  Liberty  Barker. Refectiofis on Government Ferrero.
The Principles of Power MacIver. The Web of Government

[723a]
Chapter  ^1.:  HABIT  INTRODUCTION  THE  familiar  word  "habit"  has  a
tremendous range of meaning. Some of its meanings in technical discourse
are   so  divergent  from  one  another—as  well  as  from  the  popular
understanding  of  the term— that it is difficult to fmd a common thread
of  derivation  whereby  to  pass  from  one  meaning to another. We can
eliminate  at  once the use of the word to designate apparel, as when we
speak  of  a  "riding  habit."  Yet  even  this sense contains a root of
meaning  which  cannot be dismissed. Augustine points out that "the term
'habit'  is derived from the verb *to have' " and Aristotle, considering
the meanings of 'to have,' includes the sense in which a man may be said
"to  have  a  coat  or tunic" along with the sense in which a man may be
said  to  have  a  habit—  "a ^ piece of knowledge or a virtue." Just as
clothes are something a person has or possesses in a manner more or less
fitting  to the body, so habits in the psychological sense are qualities
which  a  person  has or possesses, and they too can be judged for their
fitness.  This  understanding of habit is conveyed in the ancient remark
which  has  become  a  common expression— that "habit is second nature."
Habit is not original nature, but something added thereto as clothes are
added  to  the  body. But unlike clothes, which are added externally and
merely by contact, habits as second nature are nature itself transformed
or  developed.  In  the  words of an ancient poet, whom Aristotle quotes
with  approval,  "habit's  but long prac- . tice, and this becomes men's
nature  in  the  end."  j  Not  all,  as  we shall see, would grant that
practice  is  essential  to  habit.  Nevertheless  the  word  "practice"
suggests  one  notion  that is common to all theories of acquired habit,
namely, that habit is a retained effect— xht result of something done or
experienced. Within this common understanding, there are opposite views.
Accord665

[723b]
ing  to  one  view,  the  acquisition  of  habits  depends  on activity.
According to another, habits are modifications, passively, not acti\ely,
acThe word "habit" is also used in a sense diametrically opposite to the
meanings  so  far considered. It is the sense in which Aristotle, in the
History  of Animals, discusses the habits of animals, and differentiates
species  according  to  the  differences  in their habits. Here the word
"habit"  is  used to signify not an acquired pattern of behavior, but an
innate  predisposition  to act or react in a certain way. The difference
between  acquired  habits  and  "the  habits to which there is an innate
tendency,"  James  tells  us,  is  marked  by  the  fact that the latter
generally  "arc  called  The  opposition  between  these two meanings of
"habit" is clear. On the one hand, habits represent what, in the case of
living  things  at  least, is added by nurture to nature— the results of
experience,  training,  or activity. On the other hand, habits which are
identical  with  instincts belong to original nature itself— part of the
native endowment of the animal. Is there any common thread of meaning in
the  notions  of  acquired and innate habit which may explain the use of
the  word in such opposite senses.? The familiar statement that a person
does  what  he  is  in  the  habit  of doing indicates that a habit is a
tendency  to  a  particular  sort  of  behavior. Knowledge of a person's
habits  enables  us  to predict what he is likely to do in any situation
which  elicits  habitual  conduct  on  his  part.  So,  too, an animal's
behavior  in a particular situation may be predicted from a knowledge of
its  instincts. Instinct and habit—or innate and acquired habits—seem to
have  this  common  character, that they are tendencies to behavior of a
specific  or  determinate sort. They are definitely not random behavior.
In the one case, the

[724a]
666  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tendency  is  preformed, a part of the inherited
nature  of the organism. In the other, the tendency is somehow a product
of  experience  and learning. In neither case does "habit" refer to mere
capacity  for  action,  unformed and indeterminate, nor does it refer to
the  action,  but  rather  to  the tendency to act. The modifiability of
instincts  by  experience  indicates another and more dynamic connection
between  innate  and  acquired  habits.  WilHam James conceives innately
determined  behavior  as  if it were a plastic material out of which new
patterns  of  conduct  can  be formed. The process of animal learning he
thinks  can  be  generally  described as the replacement of instincts by
habits.  "Most  instincts,"  he  writes,  "are implanted for the sake of
giving rise to habits, and this purpose once accomplished, the instincts
themselves, as such, have no raison tfeire in the psychical economy, and
consequently  fade  away."  Some  years before the Russian physiologists
Bechterev   and   Pavlov  experimentally  studied  the  conditioning  of
reflexes,  James  described animal learning in terms of the substitution
of new for old responses to stimuli which had previously called forth an
instinctive  reaction,  or  in  terms  of  the attachment of instinctive
responses  to  new  stimuli.  "The  actions  we call instinctive," James
writes,  "all  conform to the general reflex type" and "are called forth
by  determinate  sensory  stimuli."  For  example,  a  predatory animal,
instinctively responsive to various perceptible signs of the whereabouts
of its prey, may learn to hunt for its food in a particular locality, at
a  particular  time,  and  in  a particular way. Or, to take the example
James  gives,  "if  a  child,  in  his first attempts to pat a dog, gets
snapped  at  or bitten, so that the impulse of fear is strongly aroused,
it  may  be that for years to come no dog will excite in him the impulse
to  fondle again." Similarly, an animal which has no instinctive fear of
man  may  acquire an habitual tendency to flee at man's approach, as the
result  of experiences in which the appearance of man is associated with
instinctively  recognized  signs  of  danger.  In  the classification of
animals,  from Aristotle on, the instincts peculiar to each species have
been used in their differentiation. In addition, the degree to which the
instincts of an animal

[724b]
are  either relatively inflexible at one extreme or easily modifiable at
the  other  has been thought to indicate that animal's rank in the scale
of  intelligence.  The higher animals seem to have a greater capacity to
form habits and to be capable, therefore, of modifying their instinctive
patterns  of behavior as the result of experience. In consequence, their
behavior  is  both  more adaptive and more variable than that of animals
which  always  follow the lines of action laid down by instinct. Species
whose  instincts  are  largely  unmodifiable  are at a disadvantage in a
changing  environment  or in one to which they are not innately adapted.
In  the struggle for existence, Darwin observes, it is the organism that
"varies  ever  so little, either in habits or structure" which "gains an
advantage  over  some  other inhabitant of the same country." Though for
the  most  part  instincts  seem  to  be  directed  toward  the animal's
survival,  inteUigence, or the power of modifying instincts by learning,
may  sometimes  be  needed to save the animal from his own instincts. If
the  lower  animals are most dependent on their instincts and least able
to modify them, that would seem to indicate a kind of opposition between
instinct  and  intelligence.  Darwin  quotes  Cuvier  to the effect that
"instinct  and intelhgence stand in an inverse ratio to each other," but
he himself does not wholly accept this view. He thinks that the behavior
of beavers, for example, or of certain classes of insects, shows that "a
high   degree  of  intelUgence  is  certainly  compatible  with  complex
instincts."  Yet  he  admits  that "it is not improbable that there is a
certain   amount   of  interference  between  the  development  of  free
inteUigence and of instinct." On this subject of instinct in relation to
inteUigence  or  reason,  James seems to take a less equivocal position.
According  to  him, "man possesses all the impulses that [animals] have,
and  a  great many more besides." After enumerating what he considers to
be  the  instinctive  tendencies  of  the human species, he concludes by
saying  that  "no  other  mammal, not even the monkey, shows so large an
array."   But   since  James  also  thinks  that  man  has  the  keenest
intelligence  and  may  even  be  the  only  reasoning animal, he cannot
believe  that  there  is  any  "material antagonism between instinct and
reason." On the

[725a]
Chaptir  32:  HABIT  contrary,  a  high  development of the faculties ol
memory,  of  associating ideas, and of making inferences implies not the
absence of instinct, but the modifiability of instinct by experience and
learning.  "Though the animal richest in reason might be also the animal
richest in instinctive impulses too," James writes, "he would never seem
the  fatal  automaton  which  a merely instinctive animal would be." The
opposite position is taken by those who, like Cuvier, hold that the more
adequate an animal's instinctive equipment is for its survival, the less
it needs free intelligence for adaptive purposes, and the less important
is the role of learning and habit formation. Some writers, like Aquinas,
go  further than this and maintain that in the case of man, the power of
reason  as  an  instrument  of  learning  and of solving life's problems
supplants  instinct  almost  entirely,  or  needs  to be supplemented by
instinctive  impulses  of  an  extremely  rudimentary  sort—hardly  more
complex than simple reflexes. What other animals do by instinct man does
by  reason.  "Brute animals," Aquinas writes, "do not act at the command
of  reason,"  but "if they are left to themselves, such animals act from
natural  instinct."  Since  in  his opinion habits can be formed only by
acts  which involve reason as a factor, he does not think that, strictly
speaking,  habits are to be found in brutes. But, he adds, to the extent
that  man's reason may influence brutes "by a sort of conditioning to do
things  in this or that way, so in this sense to a certain extent we can
admit  the  existence  of  habits in brute animals." The modification of
instincts  in the course of individual Ufe raises a question about their
modifiability  from  generation  to generation. The question has obvious
significance  for the theory of evolution. It is thought by some that an
animal's  instincts  represent  the  past  experience  ot the race. In a
passage  quoted  by  James, Herbert Spencer, for example, maintains that
"reflex  actions  and  instincts  ....  result  from the registration of
experience  continued for numberless generations." Freud appears to hold
much  the  same  opinion.  "All  organic instincts are conservative," he
writes.  They  are  "historically  acquired,  and  are  directed towards
regressions, towards reinstate-

[725b]
667 nunt ol something earlier." Indeed, he claims lliat tlie insimcls of
living  tilings  revcri  back beyond ancestral history to the inorganic.
They  go back to "an ancient starting point, which the living being left
long  ago."  They  arc  an  "imprint"  left  upon the development of the
organism  by  "the  evolution of our earth and its relation to the sun."
James,  on  the other hand, claims that there is "perhaps not one single
unequivocal  item of positive proof" in favor of the view thai "adaptive
changes  are  inherited."  He  thinks  the variability of instincts from
generation  to generation must be accounted for by some other means than
the  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics,  according to which the
habits   acquired  by  earlier  generations  gradually  become,  through
hereditary  transmission,  the innate habits of later genThe question of
their  origin  aside, what is the structure of instincts? In the chapter
on  Emotion,  where  this  matter is considered, instinctive behavior is
described  as  having  three  components.  It involves, first, an innate
ability  to  recognize certain objects; second, an emotional reaction to
them  which includes an impulse to act in a certain way; and, third, the
ability  to  execute  that  impulse  without  benefit of learning. James
covers  two  of  these  three points when he defines an instinct as "the
faculty  of  acting  in  such  a way as to produce certain ends, without
foresight   of   the   ends,  and  without  previous  education  in  the
performance";  and he touches on the remaining one when he declares that
"instinctive  reactions  and  emotional  expressions shade imperceptibly
into  each  other. Every object that excites an instinct," he goes on to
say, "excites an emotion as well," but emotions "fall short of instincts
in  that  the emotional reaction usually terminates in the subject's own
body,  whilst  the  instinctive  reaction is apt to go further and enter
into practical relations with the exciting object." In the discussion of
instincts  from  Aristotle  to  Freud, the emphasis on one or another of
these  components has varied from time to time. Mediaeval psychologists,
if  we  take Aquinas as an example, seem to stress the cognitive aspect.
He  speaks of the sheep running away "when it sees the wolf, not because
of  its  color  or  shape,  but  as a natural enemy." The point which he
thinks

[726a]
668  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  notable here is not the fact that the sheep runs
away,  but  rather  the  fact  that  without  any previous experience of
wolves,  the  sheep recognizes the wolf as dangerous. "The sheep, seeing
the  wolf,  judges it a thing to be shunned . . . not from deliberation,
but  from  natural instinct." This instinctive power of recognizing what
is  to  the  animal's  advantage  or peril Aquinas calls "the estimative
power"  and  assigns  it,  along  with  memory  and  imagination, to the
sensitive  faculty.  Later  writers  stress  the  emotional and conative
aspects  of  instinct—feeling and impulse. James, for example, indicates
this  emphasis  when  he  says  that "every instinct is an impulse"; and
Freud  makes  desire  central  rather  than  perception  or  action.  An
instinct,  he says, may be described as a stimulus, but it would be more
exact  to  speak  of "a stimulus of instinctual origin" as a "need." The
instincts  are  the basic cravings or needs, and these instinctual needs
are  the  primary unconscious determinants of behavior and thought. What
Freud  calls  "instinctual needs" seem to be the counterpart of what, in
an  earlier  phase of the tradition, are called "natural desires." These
two  notions  are  far  from being strictly interchangeable, but they do
have  a  certain  similarity in their reference to desires which are not
conscious  or  acquired  through  experience.  This  matter  is  further
discussed  in the chapter on Desire. If we turn now to the consideration
of  habit  as  something  acquired  by the individual, we find two major
issues. The first of these has already been mentioned in connection with
the  conception  of  habit  as  a  retained effect. According to William
James, the capacity for habit formation is a general property of nature,
found  in  inanimate matter as well as in living things. "The moment one
tries  to  define  what  habit  is,"  he  writes,  "one  is  led  to the
fundamental  properties  of  matter." He regards the laws of nature, for
example,  as  "nothing  but  the  immutable  habits  which the different
elementary  sorts  of  matter follow in their actions and reactions upon
each  other. In the organic world, however, the habits are more variable
than this." James attributes this universal capacity for habit formation
to what he calls the "plasticity"

[726b]
of  matter, which consists in "the possession of a structure weak enough
to  yield  to  an influence, but strong enough not to yield all at once.
Each  relatively  stable  phase  of  equilibrium  in such a structure is
marked by what we may call a new set of habits." He cites as examples of
habit  formation in inorganic matter such things as the magnetizing ofan
iron  bar,  the  setting  of plaster, scratches on a polished surface or
creases  in  a  piece of cloth. The matter in each of these cases is not
only  plastic and yielding, but retentive through its inertia. "When the
structure  has  yielded,"  he  writes,  "the  same  inertia  becomes the
condition  of its comparative permanence in the new form, and of the new
habits  the  body then manifests." The habits of living things or of the
human  mind are to be regarded only as special cases of nature's general
plasticity  and  retentiveness.  James  does  not  fail  to  observe the
difference  between  the  magnetized  bar, the scratched surface, or the
creased  cloth, and the habits of a trained animal or a skilled workman.
The  latter  are  acquired  by  activity—  by  practicing  the  same act
repeatedly.  Furthermore,  they  are not merely passive relics of a past
impression,  but  are  themselves  tendencies to action. They erupt into
action almost spontaneously when the occasion for performance arises. It
may  be  questioned  whether the word "habit" should be used so broadly.
Unhke  James, most writers restrict its apphcation to living things, and
even  there they limit habit formation to the sphere of learning. If the
capacity  to learn from experience is not a property of plant life, then
plants  cannot  form  habits. The same may be said of certain species of
animals  whose  activity  is entirely and inflexibly instinctive. Habits
are  possessed  only  by  those  organisms—animals  or men —whose future
conduct  can  be  determined  by their own past behavior. Aquinas, as we
have  seen,  goes  further  than  this,  and limits habit formation in a
strict  sense  to man alone. This leads at once to the second issue. For
those  who believe that man is not specifically different from all other
animals,  man's  habits  and  his  habit  formation  require  no special
distinction  or analysis. They hold that human intelligence differs from
animal  intelligence only in degree, not in kind. No other factors, they
think, are present in human learn-

[727a]
Chapter  ing  than  those which operate when animals somehow profit from
experience or acquire new modes of behavior. In the great books there is
I  to be found, however, a very special theory of habit which is part of
the  doctrine  that man is specifically different from all other animals
in  that  he  alone is rational and has free will. The issue about man's
nature  is  discussed  in other chapters (Animal, Evolution, Man, Mind).
Here  we  must examine the consequences for the theory of habit of these
opposing views. Do animals and men form habits in the same sense of that
term P The use of the word is not at stake, for "habit" may be used in a
different sense for the acquired dispositions of animals. Those who hold
that  brute  animals  and  men  do  not  have  habits  in the same sense
acknowledge  that  men may have, in addition to their specifically human
habits, the sort of modified instincts or conditioned reflexes which are
typical  of  animal  habit formation. Furthermore, it is recognized that
human and animal habits are alike in certain respects. Both are acquired
by  activity  and both are tendencies to activity of a determinate sort.
The  question,  therefore,  is simply this: Does one conception of habit
apply  to  men  and  animals,  or  does  human  nature require a special
conception  applicable  to  man  alone  ?  To  clarify this issue, it is
necessary  to summarize the analysis of human habits which Aristotle and
Aquinas develop more fully than other writers, even than those who share
their  view  of  the  rationahty  and freedom of man. That Aristotle and
Aquinas  should  be  the  authors of an elaborate theory of human habits
becomes  intelligible  in  terms  of two facts. In the first place, they
consider  habit  in  the  context of moral theory. For them the virtues,
moral  or  intellectual, are habits, and so necessarily are the opposite
vices.  Virtues  are  good habits, vices bad habits; hence, good or bad,
human  habits  must  be so formed and constituted that they can have the
moral  quality  connoted by virtue or vice. Since virtue is praiseworthy
and vice blameworthy only if their possessor is responsible, human habit
is  conceived  as  arising from freely chosen acts. In the second place,
their understanding of habit is affected by their psychological doctrine

[727b]
32:  HABIT  669  of  faculties,  and especially by their analysis of the
powers and activities which they think belong peculiarly to man. This in
turn  gives a metaphysical meaning to habit, for they treat human powers
and  human  acts  as  special  cases  of potentiality and actualization.
Aquinas  bases much of his discussion of habii on Aristotle's definition
of  it as "a disposition whereby that which is disposed is disposed well
or  ill,  and this, either in regard to itself or in regard to another."
In  calling  a  habit  a dis[)osition, Aristotle goes on to say that all
"dispositions  are  not  necessarily habits," for while dispositions are
unstable  or ephemeral, habits "are permanent" or at least "difficult to
alter."  For  a disposition to be a habit, certain other conditions must
be  present,  according  to  Aquinas.  "That which is disposed should be
distinct  from  that  to  which  it  is  disposed," he writes, and hence
"should be related to it as potentiality is to act." If there is a being
which  lacks  all  potentiality,  he points out, "we can find no room in
such  a  thing  for habit ... as is clearly the case in God." It is also
necessary  that  "that  which is in a state of potentiality in regard to
something  else  be  capable  of  determination  in  several ways and to
various  things." If there were a potentiality which could be actualized
in one way and one way only, then such a power of operation could not be
determined  by habits. Some of man's powers seem to be of this sort. His
faculty  of  sensation,  for example, functions perfectly when the sense
organs  have  normally matured. A man does not learn to see colors or to
hear  tones,  and  so  the simple use of his senses—apart from aesthetic
perceptions and trained discriminations—does not lead to sensory habits.
"The  exterior  apprehensive  powers,  as sight, hearing, and the like,"
Aquinas  maintains,  "are  not  susceptive of habits but are ordained to
their  fixed  acts,  according  to  the disposition of their nature." In
contrast,  man's  faculty  of  thinking  and  knowing can be improved or
perfected by activity and exercise. The words "improved" and "perfected"
are  misleading  if  they  are  thought to exclude bad habits, for a bad
habit  is  no  less  a  habit  than a good one. fhe definition of habit,
Aquinas  points  out,  includes  dispositions which "dispose the subject
well or

[728a]
670  THE GREAT IDEAS ill to its form or to its operation." Hence when we
say  that  a  power  of  operation is "improved" or "perfected" by being
exercised, we must mean only that after a number of particular acts, the
individual  has a more determinate csipacity for definite operation than
he  had  before.  A  man may have at birth the mere capacity for knowing
grammar  or geometry, but after he has learned these subjects he has the
habit of such knowledge. This, according to Aristotle and Aquinas, means
that  his  original  capacity  has been rendered more determinate in its
activity. It would be so even if he had learned errors, that is, even if
the  intellectual  habits  he  had  formed disposed his mind in a manner
which would be called "ill" rather than "well." The difference between a
man who has learned grammar and one who has not is a difference in their
capacity  for a certain intellectual performance, a difference resulting
from  the  intellectual  work  which  has  been  done by the man who has
learned  grammar.  That difference is an intellectual habit. The man who
has  not  learned  grammar has the same undeveloped capacity for knowing
grammar  with which he was born. The man who has learned grammar has had
his  native capacity for grammatical knowledge developed. That developed
capacity  is a habit of knowledge or skill which manifests itself in the
way  in  which  he  writes  and speaks. But even when he is not actually
exercising  his  grammatical  skill,  the  fact  that he has formed this
particular  habit  means  that  he  will  be able, whenever the occasion
arises,  to  do  correctly with speed and facility what the man who does
not  have  the habit cannot do readily or easily if he can do it at all.
It may be helpful to illustrate the same points by reference to a bodily
habit,  such  as a gymnastic or athletic skill which, being an art, is a
habit  not  of body alone, but of mind as well. If two men are born with
normal  bodies  equally  capable of certain muscular coordinations, they
stand  in  the same relation to performing on the tennis court. Both are
equally  able  to  learn  the  game. But when one of them has learned to
play,  his  acquired  skill  consists  in  the  trained capacity for the
required acts or motions. The other man may be able to perform all these
acts or go through all these motions, but not with the same facility and
grace, or as pleasantly, as

[728b]
the man whose mastery of the game Hes in a habit formed by much practice
in  doing what is required. As the habit gradually grows, awkwardness is
overcome,  speed increases, and pleasure in performance replaces pain or
difficulty.  Clearly,  then,  the  habit  exists  even when it is not in
operation.  It may even develop during periods of inactivity. As William
James  remarks,  there  is a sense in which "we learn to swim during the
winter and to skate during the summer" when we are not actually engaging
in  these  sports.  This  would seem to be inconsistent with the general
insight,  common  to  all  observers,  that  habits  are strengthened by
exercise  and  weakened  or  broken  by  disuse or by the performance of
contrary   acts.   But  James  explains  that  his  point,  stated  less
paradoxically,  means  only  that  during periods of rest the effects of
prior activity seem to consolidate and build up a habit. The dynamism of
habit  formation and habitual activity is summarized, in the language of
Aristotle  and Aquinas, by the statement that "habit is a kind of medium
between  mere  power  and  mere  act." On the one hand, a habit is Uke a
power or capacity, for though it is an improvement on native ability, it
is  still  only an ability to perform certain acts; it is not the actual
performance  of  them.  On  the  other  hand, habit is like operation or
activity, for it represents an actualization or development of capacity,
even  as a particular operation is an actualization of the power to act.
That  is  why  habit  is sometimes called a second grade of potentiality
(compared  to  natural capacity as first potentiality) and also "a first
grade  of  actuality" (compared to operation as complete act). According
to  the theory of specifically human habits, habits are situated only in
man's  powers  of reason and will. Habits are formed in the other powers
only  to the extent that they are subject to direction by his reason and
will.  Specifically  human  habits  can  be  formed only in that area of
activity in which men are free to act or not to act; and, when they act,
free  to  act  this  way  or that. Habit, the product of freedom, is not
thought of as abolishing freedom. However difficult it may be to exert a
free choice against a strong habit, even the strongest

[729a]
habit  is  not conceived as unbreakable; and if it is breakable, it must
permit  action  contrary to itself. Habitual behavior only seems to lack
freedom  because  a  man does habitually, without conscious attention to
details, what he would be forced to do by conscious choice at every step
if  he  lacked  the  habit. In the theory under consideration habits arc
classified  according to the faculty which they determine or perfect, on
the  ground  that  "every  power  which may be variously directed to act
needs  a  habit  whereby  it  is well disposed to its act." Consequently
there  are  intellectual  habits, or habits of thinking and knowing; and
appetitive  habits,  or  habits of desire which involve the emotions and
the  will, and usually entail specific types of conduct. Within a single
faculty,  such  as  the  intellect, habits are further differentiated by
reference  to  their objects or to the end to which their characteristic
operation  is directed. For example, the habit of knowing which consists
in a science like geometry and the habit of artistic performance such as
skill  in  grammar  both  belong to the intellect, but they are distinct
habits  according  to  their  objects or ends. All of these distinctions
have  moral  as  well  as  psychological  significance. They are used in
formulating  the  criteria  o{  good  Sind  ^a^  habits  which  are more
appropriately  discussed in the chapter on Virtue and Vice. But here one
further  psychological  distinction  deserves  comment.  Some  of  man's
acquired  habits  are  regarded as natural in a special sense—not in the
sense  in  which  instincts are called "natural" or "innate" habits. The
distinction is drawn from the supposition that certain habits develop in
all  men  because,  since  human  nature  is  the same for all, men will
inevitably  form  these  habits  if they act at all. This word "natural"
here applied to a habit simply means that it is common to all having the
same nature. For example, the understanding of the law of contradiction—
that  the  same thing cannot be affirmed and denied at the same time—and
other  simple  axioms of theoretic knowledge are said to be possessed by
the  human  mind as a matter of natural habit. If a man thinks at all he
will  come  to know these truths. "It is owing to the very nature of the
intellectual  soul," Aquinas writes, "that man, having once grasped what
is

[729b]
Chapter  32:  HABIT  671  a  whole  and  what  is a part, should at once
perceive  that  every whole is larger than its part." The sense in which
Aquinas  says  that  "M^-  understanding  offirst principles is called a
natural  habit"  applies to the first principles of the practical reason
as  well  as  to  the  axioms of theoretic knowledge. Just as no man who
makes  theoretic  judgments  about the true and the false can be, in his
opinion,  without  habitual knowledge of the principle of contradiction,
.so  he  thinks no man who makes practical judgments about good and evil
can  be  without  habitual knowledge of the natural moral law, the first
principle  of  which  is that the good is to be sought and evil avoided.
"Since  the  precepts  of  the  natural  law are sometimes considered by
reason  actually,"  Aquinas  writes,  "while  sometimes  they are in the
reason  only  habitually,  in  this  way the natural law may be called a
habIn  a  different  phase  of  the  tradition  Hume  regards  it  as an
inevitable tendency of the human mind to interpret any repeated sequence
of  events  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect. If one thing has preceded
another  a  certain  number of times in our experience, we are likely to
infer  that  if  the first occurs, the second will follow. The principle
which  determines  us "to form such a conclusion" is, Hume says, "Custom
or  Habit."  All  our inferences from experience are "effects of custom,
not of reasoning" ; and since the habit of inferring a future connection
between  things which have been customarily conjoined in the past is, in
his  opinion,  universally present in human nature, Hume refers to it as
"a  species of natural instinct which no reasoning or process of thought
and  understanding  is  able  either to produce or prevent." Even Kant's
synthetic  judgments  a  priori  have  a certain similarity to the thing
called  "natural  habit."  They  comprise  judgments  the mind will make
because  of  its  own  nature  or,  in  Kant's terms, its transcendental
structure.  Though  a  priori, the judgment itself is not innate, for it
arises only when actual experience provides its subject matter. So, too,
the  natural  habit of first principles, of which Aquinas speaks, is not
innate, but a result of experience. There is still one other traditional
meaning of the phrase "natural habit." It occurs in

[730a]
672  THE  GREAT IDEAS Christian theology. Habits are there distinguished
according  as  they  are  acquired by man's own efforts or are a gift of
God's  grace,  which  adds  to  or elevates human nature. The former are
natural,  the  latter supernatural. In the sphere of supernatural habits
the  theologian makes a distinction between grace itself and the special
habits which accompany grace. Aquinas, for example, writes that "just as
the  natural  light  of  reason is something different from the acquired
virtues,  which are ordained to this natural light, so also the light of
grace,  which  is  a  participation  of  the divine nature, is something
different  from  the  infused  virtues  which  are  derived from and are
ordained  to  this  light."  These  "infused  virtues," like the natural
virtues,  are  good  habits—principles of operation, determining acts of
thought  or desire. They are either the specifically theological virtues
of  faith,  hope,  and  charity, or the supernatural counterparts of the
acquired  intellectual  and  moral  virtues— the habits which are called
"the  infused  virtues"  and  "the moral and intellectual gifts." Grace,
taken  in  itself  rather  than in its consequences, is not an operative
habit,  that  is,  it  is  not  a  habit  of  performing  certain  acts.
Nevertheless,  regarded  as something added to and perfecting nature, it
is  considered  under  the  aspect  of  habit.  But rather than "a habit
whereby  power  is  inclined to an act," Aquinas includes it among those
habits  by  which  "the nature is well or ill disposed to something, and
chiefly  when  such  a disposition has become a sort of nature." Through
the habit of grace, man's nature is elevated by becoming "a partaker ...
of  the  divine nature." To distinguish this kind of habit from those in
the  operative  order,  it  is  sometimes called an "entitative habit"—a
habit  of  the  very  being  of man's personality. On the purely natural
plane,  health  may  be  thought  of in the same way as a habit which is
entitative  rather than operative. It is a habit not of thought, desire,
or  conduct, but of man's physical being. The word "custom" is sometimes
a synonym for "habit" and sometimes a variant with special connotations.
What  a  man  does  habitually is customary for him to do. So far as the
single individual is concerned, there seems to be no

[730b]
difference  between habit and custom. But we usually think of customs in
terms of the group or community rather than the individual. As indicated
in  the  chapter  on  Custom  and  Convention,  the  prevailing modes of
behavior  in  a  society  and  its widely shared beUefs represent common
habits  of thought and action on the part of its members. Apart from the
habits  of  individuals social customs have no existence whatsoever. But
social  customs  and  individual  habits cannot be equated because, with
respect  to  any  customary  practice  or  opinion,  there  may  be non-
conforming  individuals  —men  of  divergent  habit.  The  prevalent  or
predominant  customs  are the habits of the majority. No society endures
for  long or functions peacefully unless common habits generate the ties
of custom. To perpetuate itself, the state necessarily attempts to mould
the  habits  of  each growing generation—by every means of education, by
tradition,  by  law. So important is the stability of custom in the life
of  society,  according  to  Montaigne,  that  it is "very unjust ... to
subject  pubhc  and established customs and institutions to the weakness
and  instabihty  of  a private and particular fancy." He doubts "whether
any  so  manifest  benefit  can  accrue  from  the  alteration  of a law
received,  let  it be what it will, as there is danger and inconvenience
in  altering  it."  His  extreme caution with regard to changing the law
comes  from  a  preference for the stability of settled customs and from
the  recognition  that  "government  is  a structure composed of diverse
parts and members joined and united together, with so strict connection,
that  it  is  impossible  to stir so much as one brick or stone, but the
whole  body will be sensible of it." Without habits of action, at least,
neither  the  individual nor society can avoid chaos. Habits bind day to
day  in  a  continuity  which would be lost if the recurring problems of
conduct  or  thought had to be solved anew each time they arose. Without
habits  Ufe  would become unbearably burdensome; it would bog down under
the  weight  of making decisions. Without habits men could not live with
themselves,  much  less  with  one another. Habits are, as William James
remarks, "the fly-wheel of society."

[731a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1. Diverse conceptions of habit : as second nature,
perieclion  of  jx)uer,  retained  modiPcation  ol  matter  la. Habit in
relation  to  potency and act lb. Habit in relation to the plasticity of
matter  2. The kinds of habit: the distinction of habit from disposition
and  other  qualities  2a, Differentiation of habits according to origin
and  function:  innate and acquired, entitativc and operative habits 2b.
Differentiation of habits according to the capacity habituated or to the
object  of  the  habit's  activity  3. The instincts or innate habits of
animals  and men 3^. Instinctual needs or drives 3^. The innate sense of
the  beneficial  and  harmful:  the  estimative  power  3r.  Instinct in
relation  to  reason  3^. The instinctive basis of habit -formation: the
modification  of  instincts  and reflexes through experience or learning
3^.  The  genesis,  transmission,  and  modification of instincts in the
course  of  generations  4.  Habit  formation  4^.  The causes of habit:
practice,  repetition, teaching, and the law 4^. The growth and decay of
habits:  ways  of  strengthening  and breaking habits 5. The analysis of
specifically human habits 5^. Habits of body: manual arts and the skills
of  play  5^.  Habits  of  appetite  and will: the moral virtues as good
habits  5^.  The natural habits of reason: innate predispositions of the
mind  5^.  The  acquired  habits  of mind: the intellectual virtues 5<?.
Supernatural  habits  (i) Grace as an entitative habit of the person (2)
The  infused  virtues  and  the  supernatural  gifts (3) The theological
virtues  6.  The  force  of  habit  in  human  life 6a. The automatic or
unconscious  functioning  of habits 6b. The contribution of habit to the
perfection  of  character  and  mind 6c. Habit and freedom 7. The social
significance of habit: habit in relation to law

[731b]
OiAi'TiiR 32: HABIT 673 074 ^>75 676 677 678 679 680 681

[732a]
674 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage cited. 1. Diverse
conceptions  of  habit:  as second nature, perfection of power, retained
modification  of  matter  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk hi, 330a 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8
[8^26-9^13]
13d-14a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246^10-248^ 6] 329c-330d / Metaphysics,
bk  v,  ch  20  544a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  5 [417^21-418^6] 647d648d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[1103^14-^2]
348b,d-349a; bk vii, ch 10
[1152^28-33]
403b / Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[1332*39-^10]
537a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1370*5-8]
613b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10 55c-d / Christian
Doctrine, bk i, CH24, 63Od-63 la 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
18,  A  2,  REP  2  105c-106b;  q  87,  a  2 466c-467b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49  la-6a;  q  94, a i 221a-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 489c-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc iv
[160170] 56b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  93  190a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
XXXIII, sect 6 249a-b

[732b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets, are given in cerBible References : The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div ^6y 464d 43 Mill: Liberty, 269c-d
46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 151 57a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  119b-d  53  James  :  Psychology, 68a-83b esp 68a-69b, 73b74a,
78b-79a  la.  Habit in relation to potency and act 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk vii, ch 3
[246*10248*8]
329c-330d; bk viii, ch 4
[255*30-
^23]  340a-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix, ch 1-2 570b,d-572a; ch 5 573a-c /
Soul, bk ii, ch i
[412*22-28] 642b; CH 5 [417*21-418*6] 647d648d; bk
hi, ch 4
[429^5-23] 661d-662a
/  Sense and the Sensible, ch 4 [441^16-24] 679b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
ii, ch i
[ii03*i4-**2]
348b,d-349a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 14, a I, REP I
75d-76c;  q  18,  a 2, rep 2 105c-106b Q 79, AA 6-7 419b-421c; a 10, ans
423d-424d  A  12  425c-426b;  q  87, a 2, ans 466c-467b q 89, A 6, REP 3
478b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 49-56 la-35a passim;
q 71, a 4, ans and rep 3 108b-109a; q 94, a i, rep i 221a-d

[733a]
1^  to 3a Chapter 32: HABIT 1 lb. Habit in relation to the plasticity of
matter  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i n, y 50, A I, ANs 6a-7b; a
6,  ans  and  rep  i  lla-12a  53  ]AMES .Psychology, 68a-71a; 423a-424a
passim; 429a-430a 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 651d652c t 2.
The  kinds of habit: the distinction of habit from disposition and other
qualities 8 Aristotle: Categories, en 8
[8''26-(fi^] 13d14a; CH 15 21c-d / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246*
10-248*6]  329c-330d'/  Metaphysics, kk i, CH I [981^2-5] 499d; bk v, ch
19-20  543d544a;  bk  ix,  ch  1-2 570b,d-572a; ch 5 573a-c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[1103*14-^2]
348b,d-349a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, AA 1-3 lb-5a;
q  54  22d-25d;  q  71,  a  4, ans and REP 3 108b-109a; q 74, a 4, rep 3
131a-d;  part III, Q 7, a 13, rep 2 755c-756c; q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b
2a.  Differentiation  of habits according to origin and function: innate
and  acquired, entitative and operative habits 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk  ix, ch 5 [1047^3134] 573a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
49,  A  2,  ANS 2b-4a; a 3, ans and rep 2 4b-5a; q 50, AA 1-2 6a-8a; a 6
lla-12a;  q  51  12a-15d;  Q 54, A I, ans 22d-23d; a 2, ans 23d-24c; a 3
24c-25b;  q  55,  a 2 27a-d; q 82, a i 168a-d; Q no, AA 3-4 350a-351d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54a;  66c-d;  68b  28  Harvey:  On Animal
Generation,  428a-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect ix, div 83-85
487c-488c  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 303d-304a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
459b-461c  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  68b-69c  esp 69a; 119a-d /
Descent of Man, 304b,d
[fn 5];
310b   53   James:  Psychology,  68a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,
591d-592b; 594d-595b / War and Death, 758a- 759c 2b. DiflFerentiation of
habits  according  to  the  capacity  habituated or to the object of the
habit's  activity  7  Plato: Theaetetus, 518a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
vii, ch 3
[246*10248*6] 329c-330d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102*261103*10] 347d-348d; bk
vi, ch 12 [1144*1-11] 393c-d / Politics, bk vii, ch 14
[13^3*16-36]
538a-b;  ch  15  [1334^8-28]  539b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 50 6a-12a; q 54, aa 1-2 22d-24c; a 3, rep 1,3 24c-25b; a 4, ans
25b-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  A  5,  ans  492b-493d 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 333a-b

[733b]
675  3.  The  instincts  or  innate habits of animals and men 7 I'l aio:
Republic, hk ii, 320b c 8 Akimoti.i: : Categories, cm 8
[(;»r^
28]  14b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix, cm 5 [1047''^! ^4] 573a 9 Aristotle :
History of Animals, bk i, <m i
[487*1
1 488b2(>] 7d 9d; bk viii, cm r 114b.d115b csp [588*'23-589*io] 115b; en
12  \^i)h^2o2SI  122d  / Politics, bk vii, cm 13 [i3^2"59 *'io] 537ab 10
(iai.in: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12. I73a c 12 I AcRi/nvs: Nature of
Things,  bk  hi  [741-747J 39c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
18,  A  3,  ans  106b-107c;  o  59,  a  3, ans 308b 309a; Q 83, A I, ans
436d-438a;  part  i-ii,  q 40, a 3 794c-795a; q 46, a 4, rfp 2 815b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 3 8b-9a 26 Shakespeare:
Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [187  204]  535d-536a  28  Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 428a-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix, div 85 488c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality,
334d-336a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 409d-410a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  119a-135a,c  esp  119a-121a,  134d-135a,c  /  Descent  of Man,
287d-291c  esp  287d-288d;  308a-312d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii,
278a-287a passim; bk xi, 499c-500c 53 James: Psychology, 8a-17b esp 12b;
47b52a  esp  49b-50a;  68a;  700a-737a  esp 700a703a 54 Freud: Instincts
412a-421a,c  esp  412b-415b  / Unconscious, 439d / General Introduction,
615b-616c  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle 639a-663d esp 651d-653a / Ego
and  Id,  708d  709b  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 789b-791d esp
790a-d,  791b-d  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 846a-853b esp 846a-847b,
851a-d  ia.  Instinctual  needs  or  drives 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
62d-63a;  67b  c;  BK  III,  llld-112c  7  Plato:  Symposium, 157b-159b;
165c-166b  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*2228] 499a 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch 8
[542*17-^1]
68d-69a; bk vi, ch 18
[571^6573*30]
97b-99a; bk vii, ch i
[581*21-^22]
107a-b; bk viii, ch 12
[596''2o-28]
122d / Generation of Animals, bk hi, ch i
[749^*1750*11] 290d-291b; ch 2
[753*7-17] 294a-b /
Ethics, BK III, ch ii
[1118^8-18]
365a-b;  bk  VII,  CH  6  [ii49''24-ii50*8]  400b-c  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371057] 57d
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 23 128c-d

[734a]
(3.  The  instincts or innate habits of animals and men. 3a. Instinctual
needs  or  drives.) 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 12, A 5,
ANs  and  REP  3  672a-c; q 13, a 2, rep 2-3 673c-674c; q 16, a 2, rep 2
684d-685b; q 17, A 2, rep 3 687d-688b; q 41, a i, rep 3 798b-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-75] 80a-c
22  Chaucer:  Manciple'sTale  [17,104-144]  490a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  61a-d;  84c-86b; PART II, 141a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 184a-b;
424d-425c;  512a-b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 339b; 346a347d;
349a-350a;  361c-362a; 402a-d; 460d461a; 476b-477b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 72c-73a 31 Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99d-103a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part hi, prop 4-9 398d-399c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii,
sect 78-80 42b-43a / Human Understa?iding, bk i, ch ii, sect 3 104b-d 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect v, div 38, 466b; DIV 45 469c; sect ix,
div 85 488c; sect XII, div 118 504c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 342c-346d
passim  43  Mill:  Utilitaria?iism,  469b-470c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  164b-c  48  Melville:  Moby Dic\, 286b-288a 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  122d-131b  / Descent of Man, 298a'C; 304a-314b esp
304b305a,  308a-310a,  311a-312d; 371c-372c; 456b-457c; 583a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  665a-d  53 James: Psychology, 198b-199a;
700a-704a;  712b-737a  esp  736b-  737a  [fn  i]  54  Freud: Narcissism,
400c-402c  esp  401a-c  /  General  Introduction,  569c-593b esp 574a-d,
590a-593b;   615b-616c;   618d-619a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle
639a-663d esp 651d-663c / Group Psychology, 669a-b; 673b-c; 684d686c esp
685a-b / Ego and Id, 708c-712c esp 708d-709b, 711c-712a; 714c-717a,c esp
717c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 787a-788d esp 787a-c; 789b-791d
/  New  Introductory  Lectures, 837b-d; 846b-852c esp 851a-d; 883b-c 3^.
The  innate  sense of the beneficial and harmful: the estimative power 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  63b-c  9 Aristotle: History ofAnimals, bk
viii, ch 12
[596^20-28] 122d; BK IX, CH 5-6 136d-138b
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 20 167d168b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 19, a 10, ANS 117d-118b; q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a;
Q  76, A 5, rep 4 394c-396a; q 78, a 4, ans and rep 4-5 411d-413d; q 81,
a  2,  rep  2  429c430c;  a  3,  ANS and rep 2 430c-431d; q 83, a I, ANS
436d-438a; q 96, a i, ans and rep 4 510b 511b

[734b]
^1^ THE GREAT IDEAS 33 to 3c 22 Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,279-287]
457b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 286d-287b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
456d-457a   31   Descartes:   Meditations,  vi,  100a  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch vii, sect 79-80 42c-43a / Hu7nan Understanding, bk i, ch
ii,  SECT 3 104b-d; bk ii, ch x, sect 3 141c-d; ch XI, SECT 5 144d-145a;
sect  ii  145d-146a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  144a-b;  146b-148a  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 121a; 122c /
Descent  of Man, 287d-288a; 290c-291a; 292b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk hi, llla-c; 129a-c 53 James: Psychology, 8a; 13a; 708a-709a; 720b725a
passim;  729b  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 607d-609c; 612c614a esp
613d-614a;   623b-c   /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  640d-641a  /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a-721c  esp  721a; 737b-738a;
751a-752b  /  New  Introductory  lectures,  845a-846a  3c.  Instinct  in
relation to reason 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[199*20-33]
276c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ix, ch 7
[6i2''i8-6i3^i6] 138b-d /
Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[1332^39-^10]
537a-b; ch 15
[1334^7-28]
539b-d  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a,c 17 Plotinus:
Fourth  Ennead,  tr iv, ch 20-21 167d-168c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 18, a 3, ANS 106b-107c; q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; Q 76, A 5,
REP  4  394c-396a;  q 78, a 4, ans and REP 4-5 411d-413d; q 83, a i, ans
436d-438a; q 96, A I, REP 4 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 12, a 5, ans and rep
3  672a-c;  q 17, a 2, rep 3 687d688b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  50,  A  3  8b-9a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 216b-219b 28 Harvey: On
Animal Generation, 428a-c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 108 128d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part v, 59d-60b / Objections and Replies, 156a-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop 9, schol 399c 3i Pascal: Pensees,
339-344  233a-b  /  Vacuum, 357a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v,
div  38,  466b; DIV 45 469c; sect ix, div 85 488c; sect XII, DIV 118-119
504c-505b  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
a7id  Fall, 409d-410a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 256d257a
/  Practical  Reason,  316c-317a  /  Judgement,  602b,d  [fn i] 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  465a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 164b-c;
171b-c; part iv, 361c-d

[735a]
b  3^  to  ^b  Chapter  287d 289a csp 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 288c-d;
292c-d;  317b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  676b-677a; 691a-b; 704a706b 54
Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  377c  380b / Unconscious, 433 b-d /
Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 651a / Ego and Id, 702c d; 715a 716b csp
71  5d  / Civilization and Its Disconfen/s, 800d-801a / New Introductory
Lectures,  837b839b esp 838a-c; 843d-845b' 3</. The instinctive basis of
habit-formation:  the  modification  of  instincts  and reflexes through
experience or learning 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch 9
[536^14-20] 63b; BK
IX,  CH  49  156d-157a / Politics, BK VII, CH 13 [1332^39-^10] 537a-b 12
LvcRETivs:  Nature  of  Things,  bk hi [307-322] 34a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50,  A  3,  REP  2  8b-9a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  v,  div  38, 466b; div 45 469c; sect ix, div 83-85
487c488c  csp  div  85 488c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 97
132c-133a 49 Darwin: Desceru of Man, 288b; 290c-291c; 293d-295c; 298a-c;
317c-319a;  569c-571b  passim, esp 570a; 592d-593b 53 James: Psychology,
8b-9a;  13a-17b  csp  17a; 44a-52b esp 49b-50a; 705a-712b; 718a; 720a-b;
725a;   732b-735b;   827a-835a   esp  834a-835a  54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development   of  PsychoAnalysis,  15d-18a  /  Narcissism,  407c-408a  /
Instincts,  415b-421a,c  esp 415d-418a / Repression, 422a-423b / General
Introduction,  574d575d;  587d-588b;  590c-593b  esp 592b-c / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  640c / Group Psychology, 693b-695c esp 693d-694b /
War  and  Death,  757d-759d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 781a-d /
New Introductory Lectures, 847a-b; 870a-b 3e. The genesis, transmission,
and modification of instincts in the course of generations 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk ii [661-668] 23b-c; BK III [741-753] 39c-d 42 Kant:
Judgement,  586a49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 82d-85c; Ilia; 119a-135a,c
esp  121b-122d,  131c-134d;  236d237a  /  Descent  of Man, 288b-c; 292c;
304b,d
[fn 5]; 318a-319a passim; 504c-507a esp 506c507a
53   James:  Psychology,  691a-b;  717a-725a  passim,  esp  718b,  724a,
724b-725a;  851b;  853a-858a;  890b-897a  54 Freud: Institicts, 413b-c /
General  Introduc-  --.  tion,  591d-592b;  594d-595b; 613a / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  651d-654c; 660c / Ego and Id, 707c- 708b / War and
Death, 758d

[735b]
J  677 4. Habit formation 4a. The causes of habit: practice, repetition,
teaching,  and  the  law  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  hi,  330a;  333b d /
Theaetetus, 5I8a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246*io248*6] 329c-33dd / Metaphysics, bk
ix, ch 5
[i047''3i-34]
573a; ch 8
[i049'*29-io5o*3l
575c-d / Soul, bk ii, ch 5
[417*21-41 8*6
647d648d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[581*^11-22] 107b; bk
viii, ch 29
[607*9
i^|  132c  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  348b,d351b  passim; bk hi, ch 5
[1114*3-10] 360a; ch 12
[1119*22-34] 365d 366a /
Politics, bk ii, ch 8
[i269''i4-23] 465b; bk
vii, ch 15 [1334*^8-28] 539b-d; bk viii, ch i
[1337*19-27]
542b; CH 5
[13 39^2 1-25]
544c-d   /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1369*^6-8]  612d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 18 161a162b; BK III, CH 3, 179d; ch 8 184b-c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  16  271c d 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
121a-122b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 10 55c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q S6, a 2, ANs 462a-463a; q 89, a 6, rep 3
478b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii. q 51 12a-15d; q 54, a 4,
rep  1,3  25b-d;  q 92, a i 213c-214c; a 2, rep 4 214d-215a,c: q 95, a 3
228c-229b;  q  96,  aa 2-3 231c-233a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi  [85114]  77d-78a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  154d-155a  25
Montaigne: Essays, 16c-d; 42b-44c; 64a b; 534a-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act hi, sc iv
[160170] 56b
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 78d-79c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v,
prop  10,  schol  455a456a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  71 197b-198a; ch xxxiii, sect 5-18 248d-251c passim 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  v,  div  :^^-  36,  464c-d;  div 38, 466b 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  357c-360d  43  Federalist: number 27, 95c-d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  329d-330a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
addiitons,  97 132c-133a / Philosophy of History, part i, 251b 53 James:
Psychology,  70a-73b;  332a; 571a b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 573d
4b.  The  growth and decay of habits: ways of strengthening and breaking
habits  7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  518a-b  8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch 8
[io''26-ii*4|  15d16a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk ii, ch 1-4 348b,d-351b
passim; bk vii, ch id [1152*28-33] 403b

[736a]
b  678  THE GREAT IDEAS (4. Hahit formation. 4b. The growth and decay of
habits:  ways  of  strengthening  and  breaking  habits.^  12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 27 132b133b; BK II, CH 18 161a-162b; bk hi, ch 12
187b-188b  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk v, sect 16 271c-d 17 Plotinus:
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 20, 293a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  qq  52-53 15d-22d; q 54, a 4, rep 1,3 25b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
64a-b;  390b-c;  391c393b; 395b-396d; 525d-527a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  69a;  69d70a;  79b-c;  80a31  Descartes:  Discourse, part hi,
48b-49d  33 Pascal: Pensees, 6 173a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h,
ch  xxi, sect 71 197b-198a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 464a-d 44 B0SWEI.1.:
Johnson,  259a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 309c 53 James: Psychology,
79b-83b;  332a 5. The analysis of specifically human habits 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk vii, ch 3 [246^10-248* 6] 329c-330d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
h, ch 1-6 348b,d-352d passim 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq
49-54 la-25d 31 Descartes: Rules, i la-2a 53 James : Psychology, 73b-83b
5a.  Habits  of  body:  manual  arts  and  the  skills  of play 7 Plato:
Protagoras, 46c / Republic, bk hi, 334d-335b; bk vii, 391d / Theaetetus,
518a-b  /  Laws,  BK  VII,  717b-d  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246^10-^19]  329c-330a  / Heavens, bk h, ch 12 [292^14-^18] 383d-384b /
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 20
[1022''
10-13] ^^^ 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[1103^33-35]
348d; [1103^6-13] 349a / Politics, bk iv, ch i
[1288^10-20] 487a-b; bk
vii, ch 15 [1334^728] 539b-d; ch 17
[1336*3-22]
541a-b;  bk  VIII,  ch  4  544a-c 10 Hippocrates : Articulations, par 52
109b110a; par 55, 111c; par 58 112b-113a / Aphorisms, SECT II, par 49-50
133d  12  EricTETUs: Discourses, bk hi, ch 15, 190a-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk ix [590-620] 295a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 40d-42a / Coriolanus, 175b
/  Philopoemen,  293d-294a  / Demosthenes, 693c; 695b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch 8, 87a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
49,  a  2,  rep  1,3  2b-4a; a 3, rep 3 4b-5a; a 4, ans 5a-6a; q 50, a i
6a-7b; a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q 52, A I, ans 15d-18a; a 2, ans 18a-19a; q 54,
a i, ans 22d-23d

[736b]
5  to^c  bk  I,  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  28a-29b  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  43d;  66c-67a; 73c; 316b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  53d-54a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 166b-167a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  335a-b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i, 53a; bk v,
337d-338a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 5a-b 42 Y^ant: Judgement, 586a-b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i, par 52, 25c / Philosophy of
History,  part ii, 267b268b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 269b-271a; 278c-d
50  Marx:  Capital, 164b-167a; 170c-171a; 237d240c 53 James: Psychology,
73b-78b  esp  75a; 332a; 774a 5b. Habits of appetite and will: the moral
virtues as good habits 8 Aristotle : Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246^20247*19] 330a-b
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[581^11-22]
107b / Ethics, bk ii, ch 1-6 348b,d-352d; bk vii, ch 5
[1148^15-1149*4]
399a-c; ch 10
[1152*28-33] 403b
/  Politics, bk vii, ch 15 [1334*^8-28] 539b-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  hi,  ch  3 178d180a; CH 8 184b-c; bk iv, ch i 213a-223d 14 Plutarch:
Cato  the  Younger,  637b-c  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vih, par 10
55c-d;  par 20-21 58c-59a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49,
A  I, REP 3 lb-2b; A 2, REP 3 2b-4a; q 50, a 3 8b-9a; a 5 lOb-d; q 56, a
4  32b-33c;  a  6  34b35a;  qq 58-61 41a-59d; q 94, a i, rep i 221a-d 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc iv
[160170] 56b
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 69d-70a; 78d-81c esp 79a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, SECT 71 197b-198a 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,  357c-360d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 368d; 378a-b
/Judgement,  521b-523c;  604d-606d  esp  606a-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445d-446a;  463d-465b  44 Boswell: Johnson, 386a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, intro, 171b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a-305c esp 304b,d
[fn5];
310c-319a  esp 311c-d, 318a319a; 321b-322d; 593a-b 53 James: Psychology,
80a-83b; 798b-808a passim, esp 799a-b 54 Freud: War and Death, 757c-759d
5c.  The  natural habits of reason: innate predispositions of the mind 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*2228]  499a;  bk  iv, ch 3
[1005^15-34] 524d-525a; BK XI, ch 5 [1061^34-1062*5] 590a-b

[737a]
5dio5e(2)  Chapter  32:  HABIT  679  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk vi, ch ii
[ii4^*25-*'i ^] 392d-393a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i^55''ij-i7]
594b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 22 127c 128c; BK II, CH II
150a-151b  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  iv, sect 4 264a 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  1-3  10a11a; TR VIII, ch 9, 31c 19 Aquinas:
Stimma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  16,  a  6, rep I 98b-d; q 18, a 3, ans
106b-107c;  q  79,  AA  12-13  425c-427a;  part  i-ii,  q  i, a j, rep 2
612a-613a;  a 5, ans 613a-614a 20 Aquinas: Sumrna Theologica, part i-ii,
q  51,  A  I, ANS and rep 1-2 12b-13c; q 53, a i, ans 19d-21a; q 94, a i
221a-d;  part  hi,  q  9,  a  i,  ANS 763b-764c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvi [7381] 77c-d; XVIII [19-21] 80a; [49-66] 80b-c 23 Hobbes:
Let'iathan, part i, 54a; 60a-b; 86b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
59c-d;  60c61c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 48 llOd-llla 31 Descartes:
Rules,  i,  lab; iv, 5c-d; viii, 13c-d / Discourse, part i, 41b; part v,
54c  /  Objections and Replies, 224b,d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
19   429d   33   Pascal:   Pensees,  i,  171a;  81  186h  /  Geometrical
Demonstration, 440b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 5-8 26a27a /
Human   Understanding,   bk   i   95b,d-121a,c  passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  v,  div  38,  466b; DIV 45 469c; sect xii, div 118
504c-d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 20a; 48a-c; 58c-59b; 66d72c esp 67c-69c;
109b-c;  157d; 229b-c; 234c / Judgement, 562a-564c; 604d-606d esp 606a-d
43  Federalist:  number  31,  lOSc-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445d-446a;
465a-b;   469b-470c  53  James:  Psychology,  851a-890a  esp  851a-852a,
879b-882a,  889a-b  5d.  The  acquired  habits of mind: the intellectual
virtues  7 Plato: Theaetetus, 518b; 542a-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii,
ch  3  [247^1-248*  9]  330b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  4 [255^3o-''23] 340a-c /
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5
[1047^31-34] 573a;
CH 8 [1049^32-1050^3] 575c-d / Soul, bk ii, CH 5 [417^1-418*6] 647d-648d
/  Memory  and Reminiscence, ch 2 [45i^io-452''6] 693a-694b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk vi 387a-394d / Politics^ BK VII, CH 15 [1334^8-28] 539b-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 3 178d180a; CH 8 184b-c; bk iv, ch i,
216c-223d  12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 4 260b261a; bk v, sect
16  271c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 14, A I, REP 1-2
75d-76c;  q  79,  aa  6-7 419b-421c; A 10, ANS 423d-424d; q 86, a 2, ans
462a463a;  q  87,  a 2, rep 2-3 466c-467b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 49, A I, rep 3 lb-2b; a 2, rep 3 2b-4a; g 50, a 3,

[737b]
rkp ? 8b 9a; a 4 9a-10b; q 51, a 3 14b 15a; O 52, A I, ANS 15d-18a; a 2,
ans  18a 19a; q 5^, A I, ans and rfp 2-^ 19d 21a; a ^, ANS and REP 3 21d
22d;  g  54,  a  4,  rep  3 25b d; gg 57-58 35a-45c; g 64, a } 68b69b 23
Hobbes:  leviathan,  part i, 54a; 60a b; 66c68c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
learning,  26a-27a  31  Descartes:  Rules,  i la-2a / Discourse, part I,
41b,d 31 Spinoza: EthicSi part iv, prop 25-28 430d431c; PART V, PROP 10,
scHOL  455a  456a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, sect 8-10
139b-140b;  ch xxxiii, sect 5-18 248d-251c passim; bk iv, ch i, sect 8-9
308b309b  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 3538 464c-466c; div
40,  467c;  div 44 468d-469c; SECT VII, DIV 59-61 476b-478a passim; sect
IX,  DIV  83-84  487c-488b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 347a-b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  223a-d  44 B0SWEL.L: Johnson, 135c-136a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  97  132c-133a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 320b-321a
passim;  593a  53 James: Psychology, 83b; 295b-298a esp 296b; 331b-336a;
361a-380a  passim;  427b-430a;  433a-434a  esp 434a; 502a-507a esp 504a;
520a-526b  esp  520b,  524a-525a; 555a-557b passim; 852b-853a; 860b-862a
5e. Supernatural habits 5^(1) Grace as an entitative habit of the person
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 2, ANS 7c-8a; q 51, a 4
15a-d;  q  82,  a i 168a-d; g no 347d-351d 5^(2) The infused virtues and
the supernatural gifts Old Testament: I Kings, 3:5-15; 4:29-34— (Z)) ///
Kings,  3:5-15;  4:29-34  /  /  Chronicles, 22:12 — (D) / Paralipomenon,
22:12  / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) // Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 / Job, 32:8
/       Psalms,      119:34-40,73,125,130,144,169—      (D)      Psalms,
118:34-40,73,125,130,144,169  / Proverbs, 2 esp 2:6 / Ecclesiastes, 2:26
/  Isaiah,  II  :2-5—  (D) Isaias, 11 :2-5 / Daniel, i esp 1:17; 2:20-23
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  3:9; 7:7,22; 8:7,21; 9—{D) OT, Boo{ of
Wisdom,  3:9; 7:7,22; 8:7,21; 9 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:1,5,10; 11:15; 15:5;
24:24-28;  43:33; 50:29; 51:17- (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:1,5,10; 11:15;
15:5;  24:34-38;  43:37; 50:31; 51:22-23 New Testament: Matthetv, 6:33 /
Acts,  2:1-21  /  /  Corinthians, 1:30; 2; 12:4-11 / Ephesians, 1:16-18;
4:17-5:21  /  Philippians,  3:9  /  James  i:5-7'i7J 3:13-18 / // Peter,
1:1-10

[738a]
(5e, Supernatural habits. 5e{2) The infused virtues and the supernatural
gifts.)  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A 4 15a-d; q 55,
a  4,  ans and rep 6 28c-29d; Q 6^, AA 3-4 65a-66c; q 68 87c-96c esp a 3
90d91b;  Q  100, A 12, ANS and rep 3 264d-265d; q no, A 3, ANS and rep 3
350a-d;  a  4,  rep  i  350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  qq 8-9 416d-426c; q 19
465a-474d;  q  45  598c-603c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 57c; part hi,
176d-177b; part iv, 270c-d 5^(3) The theological virtues Old Testament :
Psalms,  22  ;  25  ;  71— {D) Psalms, 21; 24; 70 / Proverbs, y.i-:2.6 I
Isaiah,  40:31  —  (D)  Isaias, 40:31 / Jere?rjiah, 39:18— (D) Jeremias,
39:18  Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 3:9— (D) OT, BooJ{ of Wisdom, 3:9 /
Ecclesiasticus,  2:6-9; 13:14— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:6-10; 13:18 New
Testament:  Matthew,  9:20-22,27-30;  15:22-28;  17:14-21  esp 17:19-21;
19:16-23  esp  19:21—  (D) Matthew, 9:20-22,27-30; 15:2228; 17:14-20 esp
17:18-20;  19:16-23  esp  19:21 / Mar}{, esp 9:23-24— (D) MarJ^, 9:16-26
esp  9:22-23  / Luke, 17:5-6 / John, 14:21; 20:26-29/ Romans, 1:5,16-17;
3:20-5:9;  8  :24-25  ;  10  /  /  Corinthians, 13 / Galatians, 5 :5-6 /
Ephesians, 2:1-10 / Colossians, i :i-8 / / Thessalonians, 5:8 / Hebrews,
6; 11 /James, 2:14-26 / // Peter, 1:5-8 / I John / 11 John / III John 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk x, ch 3 300b301a; BK XXI, ch 16 573b-574a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A 4 15a-d; q 58, a 3, rep 3
43b-44a;  q 62 59d- ^^ 63a; q 63, a 3 65a-d; q 64, a 4 69b-70a; q 67, AA
3-6  83b-87c; q no, a 3, rep i 350a-d; a 4, ANS 350d-351d; part ii-ii, q
23 482c-489c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv
[i]-
XXVI  [81]  142d-146c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 149c-d; part hi,
241c-242a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c 32 MihTos: Paradise
Lost,  bk xii [576-605] 331b332a 6. The force of habit in human life Old
Testament:  /o^,  20:11-13  /  Proverbs,  22:6  /  Jeremiah, iy.27,— {D)
Jeremias, 13:23 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 35c-d; bk hi, 97d98a; bk iv,
137a-138c  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vii,  716a-b;  717d-718d  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk ii, ch 3 [994^31995*6] 513c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii,
ch 1-6 348b,d-352d passim, esp ch i
[1103^22-25] 349b; bk
vii,  ch  5 [1148^15-1149*4] 399a-c; ch 10 [1152*2833] 403b / RJtetoric,
bk i, ch 10
[1368^281369^27]
612a-613a esp
[1369*1-7]
612a-b,
[1369^6-8] 612d, [1369*^16-19] 612d-613a
12 LvcRETius: Nature of Things, bk hi [307-322] 34a-b

[738b]
d 680 THE GREAT IDEAS 5^(3) to 6b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par
23 50b-c; bk viii, par 18 57d-58a; par 25-26 60a-b / Christian Doctrine,
bk  i, ch 24 630c-631a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, AA
3-4  4b-6a  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xxv, 35d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
16c-d; 42b-43d; 63d64b; 307c-308a; 316b-c; 390b-c; 391c-393b; 395b-396d;
489b-490c;   524b-527a  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  285b-c  31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi,  48b-49d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 6 173a 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 3536 464c-465c; div 44-45, 469b-c
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  347a-b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 464d 41
Gibbon: Decline afid Fall, 125a 43 Federalist: number 27, 95c-d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  370c-d  /  Utilitarianism, 464a44 BoswELJ^:
Johnson,  259a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 308b; 317b-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk hi, 150c; bk v^i, 244a-b; bk viii, 303a-305b; bk xi, 486a;
bk  XII,  556d-557a;  bk  xiv,  609d; bk xv, 639c 53 James : Psychology,
73b-83b  54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 643d646a esp 645b-646a
6a.  The  automatic  or  unconscious  functioning of habits 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8 [8*'26-9*i3] 13d14a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 10
[1152*2833] 403b
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1370*5-8]
613b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2 2b-4a; q 109, a
8, ans 344d-346a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 307c-308a; 316b-c 35 Locke: Human
Understanditig,  bk  ii,  ch  ix,  sect  8-10  139b-140b passim 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  464a-b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 119b 53 James:
Psychology,  3b;  73b-78b;  93a;  295b298a esp 296b; 774a; 788a-789a esp
788b789a; 790b-791a; 810a-b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 455b 6b. The
contribution  of  habit  to  the  perfection  of  character and mind Old
Testament:  Proverbs,  22:6  /  Jeremiah,  13:23  —  (D) Jeremias, 13:23
Apocrypha:   Ecclesiasticus,   30:8—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  30:8  5
Euripides:  Suppliants [857-917] 266a-b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  ii,  398d397a  7  Plato: Republic, bk hi, 330a-331c; 333b-d; bk vii,
389d-390b; 391c-d / Timaeus, 474d475d / Theaetetus, 518b / Laivs, bk ii,
653a-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[13*16-31] 18d
/ Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246*10-248*6]
329c330d

[739a]
6c  to  7  C»apti:r  32: HABIT r,81 9 Aristotle: Hislory of Animals y bk
vii, cii i
[581^11-22] 107b / Ethics, bk
i,  ch  4  fiogs'^^-  13] 340c-d; CH 9 345a-c; bk ii, ch 1 6 348b.d 352d
passim, esp ch i
[iio3''22
25)  349b; hk HI, CH 5 [1114*3-10] 360a; bk x, ch o (1179*^^- 1 180^:52]
434a-435a / Politics, bk iv, ch ii
[1295^14-18] 495d; BK VII, ch 13
[i ^^2"^9
*'io] 537a-b; ch 15
[1334^8-28]
539b d; ch 17
[i336''40-''38] 541c-542a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4 lOSd 110a; BK II, CH 18 161a 162b;
bk  hi,  ch  ^  178d180a;  ch  12  187b 188b; bk iv, ch i 213a223d; CH 9
237d-238d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 4 260b- "*' 261a; bk v,
sect 16 271c-d; bk xi, sect 26 306b 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  9-10 627a-b; ch 24, 630d-631a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  50,  AA  4-5  9a-10d;  q  63,  a  2  64b-65a; q 92, a i, REP I
213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-215a,c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 42b-43d;
63d-64b;  176c177a;  202d-203a;  390b-c;  391c-393b;  525d527a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 69a-70a; 78d-81c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
i,   41b;   part   ii,   45b-46c;  part  hi,  48b-49d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  71 197b-198a; ch xxxiii, sect 8
249c-d  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 4445, 469b-c; sect ix,
div  83-84 487c-488b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 347a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 223a-d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  368d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 464a-d 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  259a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 96-97 132c-133a
49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 305a; 310d-314a passim, esp 313d-314a; 322a;
322d;  592b-593b  esp  593a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d; bk
IX,  369c-d;  bk  xiv, 605b-d 53 James: Psychology, 78b-83b esp 81b-83b;
331b-332b;  433a-434a;  711b-712a;  751b-752a;  760a-b 54 Freud: War and
Death,  757d-759d / Neu^ Introductory Lectures, 844b-c; 870a-b 6c. Habit
and freedom 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 10 55c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 83, A I, REP 5 436d-438a; a 2, ans 438a-d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk xix, 142a 42 Kant : Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  378a-b  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 464a-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  97 132c-133a / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro, 171b172b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 288b-d

[739b]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  221b d 52 Dosiy>i:vsky: Brothers
Karamazoi,  bk  vi,  I64b  d  53 Jami s: Psychology, 74a 78b; 80a 7. The
social  significance  of  habit:  habit in relation to law 6 Hi-uodotus:
History,  bk  i,  35c-d; bk hi, 97d 98a; bk iv, 137a 138c 6 rnrcvDiDF^s:
Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 396d 397a 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 344b 345d;
bk vir, 401c d / Laws, bk vii, 713c 714c; 716a b; 717d 718d 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch 3 [994^31995'*i4] 513c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
ii, ch i (ii03*'3-6I349a; BK v, ch I
[ii29*'i9-24] 377a;
bk x, ch 9
[ii79"V^-ii8o'»32] 434a-435a /
Politics,  bk ii, ch 8 [1269*14-23] 465b; bk v, ch 9 [1^10*1518] 512b-c;
HK VII, CH 13 [13:52*27 ^10] 537a-b; bk viii, ch I [1337*19-27] 542b; ch
5
[1339*
21-25]  544c-d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 38c; 48a-c / LycurgusNuma, 63d-64a
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk hi, 57d-58b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  92, A I 213c-214c; a 2, rep 4 214d-215a,c; q 94, A I 221a-d; q
95, a 3 228c-229b; q 96, aa 2-3 231c-233a; q 97, a 2 236d-237b; q 100, a
12  264d-265d;  q 106, a 2 322b-323a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi  [85114] 77d-78a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 42b-51a; 131b-132a; 463b-d 30
Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 41-43 109c-110a 31 Desc\ktes\ Discourse,
part  ii, 45b-46c; part III, 48b-49d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 380a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk vi, 39a; BK X, 65c; bk XIV, 106b; bk
xix,  135a-142a;  BK  xxiii,  197c-198a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 324d;
347a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 402b-c; 406c-d; bk iv, 434b435a 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 7d-8b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 464d
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 125a; 227b 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  383a-b  43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d  43  Mill: Liberty,
305b-312a  passim  /  Representative Governmefit, 329d-330a; 330d-331a /
Utilitarianism,  464c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par
151152  57a-b; additions, 97 132c-133a / Philosophy of History, part ii,
271d-272d;  part  iv,  365b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 305a; 317b-d 50
Marx:  Capital, 235a-236c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 303a 305b;
BK XI, 499c-500c 53 James: Psychology, 79b-80a

[740a]
682  THE  GREAT  IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES supernatural gifts, see Mind 4f,
5c; Virtue and Vice 8e. sect viii-ix, XIV ; bk ii, part hi, sect V Mind,
iii,  part  i, ch 2-3 Seneca. "On the Diseases of the Soul," in Moral ch
10 Letter^ SuAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxxix, xlii part :i, ch 5
Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human UnderMind, ch iii

[740b]
1  For:  Terms  of fundamental relevance to the conception of habit, see
Being  yc-yc(^);  Matter  2a;  Mind  2b;  Nature  2c.  The psychological
analysis  of  the  faculties or powers in which habits are situated, see
Animal  ia-ia(3);  Life  3; Man ^-^d; Soul 2c-2c(3); Virtue and Vice 2a.
Other  discussions  of  instinct,  see Animal id; Desire 3a; Emotion ic;
Evolution  3b; Sense 3d(3). Consideration of the factors involved in the
formation  or  breaking of habits, see Education 3-6; Law 6d; Virtue and
Vice  4-4d(4). The role of habit in the theory of virtue, ^^^ Virtue and
Vice le; for other discussions of the intellectual virtues, i<?^ Art I ;
Mind 4c, 4e-4f; Prudence i-2c; Science ia(i); Virtue and Vice 2a, 2a(2);
Wisdom 2a; for other discussions of the moral virtues, see Courage i, 4;
Justice  ic-id; Temperance i-ib; Virtue and Vice 2a-2a(i), 3b; for other
discussions  of  the  theological  virtues,  ^f<?  Knowledge 6c(5); Love
5b-5b(2);  Mind  5c;  Religion la; Virtue and Vice 2b, 8d-8d(3); and for
other  discussions  of  the  infused virtues and the Matters relevant to
grace  as an entitative habit, see God yd; Man 9b(2); Nature 6b; Sin 3c,
4d,  7;  Virtue  and  Vice  8b; Will ye (2). Other considerations of the
natural habits of the mind, see Judgment 8a; Knowledge 6c(2)- 6c(4); Law
4a; Mind 4df2)-4d(3); Principle 2b(2), 3a(i), 4; Virtue and Vice 4a. The
relation  of habit to freedom, see Will 3a (2). The relation of habit to
custom  and law, see Custom and Convention 2, 6b; Law 5f, 6d. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in Great Boo\s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
BibHography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The
Great  Ideas.  Hartley. Observations on Maji, His Frame, His I* Duty and
His  Expectations, vol i, proposition 2 Aquinas. Quaestiones Disputatae,
De  Veritate,  q  16  Condillac.  Traite  des  animaux,  part  ii,  ch 5
Descartes.  The Passions of the Soul, xvi, xliv, l Voltaire. "Instinct,"
in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary  Hume. A Treatise ofHuman Nature, bk i,
part hi, T. Reid. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human C. R. Darwin.
A   Posthumous  Essay  on  Instinct  Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the
Principles  ofMorals  .  The  Expression  of  Emotions  in  Man  and and
Legislation,  ch  i  i Animals Maine de Biran. The Influence of Habit on
the  Faculty  of  Thinking  IL D. Stewart. Outlines of Moral Philosophy,
part i, • Elements ofthe Philosophy ofthe Human Mind, (2-5), xliii-xliv,
xlvi  (3),  liii  Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and Idea, voliii,
Malebranche. De la recherche de la verite, bk ii (i), sup, ch 27 CH 5 J.
Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human

[741a]
E.   Hartmann.   Philosophy   of   the   Unconscious,   (a)  W'oodworth.
Psychological  Issues^  en  9  hi;  (b)  I  C.  L. M<)R{;an. I labtt and
Instinct  Hering.  Memory  , Instinct and Experience S. Butler. Life and
Habit  Jung.  Instinct  and  the  Unconscious  Radestock.  Hahit and Its
Importance  in  Education  Rivers. Instinct and the Unconscious Romanes.
Mental  Evolution in Animals, en 11-18 B. Russell. The Analysis of Mind,
lect 2 C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol hi, par 154-164, Dewey. Human
Nature  and  Conduct,  part  i-ii  359-403;  VOL VI, par 259-263 Pavlov.
Conditioned  Rcjlexes  H.  R. Marshall, Instinct and Reason Vann. Morals
Mal^yth  Man  Bergson.  Creative  Evolution,  ch 2 Thorndike. Man on His
Worlds

[741b]
Chapter 32: HABIT 683

[742a]
INTRODUCTION  THE great questions about happiness are concerned with its
definition  and its attainabihty. In what does happiness consist ? Is it
the  same  for all men, or do different men seek different things in the
name  of  happiness?  Can  happiness  be  achieved  on  earth,  or  only
hereafter?  And  if  the  pursuit of happiness is not a futile quest, by
what means or steps should it be undertaken? On all these questions, the
great  books  set  forth  the fundamental inquiries and speculations, as
well  as  the  controversies  to  which  they  have  given  rise, in the
tradition  of  western  thought.  There seems to be no question that men
want  happiness.  "Man  wishes  to  be happy," Pascal writes, *'and only
wishes to be happy, and cannot wish not to be so." To the question, what
moves  desire? Locke thinks only one answer is possible: "happiness, and
that  alone." But this fact, even if it goes undisputed, does not settle
the  issue whether men are right in governing their lives with a view to
being or becoming happy. There is therefore one further question. Should
men  make  happiness  their  goal  and  direct  their  acts accordingly?
According  to  Kant, "the principle oi private happiness" is "the direct
opposite  of  the  principle  of  morality." He understands happiness to
consist in "the satisfaction of all our desires: extensive, in regard to
their multiplicity; intensive, in regard to their degree; protensive, in
regard  to their duration." What Kant calls the "pragmatic" rule of hfe,
which  aims  at  happiness,  "tells us what we have to do, if we wish to
become   possessed   of  happiness."  Unhke  the  moral  law,  it  is  a
hypothetical,  not  a  categorical, imperative. Furthermore, Kant points
out  that  such  a pragmatic or utilitarian ethics (which is for him the
same as an "ethics of happiness") cannot help being em-

[742b]
a^^^f^r  33: HAPPINESS pirical, "for it is only by experience," he says,
"that   I   can  learn  either  what  inclinations  exist  which  desire
satisfaction,  or  what  are the natural means of satisfying them." Such
empirical knov. ledge "is available for each individual in his own way."
Hence  there  can  be  no  universal  solution in terms of desire of the
problem  of  how to be happy. To reduce moral philosophy to "a theory of
happiness"  must  result, therefore, in giving up the search for ethical
principles which are both universal and a priori. In sharp opposition to
the  pragmatic rule, Kant sets the "moral or ethical law," the motive of
which  is  not simply to be happy, but rather to be worthy of happiness.
In  addition to being a categorical imperative which imposes an absolute
obligation  upon us, this law, he savs, "takes no account of our desires
or  the  means  of satisfying them." Rather it "dictates how we ought to
act  in  order  to deserve happiness." It is drawn from pure reason, not
from  experience,  and  therefore  has  the  universality of an a priori
principle,  without  which,  in  Kant's  opinion,  a  genuine science of
ethics—or  metaphysic  of  morals— is impossible. With the idea of moral
worth— that which alone deserves happiness— taken away, "happiness alone
is,"  according  to Kant, "far from being the complete good. Reason does
not  approve  of  it  (however much inclination may desire it) except as
united  with  desert.  On the other hand," Kant admits, "morality alone,
and, with it, mere desert, is Hkewise far from being the complete good."
These  two  things  must  be  united to constitute the true summum bonum
which,  according to Kant, means both the supreme and the complete good.
The  man  "who  conducts  himself in a manner not unworthy of happiness,
must  be  able  to  hope  for  the possession of happiness." But even if
happiness combined with moral 684

[743a]
Chapter 33: HAPPINESS worth docs constitute the supreme good, Kant still
refuses  to admit that happiness, as a practical objective, can function
as  a  moral  principle. Though a man can hope to he happv only if under
the  monil law he does his duty, he should not do his duty with the hope
of  thereby  becoming  happy.  "A disposition," he writes, "which should
require  the prospect of happiness as its necessary condition, would not
be moral, and hence also would not be worthy of complete happiness." The
moral  law  commands  the performance of duty unconditionally. Happiness
should  be a consequence, but it cannot be a condition, of moral action.
In  other words, happiness fails for Kant to impose any moral obligation
or  to  provide  a standard of right and wrong in human conduct. No more
than  pleasure  can happiness be used as a first principle in ethics, if
morality  must  avoid  all  calculations of utiHty or expediency whereby
things  are  done or left undone for the sake of happiness, or any other
end to be enjoyed. This issue between an ethics of duty and an ethics of
happiness, as well as the conflict it involves between law and desire as
sources  of  morality, are considered, from other points of view, in the
chapters  on  Desire  and  Di'Ty,  and  again in Good and Evil where the
problem  of  the  summiim  bonum is raised. In this chapter, we shall be
concerned with happiness as an ethical principle, and therefore with the
problems  to  be  faced  by  those  who,  in  one way or another, accept
happiness  as  the  supreme  good  and  the end of life. They may see no
reason  to reject moral principles which work through desire rather than
duty.  They  may find nothing repugnant in appealing to happiness as the
ultimate  end  which justifies the means and determines the order of all
other  goods.  But  they  cannot  make  happiness the first principle of
ethics  without  having  to face many questions concerning the nature of
happiness and its relation to virtue. Discussion begins rather than ends
with  tlic  fact  that  happiness is what all men desire. Once they have
asserted  that  fact, once they have made happiness the most fundamental
of  all  ethical terms, writers Uke Aristotle or Locke, Aquinas or Mill,
cannot escape the question

[743b]
whether  all  who  seek  happiness  l(K)k  for it or find il in the same
things.  HoKling  that  a  definite  conception  of  happiness cannot be
formulated,  Kant  thinks  that  happiness  fails  even  as  a pragmatic
principle  of  conduct.  "The  notion of happiness is so indefinite," he
writes,  "that  although every man wishes to attain it, yet he never can
say  definitely  and  consistently what it is that he really wishes." He
cannot  "determine  with  certainty what would make him truly happv; Ix-
causc  to  do  so he would v\Qf:(\ to be omniscient." If this is true of
the  individual,  how  various  must  be  the notions of happiness which
prevail  among  men  in  general.  Locke  plainly  asserts  what is here
implied, namely, the fact that "everyone does not place his happiness in
the  same  thing, or choose the same way to it." But admitting this fact
does  not  prevent Locke from inquiring how "in matters of happiness and
misery  .  .  . men come often to prefer the worse to the better; and to
choose  that  which,  by their own confession, has made them miserable."
Even  though  he  declares that "the same thing is not good to every man
alike,"  Locke thinks it is possible to account "for the misery that men
often  bring  on  themselves"  by explaining how the individual may make
errors  in  judgment—  "how things come to be represented to our desires
under  deceitful  appearances  ...  by  the judgment pronouncing wrongly
concerning  them."  But  this applies to the individual only. Locke does
not  think  it  is  possible  to  show that when two men differ in their
notions  of  happiness,  one  is  right and the other wrong. "Though all
men's  desires  tend  to  happiness,  yet they are not moved by the same
object.  Men  may choose different things, and yet all choose right." He
does  not  quarrel  with  the  theologians  who,  on the basis of divine
revelation,  describe  the eternal happiness in the life hereafter which
is  to  l:)e  enjoyed ali}{e by all who are saved. But revelation is one
thing,  and reason another. With respect to temporal happiness on earth,
reason  cannot achieve a definition of the end that has the certainty of
faith concerning salvation. Hence Locke quarrels with '*the philosophers
of  old" who, in his opinion, vainly sought to define the siimmiim bonum
or happiness in such a way that all men would agree on what

[744a]
686  THE  GREAT IDEAS happiness is; or, if they failed to, some would be
in  error  and misled in their pursuit of happiness. It may be wondered,
therefore,  what  Locke  means by saying that there is a science of what
man ought to do "as a rational and voluntary agent for the attainment of
.  .  . happiness." Ke describes ethics as the science of the "rules and
measures  of  human  actions,  which  lead  to  happiness" and he places
"morality  amongst  the sciences capable of demonstration, wherein . . .
from   self-evident   propositions,   by   necessary   consequences,  as
incontestable  as  those in mathematics, the measures of right and wrong
might  be  made  out,  to  any one that will apply himself with the same
indifferency  and attention to the one, as he does to the other of these
sciences. The ancient philosophers with whom Locke disagrees insist that
a  science  of ethics depends on a first principle which is self-evident
in  the  same  way  to  all  men. Happiness is not that principle if the
content  of  happiness  is  what  each  man  thinks  it to be; for if no
universally applicable definition of happiness can be given —if when men
differ in their conception of what constitutes happiness, one man may be
as  right  as  another— then the fact that all men agree upon giving the
name  "happiness" to what they ultimately want amounts to no more than a
nominal  agreement.  Such nominal agreement, in the opinion of Aristotle
and  Aquinas,  does  not  suffice to establish a science of ethics, with
rules  for the pursuit of happiness which shall apply universally to all
men.  On  their view, what is truly human happiness must be the same for
all  men. The reason, in the words of Aquinas, is that "all men agree in
their  specific  nature."  It  is  in  terms of their specific or common
nature that happiness can be objectively defined. Happiness so conceived
is  a common end for all, "since nature tends to one thing only." It may
be  granted  that  there  are in fact many different opinions about what
constitutes  happiness,  but  it cannot be admitted that all are equally
sound without admitting a complete relativism in moral matters. That men
do  infact  seek  different things under the name of happiness does not,
according  to  Aristotle and Aquinas, alter the truth that the happiness
they

[744b]
should  seek  must  be  something  appropriate  to the humanity which is
common   to   them  all,  rather  than  something  determined  by  their
individually  differing  needs  or  temperaments. If it were the latter,
then  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  would admit that questions about what men
should  do  to  achieve happiness would be answerable only by individual
opinion   or   personal   preference,  not  by  scientific  analysis  or
demonstration.  With the exception of Locke and perhaps to a less extent
Mill,  those  who  think  that  a  science  of  ethics can be founded on
happiness as the first principle tend to maintain that there can be only
one  right  conception  of human happiness. They regard other notions as
misconceptions  which  may  appear  to be, but are not really the summum
bonum.  The  various  definitions of happiness which men have given thus
present  the problem of the real and the apparent good, the significance
of  which is considered in the chapter on Good and Evil. In the everyday
discourse of men there seems to be a core of agreement about the meaning
of the words "happy" and "happiness." This common understanding has been
used by philosophers like Aristotle and Mill to test the adequacy of any
definition  of  happiness.  When  a man says "I feel happy" he is saying
that  he feels pleased or satisfied— that he has what he wants. When men
contrast  tragedy  and  happiness,  they have in mind the quality a life
takes  from  its  end. A tragedy on the stage, in fiction, or in life is
popularly  characterized  as  "a  story  without  a  happy ending." This
expresses  the  general  sense  that  happiness is the quality of a life
which  comes out well on the whole despite difficulties and vicissitudes
along  the  way.  Only  ultimate  defeat or frustration is tragic. There
appears to be some conflict here between feeling happy at a given moment
and  being  happy  for  a  lifetime,  that is, living happily. It may be
necessary  to choose between having a good time and leading a good fife.
Nevertheless,  in both uses of the word "happy" there is the connotation
of  satisfaction.  When  men  say that what they want is happiness, they
imply  that,  having  it,  they  would ask for nothing more. If they are
asked why they want to be

[745a]
happy,  they  find  it  difficult to give any reason except "for its own
sake."  They  can  think of nothing beyond happiness for which happiness
serves  as  a means or a preparation. This aspect of ultimacy or finahty
appears  without qualification in the sense of happiness as belonging to
a  whole  life.  There  is  quiescence,  too, in the momentary feeUng of
happiness, but precisely because it does not last, it leaves another and
another  such  moment  to  be  desired. Observing these facts, Aristotle
takes  the  word  "happiness"  from  popular  discourse and gives it the
technical significance of ultimate good, last end, or summum bonum. "The
chief good," he writes, "is evidently something final. . . . Now we call
that  which is in itself worthy of pursuit more final than that which is
worthy  of  pursuit  for  the  sake of something else, and that which is
never desirable for the sake ofsomething else more final than the things
that  are  desirable  both  in themselves and for the sake of that other
thing.  Therefore,  we  call  final  wdthout qualification that which is
always  desirable  in  itself  and never for the sake of something else.
Such  a  thing  happiness,  above  all  else, is held to be; for this we
choose  always  \  for itself and never for the sake of something else."
The  ultimacy  of  happiness  can  also  be  expressed  in  terms of its
completeness  or  sufficiency.  It  would  not be true that happiness is
desired  for its own sake and everything else for the sake of happiness,
if  the  happy  man  wanted something more. The most obvious mark of the
happy  man,  according  to  Aristotle, is that he wants for nothing. The
happy  life  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.  It is this insight which
Boethius   later   expresses  in  an  oft-repeated  characterization  of
happiness  as  "a fife made perfect by the possession in aggregate ofall
good  things."  So conceived, happiness is not a particular good itself,
but the sum of goods. "If happiness were to be counted as one good among
others,"  Aristotle  argues, "it would clearly be made more desirable by
the  addition  of  even  the  least  of  goods." But then there would be
something  left  for the happy man to desire, and happiness would not be
"something  final  and  self-sufficient  and  the  end  of action." Like
Aristotle,  Mill appeals to the common sense of mankind for the ultimacy
of happiness.

[745b]
CiiAPTLR  33;  HAPPINESS  687 "The utilitarian doctrine," he writes, "is
that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable as an end; all
otiicr things being only desirable as means." No reason can or need
[)e
given why this is so, "except that each person, so far as he believes it
to  be  attainable,  desires his own happiness." This is enough to prove
that  happiness is a good. To show that it is the good, it is "necessary
to  show,  not  only  that  people desire happiness, but that they never
desire anything else." Here Mill's answer, like Aristotle's, presupposes
the  rightness  of the prevailing sense that when a man is happy, he has
everything  he  desires.  Many  things.  Mill admits, may be desired for
their  own  sake,  but  if  the  possession  of  any one of these leaves
something  else  to  be  desired,  then  it is desired only as a part of
happiness.  Happiness  is  "a  concrete whole, and these are some of its
parts.  .  . . Whatever is desired otherwise than as a means to some end
beyond  itself, and ultimately to happiness, is desired as itself a part
of  happiness,  and  is  not desired for itself until it has become so."
There are other conceptions of happiness. It is not always approached in
terms  of  means and ends, utility and enjoyment or satisfaction. Plato,
for example, identifies happiness with spiritual well-being—a harmony in
the  soul, an inner peace which results from the proper order of all the
soul's parts. Early in the Republic, Socrates is challenged to show that
the  just  man  will  be  happier  than  the  unjust man, even if in all
externals  he  seems  to  be  at  a  disadvantage. He cannot answer this
question  until  he  prepares  Glaucon  for  the insight that justice is
"concerned  not  with the outward man, but with the inward." He can then
explain  that  "the just man does not permit the several elements within
him  to  interfere  with one another. ... He sets in order his own inner
life,  and  is  his  own  master  and  his own law, and is at peace with
himself." In the same spirit Plotinus asks us to think of "two wise men,
one  of  them  possessing  all that is supposed to be naturally welcome,
while  the  other  meets  only  with the very reverse." He wants to know
whether  we  would  "assert  that they have an equal happiness." His own
answer is that we should, "if they are equally

[746a]
6sa THE GREAT IDEAS ^wrsc . . . [even] though the one be favored in body
and  in  all  else  that does not help towards wisdom." We are likely to
misconceive  happiness, Plotinus thinks, if we consider the happy man in
terms  of  our  own  feebleness.  "We  count alarming and grave what his
felicity  takes  lightly;  he  would be neither wise nor in the state of
happiness  if  he  had  not  quitted  all  trifling  with  such things."
According  to  Plotinus, "Plato rightly taught that he who is to be wise
and  to  possess  happiness  draws his good from the Supreme, fixing his
gaze  on  That,  becoming like to That, living by That . . . All else he
will attend to only as he might change his residence, not in expectation
of  any  increase  in  his  settled felicity, but simply in a reasonable
attention  to  the differing conditions surrounding him as he lives here
or  there."  If  he  "meets  some turn of fortune that he would not have
chosen, there is not the slightest lessening of his happiness for that."
Like Plato, Plotinus holds that nothing external can separate a virtuous
man  from  happiness—  that  no one can injure a man except himself. The
opposite view is more frequently held. In his argument with Callicles in
the  Gorgias,  Socrates  meets with the proposition that it is better to
injure  others  than  to  be  injured  by  them. This can be refuted, he
thinks,  only  if  CaUicles can be made to understand that the unjust or
vicious  man  is miserable in himself, regardless of his external gains.
The fundamental principle, he says, is that "the happy are made happy by
the  possession of justice and temperance and the miserable miserable by
the  possession  of vice." Happiness is one with justice because justice
or  virtue  in  general  is "the health and beauty and well-being of the
soul."  This  association  of happiness with health the one a harmony in
the  soul  as the other is a harmony in the body—appears also in Freud's
consideration  of  human well-being. For Freud, the ideal of health, not
merely  bodily health but the health of the whole man, seems to identify
happiness  with  peace  of  mind.  "Anyone  who is born with a specially
unfavorable  instinctual  constitution,"  he  writes, "and whose libido-
components  do  not  go  through  the  transformation  and  modification
necessary for suc-

[746b]
cessful  achievement  in  later  life,  will  find  it  hard  to  obtain
happiness."  The  opposite  of happiness is not tragedy but neurosis. In
contrast  to  the  neurotic, the happy man has found a way to master his
inner  conflicts  and  to  become  well-adjusted to his environment. The
theory  of  happiness as mental health or spiritual peace may be another
way  of  seeing the self-sufficiency of happiness, in which all striving
comes  to  rest  because  all  desires  are  fulfilled  or  quieted. The
suggestion  of  this  point  is  found  in the fact that the theologians
conceive beatitude, or supernatural happiness, in both ways. For them it
is  both an ultimate end which satisfies all desires and also a state of
peace  or heavenly rest. "The ultimate good," Augustine writes, "is that
for  the sake of which other things are to be desired, while it is to be
desired  for  its  own sake"; and, he adds, it is that by which the good
"is  finished,  so  that it becomes complete"—allsatisfying. But what is
this  "final  blessedness, the ultimate consummation, the unending end"?
It  is  peace. "Indeed," Augustine says, "we are said to be blessed when
we  have such peace as can be enjoyed in this life; but such blessedness
is  mere misery compared to that final felicity," which can be described
as "either peace in eternal life or eternal life in peace." There may be
differences  of  another  kind among those who regard happiness as their
ultimate  end.  Some  men  identify happiness with the possession of one
particular  type  of good wealth or health, pleasure or power, knowledge
or virtue, honor or friendship—or, if they do not make one or another of
these  things the only component of happiness, they make it supreme. The
question  of  which is chief among the various goods that constitute the
happy  life  is  the  problem  of  the order of goods, to which we shall
return  presently.  But  the  identification  of happiness with some one
good,  to  the  exclusion or neglect of the others, seems to violate the
meaning of happiness on which there is such general agreement. Happiness
cannot  be that which leives nothing to be desired if any good —anything
which  is  in  any way desirable— is overlooked. But it may be said that
the miser desires nothing but gold, and considers himself happy

[747a]
Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS  689  when  he  possesses  a  hoard. That he may
consider  himself  happy cannot be denied. Yet this does not prevent the
moralist   from  considering  him  deluded  and  in  reality  among  the
unhappicst  of  men.  The difference between such illusory happiness and
the  reality  seems  to  depend on the distinction between conscious and
natural desire. According to that distinction, considered in the chapter
on  Desire, the miser may have all that he consciously desires, but lack
many of the things toward which his nature tends and which are therefore
objects  of natural desire. Me may be the unhappiest of men if, with all
the  wealth  in  the  world,  yet self-deprived of friends or knowledge,
virtue or even health, his excliLsive interest in one type of good leads
to  the  frustration  of  many  other  desires.  He  may not consciously
recognize  these,  but  they  nevertheless represent needs of his nature
demanding  fulfillment.  As  suggested  in  the  chapter  on Desire, the
relation  of  natural law to natural desire may . provide the beginning,
at  least, of an answer to . Kant's objection to the ethics of happiness
on  ;  the ground that its principles lack universality I or the element
of obligation. The natural moral * law may command obedience at the same
time  :  that  it  directs  men  to happiness as the satisfaction of all
desires  which  represent  the  innate  tendencies  of man's nature. The
theory  of  natural  desire thus also has a bearing on the issue whether
the content of happiness must really be the same for all men, regardless
of how it may appear to them. Even if men do not identify happiness with
one  type  of  good, but see it as the possession of every sort of good,
can  there be a reasonable difference of opinion concerning the types of
good  which  must  be included or the order in which these several goods
should  be  sought?  A  negative answer seems to be required by the view
that  real  as  opposed  to  apparent  goods  are the objects of natural
desire. Aquinas, for example, admits that ''happy is the man who has all
he  desires,  or  whose  every wish is fulfilledy is a good and adequate
definition"  only  "if  it  be  understood  in a certain way." It is "an
inadequate  definition if understood in another. For if we understand it
simply  of all that man desires by his natural appetite, then it is true
that he who has all that he desires

[747b]
is  happy;  since  nothing  satisfies  man's  natural desire, except the
perfect  good  which  is  Happiness.  But  if wc untlcrsiand it of those
llnngs  that  man  desires  according  to  the  apprehension of reason,"
Aquinas  continues,  then  "it  docs  not  belong to I lappiness to have
certain  things  that man desires; rather does it belong to unhappiness,
in so far as the possession of such things hinders a man from having all
that  he  desires  naturally." For this reason, Aquinas points out, when
Augustine  approved  the  statement  that  ''happy  is he who has all he
desires''  he  added  the words "provided he desires nothing As men have
the  same  complex nature, so they have the same set of natural desires.
As  they  have  the  same  natural  desires, so the real goods which can
fulfill  their  needs  comprise  the  same variety for all. As different
natural  desires  represent  different  parts of human nature —lower and
higher—so the several kinds of good are not equally good. And, according
to  Aquinas,  if  the natural object of the human will "is the universal
good," it follows that "naught can satisfy man's will save the universal
good." This, he holds, "is to be found, not in any created thing, but in
God  alone."  We  shall  return  later to the theologian's conception of
perfect  happiness  as  consisting  in  the  vision  of  God in the life
hereafter.  The  happiness  of  this earthly life (which the philosopher
considers) may be imperfect by comparison, but such temporal feficity as
men can attain is no less determined by natural desire. If a man's undue
craving  for  one  type  of  good  can  interfere with his possession of
another  sort  of good, then the various goods must be ordered according
to  their  worth; and this order, since it reflects natural desire, must
be  the  same  for  all  men.  In such terms Aristotle seems to think it
possible  to  argue  that  the  reafity  of  happiness can be defined by
reference to human nature and that the rules for achieving happiness can
have  a  certain  universality—despite  the  fact that the rules must be
applied  by  individuals  differently  to the circumstances of their own
lives.  No  particular  good  should  be  sought  excessively  or out of
proportion  to  others,  for  the penalty of having too much of one good
thing is deprivation or disorder with respect to other

[748a]
690 THE GREAT IDEAS The relation of happiness to particular goods raises
a  whole  series  of  questions,  each pecuUar to the type of good under
consideration.  Of  these, the most insistent problems concern pleasure,
knowledge,  virtue,  and  the goods of fortune. With regard to pleasure,
the  difficulty  seems  to arise from two meanings of the term which are
more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter on Pleasure and Pain. In one of
these  meanings  pleasure is an object of desire, and in the other it is
the  feeling of satisfaction which accompanies the possession of objects
desired.  It  is  in  the latter meaning that pleasure can be identified
with  happiness  or,  at  least,  be  regarded  as its correlate, for if
happiness  consists  in the possession of all good things it is also the
sum total of attainable satisfactions or pleasures. Where pleasure means
satisfaction,  pain  means  frustration,  not the sensed pain of injured
flesh.  Happiness,  Locke  can therefore say, "is the utmost pleasure we
are  capable  of"; and Mill can define it as "an existence exempt as far
as  possible from pain, and as rich as possible in enjoyments." Nor does
Aristotle  object  to  saying  that  the  happy  life "is also in itself
pleasant."  But  unlike  Locke  and  Mill, Aristotle raises the question
whether all pleasures are good, and all pains evil. Sensuous pleasure as
an  object  often  conflicts  with  other  objects  of  desire.  And  if
"pleasure"  means  satisfaction,  there can be conflict among pleasures,
for  the  satisfaction  of  one  desire  may  lead  to  the  frustration
ofanother.  At  this point Aristotle finds it necessary to introduce the
principle  of virtue. The virtuous man is one who finds pleasure "in the
things  that  are  by  nature pleasant." The virtuous man takes pleasure
07ily  in  the right things, and is willing to suffer pain for the right
end.  If  pleasures, or desires and their satisfaction, can be better or
worse, there must be a choice among them for the sake of happiness. Mill
makes  this  choice  depend on a discrimination between lower and higher
pleasures,  not  on virtue. He regards virtue merely as one of the parts
of  happiness,  in no way different from the others. But Aristotle seems
to  think  that  virtue  is  the principal means to happiness because it
regulates  the choices which must be rightly made in order to obtain all
good things; hence his defv-

[748b]
nition  of  happiness  as  "activity  in accordance with virtue." 1 This
definition raises difficulties of still another order. As the chapter on
Virtue  and Vice indicates, there are for Aristotle two kinds of virtue,
moral  and  intellectual,  the  one  concerned  with  desire  and social
conduct,  the other with thought and knowledge. There are also two modes
of life, sometimes called the active and the contemplative, differing as
a  life  devoted to political activity or practical tasks differs from a
life occupied largely with theoretic problems in the pursuit of truth or
in  the consideration of what is known. Are there two kinds of happiness
then, belonging respectively to the political and the speculative life ?
Is  one a better kind of happiness than another? Does the practical sort
of  happiness  require  intellectual  as  well as moral virtue? Does the
speculative sort require both also? In trying to answer these questions,
and   generally  in  shaping  his  definition  of  happiness,  Aristotle
considers  the  role  of  the  goods  of fortune, such things as health,
wealth,  auspicious birth, native endowments of body or mind, and length
of life. These gifts condition virtuous activity or may present problems
which  virtue  is  needed to solve. But to the extent that having or not
having them is a matter of fortune, they are not within a man's control—
to  get,  keep,  or  give  up.  If  they are indispensable, happiness is
precarious,  or  even  unattainable  by  those  who  are unfortunate. In
addition,  if  the goods of fortune are indispensable, the definition of
happiness  must itself be qualified. More is required for happiness than
activity in accordance with virtue. "Should we not say," Aristotle asks,
"that  he  is happy who is active in accordance with complete virtue and
is sufficiently equipped with external goods, not for some chance period
but  throughout  a complete life? Or must we add 'and who is destined to
live thus and die as befits his fife' ? . . . If so, we shall call happy
those  among  living  men  in  whom these conditions are, and are to be,
fulfiUed— but happy men.'' The consideration of the goods of fortune has
led  to diverse views about the attainability of happiness in this life.
For one thing, they may

[749a]
act  as  an  obstacle  to  happiness.  Pierre  Bczukhov in War and Peace
learned,  during  his  period  of  captivity,  that  "man is created for
happiness;  that  happiness  lies in himself, in the satisfaction of his
natural  human  cravings; that all unhappiness arises not from privation
but from superfluity." The vicissitudes of fortune seem to be what Solon
has  in  mind when, as reported by Herodotus, he tells Croesus, the king
of  Lydia,  that  he will not call him happy "until I hear that thou has
closed  thy  life  happily  ...  for oftentimes God gives men a gleam of
happiness, and then plunges them into ruin." For this reason, in judging
of  happiness, as "in every matter, it behoves us to mark well the end."
Even  if  it  is  possible  to call a man happy while he is alive—on the
ground  that virtue, which is within his power, may be able to withstand
anything  but  the  most  outrageous  fortune—  it is still necessary to
define  happiness  by  reference  to a complete life. Children cannot be
called  happy,  Aristotle  holds,  because their characters have not yet
matured  and their lives are still too far from completion. To call them
happy,  or  to  call  happy  men  of  any age who still may suffer great
misfortune,  is  merely  to  voice the hopes we have for them. "The most
prosperous,"  Aristotle  writes, "may fall into great misfortunes in old
age,  as  is  told  of  Priam  in  the  Trojan  cycle;  and  one who has
experienced  such  chances and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy."
Among  the  goods  of  fortune  which  seem  to  have  a  bearing on the
attainment of happiness, those which constitute the individual nature of
a   human   being  at  birth—physical  traits,  temperament,  degree  of
intelligence—may  be  unalterable  in  the  course  of  life. If certain
inherited  conditions either limit the capacity for happiness or make it
completely  unattainable, then happiness, which is defined as the end of
man, is not the summum bonum for all, or not for all in the same way. In
the  Aristotelian  view,  for example, women cannot be happy to the same
degree  or  in  the same manner as men; and natural slaves, like beasts,
have  no  capacity  for happiness at all, though they may participate in
the  happiness  of  the  masters  they serve. The theory is that through
serving him, the slave gives the master

[749b]
Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS  691 the leisure ncccssiiry for the political or
speculative  life open to those of auspicious birth, Even as the man who
is  a  slave  belongs  wholly to another man, so the highest good of his
life  lies  in  his  contribution  to the happiness of that The question
whether  happiness can be achieved by all normal human beings or only by
those  gifted  with very special talents, depends for its answer in part
on  the  conception  of happiness itself. Like Aristotle, Spinoza places
happiness  in  intellectual  activity of so high an order that the happy
man  is  almost godlike; and, at the very end of his Ethics, he finds it
necessary  to  say  that  the way to happiness "must indeed be difficult
since  it  is  so seldom discovered." Nevertheless, "true peace of soul"
can  be found by the rare individual. "All noble things are as difficult
as  they  are  rare." In contrast, a statement like Tawney's— that "if a
man  has  important  work to do, and enough leisure and income to enable
him  to  do  it properly, he is in possession of as much happiness as is
good  for any of the children of Adam" seems to make happiness available
to more than the gifted few. Whether happiness is attainable by all men,
even  on Tawney's definition, may also depend on the economic system and
the  political  constitution,  to the extent that they determine whether
all  men will be granted the opportunity and the leisure to use whatever
talents  they  have for leading a decent human life. There seems to be a
profound  connection between conceiving happiness in such a way that all
normal  men  are capable of it and insisting that all normal men deserve
political  status  and economic liberty. Mill, for example, differs from
Aristotle  on both scores. Differing from the position of both Aristotle
and  Mill  is  the  view  that  happiness  is an illusory goal— that the
besetting  ills  of  human  life  as  well  as  the  frailty of men lead
inevitably to tragedy. The great tragic poems and the great tragedies of
history  may,  of  course, be read as if they dealt with the exceptional
case,  but  another  interpretation  is possible. Here writ large in the
life  of  the  hero,  the  great or famous man, is the tragic pattern of
human life which is the lot of all men.

[750a]
692 THE GREAT IDEAS Sophocles seems to be saying this, when he writes in
Oedipus  at  Colonus:  "Not  to be born is, past all prizing, best; but,
when  a  man hath seen the Hght, this is next best by far, that with all
speed  he  should go thither, whence he hath come. For when he hath seen
youth  go  by,  with  its  light  follies,  what troublous affliction is
strange  to  his  lot,  what suffering is not therein ? —envy, factions,
strife,  battles,  and  slaughters; and, last of all, age claims him for
her  own  age, dispraised, infirm, unsociable, unfriended, with whom all
woe  of woe abides." Death is sometimes regarded as the symbol of tragic
frustration.  Sometimes  it  is  not  death, but the fear of death which
overshadows life, so that for Montaigne, learning how to face death well
seems  indispensable  to living well. "The very fehcity of life itself,"
he writes, "which depends upon the tranquihty and contentment of a well-
descended  spirit,  and  the  resolution and assurance of a well-ordered
soul,  ought  never  to  be attributed to any man till he has first been
seen  to  play  the  last,  and, doubtless, the hardest act of his part.
There may be disguise and dissimulation in all the rest ... but, in this
scene of death, there is no more counterfeiting: we must speak out plain
and  discover what there is of good and clean in the bottom of the pot."
So,  too,  for  Lucretius,  what happiness men can have depends on their
being rid of the fear of death through knowing the causes of things. But
neither  death  nor the fear of death may be the crucial flaw. It may be
the  temporal  character  of  life  itself.  It  is  said that happiness
consists in the possession of all good things. It is said that happiness
is  the  quaUty  of  a whole life, not the feeling of satisfaction for a
moment.  If  this  is  so,  then  Solon's remark to Croesus can be given
another  meaning,  namely,  that  happiness  is  not  something actually
enjoyed  by a man at any moment of his life. Man can come to possess all
good  things only in the succession of his days, not simultaneously; and
so  happiness is never actually achieved but is always in the process of
being achieved. When that process is completed, the man is dead, his Ufe
is  done.  It may still be true that to live well or virtuously—with the
help  of  fortune—  is  to  live  happily,  but so long as life goes on,
happiness is

[750b]
pursued  rather  than  enjoyed.  On earth and in time, man does not seem
able  to  come  to  rest in any final satisfaction, with all his desires
quieted  at  once  and  forever by that vision of perfection which would
deserve  Faust's  "Stay,  thou  art  so fair!" As ALREADY INTIMATED, the
problem of human happiness takes on another dimension when it is treated
by  the Christian theologians. Any happiness which men can have on earth
and in time is, according to Augustine, "rather the solace of our misery
than  the  positive  enjoyment of felicity. "Our very righteousness," he
goes  on  to  say,  "though true in so far as it has respect to the true
good,  is yet in this life of such a kind that it consists rather in the
remission  of  sins  than  in  the  perfecting  of virtues. . . . For as
reason, though subjected to God, is yet 'pressed down by the corruptible
body,'  so  long  as  it is in this mortal condition, it has not perfect
authority  over vice. . . . For though it exercises authority, the vices
do  not  submit  without  a struggle. For however well one maintains the
conflict,  and  however  thoroughly  he has subdued these enemies, there
steals  in some evil thing, which, if it do not find ready expression in
act,  sUps  out  by the lips, or insinuates itself into the thought; and
therefore his peace is not full so long as he is at war with his vices."
Accepting  the  definition  of  happiness  as the possession of all good
things  and the satisfaction of all desires, the theologians compare the
successive accumulation of finite goods with the unchanging enjoyment of
an infinite good. An endless prolongation of the days of our mortal life
would not increase the chances of becoming perfectly happy, because time
and  change  permit no rest, no finality. Earthly happiness is therefore
intrinsically  imperfect.  Perfect happiness belongs to the eternal life
of  the immortal soul, completely at rest in the beatific vision, for in
the  vision  of God the soul is united to the infinite good by knowledge
and  love.  In  the divine presence and glory all the natural desires of
the  human  spirit  are simultaneously satisfied— the intellect's search
for  truth  and  the  will's yearning for the good. "That final peace to
which  all our righteousness has reference, and for the sake of which it
is

[751a]
maintained,"  Augustine  descrilKs  as  "the felicity of a life which is
done  with  bondage"—  to  vice  or  conflict,  to  lime  and change. In
contrast, the best human hfe on earth is miserable with frustrations and
an  ennui that human nature cannot escape. The doctrine of immortaUty is
obviously presupposed in the theological consideration of happiness. For
Kant  immortality  is  a  necessary  condition  of  the  soul's infinite
progress toward the moral perfection, the holiness, which alone deserves
perfect  happiness.  But  for  theologians  like  Augustine and Aquinas,
neither  change  nor  progress  play  any  part in immortal life. On the
contrary,  the  immortal  soul  finds its salvation in eternal rest. The
difference  between  motion and rest, between time and eternity, belongs
to  the  very  essence of the theologian's distinction between imperfect
happiness  on  earth  and perfect happiness hereafter. These matters, of
relevance  to  the theory of happiness, are discussed in the chapters on
Eternity  and  Immortality;  and  in  the chapter on Sin we find another
religious  dogma,  that of original sin, which has an obvious bearing on
earthly  happiness as well as on eternal salvation. Fallen human nature,
according  to  Christian  teaching,  is  incompetent to achieve even the
natural  end  of imperfect temporal happiness without God's help. Milton
expounds this doctrine of indispensable grace in Paradise Lost, in words
which  God the Father addresses to His Son: Man shall not quite be lost,
but  sav'd  who  will,  Yet  not  of will in him, but grace in me Freely
voutsaft;  once  more I will renew His lapsed powers, though forfeit and
enthrall'd  By  sin  to  foul exorbitant desires; Upheld by me, yet once
more he shall stand On even ground against his mortal foe, By me upheld,
that  he  may  know how frail His fall'n condition is, and to me owe All
his  deliv'rance,  and  to none but me. God's grace is needed for men to
lead  a good life on earth as well as for eternal blessedness. On earth,
man's  efforts  to be virtuous require the reinforcement of supernatural
gift-s—  faith,  hope,  and  charity, and the infused moral virtues. The
beatific vision in Heaven totally exceeds the natural powers of the soul
and comes with the gift of added supernatural light. It seems, in short,
that there is no purely natural

[751b]
CiiAi'Tr.R  33:  FIAPiMNESS 693 happiness according to the strict tenets
of  Christian  doctrine.  Aquinas  employs  the  conception  of  eternal
beatitude not only to measure the imptrlection of earthly life, but also
to insist that temporal happiness is happiness at all only to the extent
that  it  is  a  remote  participation of true and perfect happiness. It
cannot  be  said  of temporal happiness that it "excludes every evil and
fulfills  every  desire. In this life every evil cannot be excluded. For
this  present life is subject to many unavoidable evils: to ignorance on
the  part  of  the intellect; to inordinate affection on the part of the
appetite;  and  to  many  penalties  on  the  part  of  the  body. . . .
Likewise,"  Aquinas  continues,  "neither  can  the  desire  for good be
satiated  in  this life. For man naturally desires the good which he has
to  be  abiding. Now the goods of the present life pass away, since life
itself  passes  away.  .  .  .  Wherefore  it is impossible to have true
happiness in this life." If perfect happiness consists in "the vision of
the  Divine  Essence,  which  men  cannot  obtain  in  this life," then,
according  to  Aquinas,  only the earthly life which somehow partakes of
God  has  a  measure  of  happiness  in it. Earthly happiness, imperfect
because  of  its  temporal  and  bodily  conditions,  consists in a life
devoted  to  God—a  kind  of  inchoate participation here and now of the
beatific  vision  hereafter.  On earth there can be only a beginning "in
respect  of  that  operation  whereby  man  is united to God. ... In the
present  life, in as far as we fall short of the unity and continuity of
that  operation,  so do we fall short of perfect happiness. Nevertheless
it  is  a  participation  of  happiness; and so much the greater, as the
operation  can  be more continuous and more one. Consequently the active
life  which  is  busy  with  many things, has less of happiness than the
contemplative   life,   which  is  busied  with  one  thing,  i.e.,  the
contemplation of truth." When the theologians consider the modes of life
on earth in terms of the fundamental distinction between the secular and
the  religious,  or the active and the contemplative, they seem to admit
the  p^ossibility  of  imperfect  happiness in either mode. In either, a
devout  Christian  dedicates  every act to the glory of God, and through
such  dedication  embraces  the  divine  in  the  passing moments of his
earthly pilgrimage.

[752a]
694 THE GREAT IDEAS 2a. The marks of a happy man, the quality of a happy
life  (4)  The role of honor in happiness 4. The pursuit of happiness 7.
The  distinction  between  temporal  and  eternal  happiness yc. Eternal
beatitude: the perfection of human happiness (2) The joy of the blessed:
the communion of saints yd. The beatitude of God

[752b]
OUTLINE  OF TOPICS PAGE 1. The desire for happiness: its naturalness and
universality  695  2.  The  understanding  of happiness: definitions and
myths  696 2B. The content of a happy life: the parts or constituents of
happiness 697 (i) The contribution of the goods of fortune to happiness:
wealth,  health,  longevity (2) Pleasure and happiness 698 (3) Virtue in
relation  to happiness 699 (5) The importance of friendship and love for
happiness  700  (6) The effect of political power or status on happiness
701  (7)  The  function  of  knowledge and wisdom in the happy life: the
place   of  speculative  activity  and  contemplation  3.  The  argument
concerning  happiness  as a first principle of morality: the conflicting
claims  of  duty  and  happiness  702 /\a. Man's capacity for happiness:
differences  in  human  nature  with  respect  to  happiness 703 4^. The
attainability  of  happiness:  the  fear of death and the tragic view of
human  life  5.  The  social  aspects  of happiness: the doctrine of the
common  good 704 5 J. The happiness of the individual in relation to the
happiness  or  good of other men 705 5^. The happiness of the individual
in  relation  to the welfare of the state: happiness 6. The happiness of
men  in  relation  to  the gods or the after-life 706 ya. The effects of
original sin: the indispensability of divine grace for the attainment of
natural  happiness  707  yb. The imperfection of temporal happiness: its
failure  to  satisfy  natural desire (i) The beatific vision 708 (3) The
misery of the damned 709

[753a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  m  4  Homf.r:  Iliad, bk ii (265 2H^\ 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume in the set; the number 12d mdicaies that the pas
sage is in section d of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is printed
in  one  column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves
of  the page. For example, in 53 Jam Es : P>v<rAo/o^>', 1 16a-l 19b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the  page.  Forexample,in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283I  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  {D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. . The desire for happiness: its
naturalness  and  universality  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a / Symposium,
164c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[1095*13-29]
340b-c;  CH 7 [1097*24-^22] 342c-343a; bk x, ch 6 [1176*30-^8] 430d-431a
/  Politics,  bk vii, CH 13 [1331^39-1332*4] 536c / Rhetoric, bk i, CH 5
[1360^4-13]   600d-601a;   ch   6   [i362''io-i2]  603b  11  Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk i. Slid 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 24, 203c204c
18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 31-34 79c80c / City ofGod, bk x, ch
i,  298b,  d; bk xix, CH 12 517b-519a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 2, a i, REP I lOd-lld; Q 12, A I, ANs 50c-51c; a 8, rep 4 57b-58b;
q 19, a 3, ans llOb-lllc; q 26, a 2, ANS and rep 2 150c-151a: q 62, a i,
ans  317d-318c; q 63, a 3 327b-328b; q 82, a i 431d-432c; q 83, a i, rep
5  436d-438a;  a 2, ans 438a-d; part i-ii, q i, aa 4-8 612a-615c; Q 2, A
2,  REP 3 616d-617b; q 3, a 6, rep 2 627b-628a; q 5, a i, ans 636d-637c;
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  639a-640b;  a  8  642d-643d  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 63, A I 63a-64a; q 84, a 4, ans 176d-178a; part
ii-ii, Q 29, A 2 531a-d

[753b]
d Chapter 33: HAPPINESS 695 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[127-129] 79d; xviii [19-33] 80a
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76c25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-7a; 149b-d 31
Spinoza:  E/Zr/W,  part iv, prop 19-21 429d-430b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 169
203a;  425  243b-244b;  437  251a  /  Geometrical Demonstration, 440b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk i, ch ii, SECT 3, 104c; bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  42-73  188c199c  passim,  esp  sect 42 188c, sect 51 191 b-c, SECT
55-56  192c-193b,  sect  64 195a-b, sect 70 197a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
235a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 258d-259a; 261c; 266b-c;
267b-d  / Practical Reason, 300a-d; 306a / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  369c-370d  /  Judgement,  478a-479a;  584d-585c; 588b [fn 2] 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism, 461c-464d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii,
par 123 44a-b; additions, 78 128c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1544-1706]
37b-41a;  PART II [11,559-594] 281b-282a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 123a 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 316d-317a; 592d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiii,  577a-578b;  BK  XIV,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631c 52 DosTOEv sky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bkv, 127b137c passim 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents, 772a

[754a]
2.  The  understanding  of happiness: definitions and myths 6 Herodotus:
History, bk i, 6c-8a; 48c; bk hi, 98b-99a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124a-129d /
Syrnposhim,  164c-165a / Republic, bk ii, 311c-312b; bk x, 437c-441a,c /
Timaeus,  444c-446b  /  Critias,  479b-485d  /  Statesman,  586c-589c  /
Philebus,  609a-c  /  Laws,  bk ii, 656d-658d 9 Aristotle : Ethics, bk i
339a-348d esp ch 7
[1097^22-1098*19] 343a-c; bk
ix,  ch  9 [1169^ 28-30] 423c; BK X, CH 6-8 430d-434a / Politics, BK IV,
CH II
[1295*35-38] 495c; bk
VII, CH 13
[1331^24-1332*27]
536b-537a  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [1360^4-18] 600d-601a / Poetics, CH 6
[1450*17-20] 684c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; [646-651] 23b; bk hi [14-24] 30b; bk V [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-42]
80a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d110a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 3 263b264a 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b /
Aeneid, bk viii
[306-336] 267a-268a
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c  /  Pyrrhus,  320c321a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  iv-v  12b-21a  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 29-34
78d80c  / City of God, bk xii, ch i 342b,d-343c / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  4  625b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a I, rep i
lOd-lld;  part i-ii, qq 2-4 615c636c 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 65a-b;
73d;  76c-d  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 18a-b; 60c-66b
esp  65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  26d-28a:  538a-543a,c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, prop 18, scholPROP 28 429a-431c; appendix, iv 447b-c;
part  v,  prop 39, schol 462b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
vii,  SECT  2  131c-d;  ch xxi, sect 42-43 188c-d; sect 55-56 192c-193b;
sect  64  195a-b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  100  432b-c 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  283a-b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 325b-d 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  236b-d  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b;
256d-257d; 267b-d / Practical Reason, 298c-d; 339b-d; 345a-c /Judgement,
584d-587a;  594c-596c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448a-452b  esp  448a;
456a-d;  461c-464d  44  Boswell:/o/i/;^o;7, 144d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  ii,  par 123 44a-b; additions, 78 128c-d 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[9695-9902]
235a240b  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 772a-b; 777c-778a;
782d

[754b]
696 THE GREAT IDEAS Itola 2a. The marks of a happy man, the quality of a
happy  life  5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [351-474]  55d-57b  5  Sophocles:
Antigone [582-624] 136b-c; [11551171] 140d-141a 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
[878-911]
347b-c  /  Hecuba [619-628] 358a 7 Plato: Gorgias, 284a-285a / Philebus,
614b-d;   617d-618a;  635b-639a,c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7
[1097*15-1098*   19]   342c-343c;   ch   8  [1098^20-29]  344a-b;  ch  9
[i099^33]-cH  10 [1101*20] 345b-346c; bk x, CH 7-8 431d-434a / Politics,
bk  vii,  ch  8  [1328*  37-^2] 532d; ch 13 [1331^24-1332^27] 536b537a /
Poetics, ch 6 [1450*15-20] 684c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch 24 203c210a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  v, sect 8 269d270b; SECT 34 273c; sect 36 273d; bk ix,
SECT  2 291c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 91c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  v, pref 207b; bk viii, ch 8 270a-d; bk x, ch 1-3 298b,d301a; BK XII,
ch  i  342b,d-343c;  bk  xix, ch 13-14 519a-520d; ch 20 523d-524a; ch 26
528d-529a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, qq 2-5 615c-643d
passim,  esp  q 2, a 4, ans 618a-d, Q 5, A 8 642d-643d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 84, A 4, ANS 176d-178a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 26d-28a; 107d-108c;
146b-c  26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc hi [275303] 326c-d /
Merchant of Venice, act i, sc ii
[i-io] 408b
31  Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 49d-50b 32 Milton: UAllegro 17b-21a /
IlPenseroso  21a25a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  169-170  203a  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  351c-352a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b-237c  / Practical
Reason,  298c-d;  345a-c  43  Mill:  Liberty, 293d-297b / Representative
Government,  347d-348b  /  Utilitarianism, 448a; 450b-c; 451a-b 44 Bosw-
Ei.!.: Johnson, 144d-145a; 164d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, intro, par
20  17a;  additions,  15  118d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 165a-b 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3431-3458]  84a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,
204b-205a;  287b288a;  360a-361a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk vi,
259b-260a;  BK  XI,  480a-482b  52 DosroEvsKY: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
130a136b; bk vi, 148d-150d; 153d-157b; bk vii, 190c-191a,c

[755a]
lb  to  lb{\) Chapter 33: HAPPINESS 697 2b. The content of a happy life:
the  parts or constituents of happiness 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [^51-474]
55d 57b 5 Sophocles: Antigone (1155 1 171) 140d 141a 5 Euripides: Ion
[585-647] 287d 288b
/  Bacchantes  [878-91  1  1  347b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i. 6c-8a 7
Plato:  Euthydemns,  69a-71a;  74b-76b / Gorgias, 267c-270a; 275b-276b /
Republic,  hk  i, 295d-297b; bk v, 364c 365d / Ttmaeus, 475d476b / Laws,
bk  i, 643c; bk 11, 656d-658d; BK V, 688c-690c; 694a-d; bk viii, 737c-d;
bk IX, 751c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[1095*1^-27]
340b; CH 5 340d-341b; ch 8
[io99''3i]-ch 9
[1100*9]
344d-345c esp ch 9
[1099^25^:51]
345b; bk ix, ch 9 423a-424b passim / Politics, BK III, CH 9 [1280*31-34]
477d-478a;  bk  vii, ch 13 [1331^24-1332*27] 536b-537a / Rhetoric, BK I,
CH  5  600d-602d; ch 9 [1367^33-35] 610d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk v [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi
[1-42] 80a-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv, ch 4 225a-228a; CH 6-7 230b-235a 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 12 262b-c; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; bk
viii,  sect I 285a-b; bk ix, sect 2 291c-d; bk x, sect 6 297a-b; bk xii,
sect  3  307b-d  14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d;  74c-75c / PoplicolaSolon
86a-87d  / Demosthenes, 691 b,d 17 Plotinus : First Ennead, tr v 19b-21a
/  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  9, 70d-71a; ch 15 74d-75b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk vi, par 9-10 37c38b; par 18-20 40d-41c; bk x, par 33-34
79d80c  /  City of God, bk iv, ch 21 198d-199d; bk VIII, CH 8 270a-d; bk
xix,  ch  1-4  507a-513c;  bk  XXII,  CH  24 609a-612a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  -c  A  2,  REP  2  105c-106b;  q  26, a 4
151c-152a,c;  ;  PART i-ii, Q I, A 5, REP I 613a-614a; a 7 614c615a; q 2
615c-622b;  q  4  629c-636c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [1251-1267] 180b /
Wife  ofBath's Prologue [5583-6410] 256a-269b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  76c-d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk i, 60c-66b esp
65c-66b;  bk  hi,  133b-140b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 70d-72a; 107a-112d;
126b-131a;   231d-238d;   279d-281a;  312c-314b;  459c-462a;  471a-472a;
478c-479c;  486b-497b  29  Cervantes: Do« Quixote, part ii, 379d-380a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  18,  scholprop  28  429a-431c;  appendix,  iv  447b-c  33 V\scAi.\
Pensees,  164-172  202b-203b; 174 204a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  55-56  192c-193b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 311b-312a;
403a-405d  esp  403c-d,  404b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laivs, bk xiv,
104c105a 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v, 336c-d; 343b-c

[755b]
7  40  (iiubon:  Decline  and  Fall, 572a c; 644d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  297c  298a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b  23  7c  / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 256a 257c; 258d 259a; 266a c; 267b-d / Practical
Rca<on,  345a  c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  (f  Ethics,  370b d /
Judgement, 584d 586a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448a-453a passim; 461c464d
44  Hoswill:  Johnson,  123b;  203b  c; 214b: 350d351b; 505c 46 He(;i:l:
Philosophy  ofRight,  intro, par 20 17a; additions, 15 118d 47 (ioetiie:
Faust esp part i
[^54-521]
11a15a, [602-784 1 16b 20b,
[1064-1 125] 26b-28a,
[1544-1571]
37b 38a,
[1660-1706J
40a 41a,
[1765-1775]
42b, [:}2i7-:528i] 79a-80a, part II
[9^56-957^1
227a-232a,  [9695-^944]  235a241b,  [11,441-452]  278b 48 Melville: Moby
Dicf{,  308a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v, 194a-198b passim;
215b-218b;  bk  vi, 235a 238a; bk vii, 275a; bk xiii, 577a-578b; bk xiv,
605b-d;  bk  XV,  630c-634a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
25d27d;  37c-38a;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim,  esp  135d-136b  53 James:
Psychology,  199b-204b  passim, esp 199b-202a 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  771a779a esp 772a-776b, 777a-b 2^(1) The contribution
of  the  goods  of  fortune  to happiness: wealth, health, longevity Old
Testament:  Exodus, 20:17 / Deuteronomy^ 11:13-17 / Psalms, 34:9-10; 91;
112:1-3;  128;  144:11-15—  (D)  Psalms,  33:10-11;  90;  111:1-3;  127;
143:11-15  /  Proverbs,  10:27;  15:16-17;  16:8 / Ecclesiastes, 2:4-11;
4:5-8;  5-6  esp  5:917— (D) Ecclesiastes, 2:4-11; 4:5-8; 5-6 esp 5:8-16
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 30:14-17— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30 : 1 4-1
New Testament: Matthew, 19:16-30 / Philippians, 4:10-23 / / Timothy, 6 /
Hebrews,  13:5  5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [155-172]  16d-17a 5 Sophocles:
Oedipus at Colonus
[1211-1248]
125b-c 5 Euripides: Suppliants [1080-1113] 267d-268a / Trojan Women
[466-510] 274a-b
/ Electra
[420-431] 331a / Phoenician Maidens [552-558]
382d  / Cyclops [316-346] 443b 5 Aristophanes : Birds [592-610] 550a-c /
Plutus  629a-642d  esp  [415-618]  633d-636d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
7b-8a;  bk  vii,  224d-225a  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b /
Republic,  BK  I,  295d-297b; bk hi, 325b-c; bk iii-iv, 341c-343b; bk v,
364c-365d  / Critias, 485b-c / Laws, bk v, 690a-c: 694a-d; bk ix, 751c /
Seventh Letter, 805d-806a

[756a]
698  The  content  of  a happy life: the parts or con- {2b. stituents of
happiness.  2^(1)  The contribution of the goods offortune to happiness:
wealth, health, longevity^ 9 Aristotle: Ethics^ bk i, ch 4
[1095*13-27]
340b;  CH 5 [1096*5-10] 341a-b; ch 7 [1098*1819] 343c; CH 8 [1099*31-^8]
344d-345a;  ch 10II 345c-347a; bk vii, ch 13 [1153^14-24] 405a; BK X, CH
8  [1178^33-1179*16]  433c-d  /  Politics,  BK  VII,  CH  I  527a-d  esp
[1323^22-29] 527c-d; CH 13 [1331^39-1332*27] 536c-537a / Rhetoric, BK I,
CH  5  [1360^14-30] 601a-b; [1361^27-35] 602 b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[59-78]
30d-31a;
[1076-1094]
44a,c;  bk  v  [1113-1135]  75c-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch 6
230b-232c  14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c  / Aemilius Paulus, 224d-225c;
229a-c  /  Marcus  Cato,  285c-d  /  Pyrrhus,  320c-321a / Caius Marius,
353d354a,c / Demosthenes, 691b,d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 91c; bk xiv,
154a-c  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr v 19b-21a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  viii,  ch 8, 270a-b; bk xix, CH3, 510a-c; ch 13-14 519a520d 19
Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  A  4,  ANS  and  rep 2
151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii, q I, a 7, ANS 614c-615a; q 2, aa 1-5 615d-619c
esp  A  4, ANS 618a-d; q 4, aa 5-7 632c-636a; Q 5, A 4, ANS 639a-640b; q
12,  a  3,  rep  i  670d671b  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [25-96]
9d10c;  purgatory,  xv  [40-81]  75d-76a  22 Chaucer: Prologue of Man of
Law's Tale
[4519-4546] 235b-236a / Tale ofMelibeus, par
49-50 422a-423a / Parson's Tale, par 28, 515a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  133b-140b;  bk iv, 234a-235a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
33b-36a;  lOSc-llOc;  122a-124d;  126b-129d; 368d 26 Shakespeare: As You
Li^e It, act ii, sc i
[1-20] 603c-d
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [68-79] 49c-d / Othello, act i, sc
hi  [199-220]  211a-b  /  Sonnets,  cxlvi  608c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  86b-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61a-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part hi, 124a-129a 37 Fielding: Tom ]ones, 2b; 263c-d; 283a-b
38 Rousseau: Inequality, 350c; 363a-366d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  256a-b  /  Practical  Reason, 330d-331a / Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 370b-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 451d-452b; 462c-463b
44  Boswell:  Johnson, 102d-103a; 124d-125d; 349a-c; 403a; 491b; 492b-c;
494b; 498d499a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 194c-d; bk x, 430a-b; bk
xi, 514b-d; bk xih, 577a-578b; bk xiv, 605b-d; bk xv, 630c-631a

[756b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 2^(1) to 2b{2) Brothers Karamazov, bk vi. 52 Dostoevsky:
164b-d  53  James  :  Psychology,  189a-b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  777a779a  2^(2)  Pleasure  and  happiness  Old  Testament:
Proverbs, 13:19; 21:17; 23:2021,29-35 / Ecclesiastes, 2:1-2; 3:12-13,22;
5:18-20;  8:15—  (Z))  Ecclesiastes,  2:1-2;  3:1213,22; 5:18-19; 8:15 /
Isaiah,  22:12-13—  (D)  Isaias,  22:12-13 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
2:1-9— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 2 :i-9 New Testament: Luke, 12:16-21 / //
Peter,   2:12-14  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [11  55-1  171]  140d-141a  5
Euripides: Alcestis
[773-802]
243d-244a  /  Cyclops  [163-174]  441  d  7 Plato: Protagoras, 57d-62d /
Gorgias,  275b284d  /  Republic, bk ix, 421a-427b / Philebus 609a-639a,c
esp 635c-639a,c / Laws, bk i, 646a; bk v, 689c-690c; bk vii, 715c-716a /
Seventh  Letter,  801  b-c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1072^
14-24] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[1095^13-22]
340d;  CH  8  [1099*7-30]  344c-d; bk vii, ch ii14 403c-406a,c esp ch 13
[1153^8-1154*6]  404d405b; BK IX, CH 9 423a-424b; bk x, ch 1-5 426a-430d
passim;  ch  6  [ii76^8]-ch  7  [1178*8] 431a-432c esp ch 7 [1177*24-28]
431d-432a  /  Politics,  BK  VIII,  ch  3  [1337^27-1338*9] 543a-b; CH 5
[1339^32-40]  545b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1360^14-18]  601a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk II
[1-36]
V
[141215a-c; BK HI
[1003-1010] 43a; bk
1435]  79b-d  14 Plutarch: Demetrius, 747b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
iv,  ch  1-2  12 b13c; ch 6-7 15a-16a; ch 12 17d; tr v, ch 4 19c; ch 8-9
20c-d  /  Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15 74d-75b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  viii,  ch  8 270a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 26, a 4,
ANS  and  REP 2 151c-152a,c; part i-ii, q i, A 6, REP I 614a-c; a 7, ans
614c-615a;  q  2,  a  6  619d-620d; q 3, a 4, ans 625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-2
629d-631a;  Q 5, a 8 642d-643d; q 34, a 3 770c-771c; Q 35, a 5 775d-777a
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 84, A 4, ANS 176d-178a; part
ii-h, q 28 527b530a; q 180, a 7 614d-616a; part hi suppl, q 81, A 4, rep
4  966d-967d; q 90, a 3 1014d1016a; Q 95, A 5, ANS 1048a-1049d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvh
[127-139] 79d; XIX [1-69] 81c-82a; xxx-xxxi
99b-102b  22 Chaucer: Prologue [331-360] 165a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk i, 60c-66b esp 65c-66b

[757a]
2^(3)  to  2^(4)  Chapter 33: HAPPINESS 699 25 Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d;
70d-72a;   110c112a;   235c-236a;   394a  395b;  406a  408b;  431c-432d;
527b-528a; 538a 543a.c 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act i, sc I
[1-162]  254a-256a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, 193b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 71d 72a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 139-14^ 196b-200a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  11, ch vii, SECT 2 131c-d; sect 5
132c;  ch  xxi,  sect 4247 188c-190b passim, csp sect 42-43 188c-d; sect
55-56  192c-193b  passim  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 192b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  234c-d  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals,
256c257c;   258d-259a   /  Practical  Reason,  298c-300d  esp  298c-d  /
Judgement, 478b-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 447b-455a esp 448a; 461c-464d
44  Bosv/ell:  Johnson, 378a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions,
15  118d  47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1741-1775] 41b-42b 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  94a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  259d-260a; bk VIII,
334d-335a;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  XIV,  605b-d; bk xv, 630c-631c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk hi 46a82a,c esp 54b-58a; bk iv, 88d;
bk xii, 370b-d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 599b-d / Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  772a-774c  esp  772a-c  2b{i)  Virtue  in relation to
happiness  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:26; 20:12 / Psalms, i; 34:11-22;
106:3;  112;  119;  128— (D) Psalms^ i; 33:12-23; 105:3; iii; 118; 127 /
Proverbs,  3:13-26,33;  10:6-7;  10:27-11:11;  16:8,20,32;  28:14,16,20;
29:18;  31:10-31  /  Ecclesiastes,  7:16-17— (D) Ecclesiastes, 7:17-18 /
Eze/{iel,   18:5-9—  (D)  Ezechiel,  18:5-9  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,
14:1-10;   25:1-12—   (D)   OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  14:1-10;  25:1-16  New
Testament:  Romans,  4:6-8  / / Timothy, 6 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 69a-71a;
74b-76b / Phaedrus, 128d-129c / Gorgias, 262a-270a; 275b284d / Republic,
bk  i,  295d-297b;  304a-c;  bk i-ii, 306b-315c; bk ix, 418d-421a; bk x,
436c437c;  439b-d  /  Timaeus, 475d-476b / Critias, 485b-c / Theaetetus,
528c-531a  /  Lau^s,  bk  ii,  656d-658c;  bk  v, 688c-690c esp 690b-c /
Seventh Letter, 806b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5 [1095^26-1096* 4]
341a;  ch  7-13  342c-348d  passim,  esp  ch  8  344a-345a; bk vi, ch 12
393b-394a passim, esp
[1144*1-6] 393c; bk x, ch 6 [1176*30-^8] 430d431a; ch 6 [ii77*i]-ch 8 [1179*32] 431c-434a
/  Politics,  bk  IV,  ch  II [1295*35-38] 495c; bk VII, CH I 527a-d esp
[1323^21-1324*4]  527c-d; CH 8 [1328*37-^2] 532d; ch 9 [i328''33-i329*2]
533b;
[1329*18-24]
533c; ch 13
[1332*8-27]
536d-537a; ch 15 [1334*12-^7] 539a-b / Rhetoric, bk I, CH 5 [1360^14-27]
601a

[757b]
d  b  12  Kpictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch ^ 108b c; hk III, CH 24 203c
210a;  hk  iv,  ch r 213a 223d 12 AuRELiirs: Meditations, bk hi, sect 12
262b  c; BK V, SECT ^4 ^6 273c d; bk vi, sect 16 275b d; bk vii, sect 28
281d;  sect  68 284c d 14 Pli;tarc:h: Numa Pompilius, 60a b / Aristides,
265c  d / Demosthenes, 691 b,d 17 Pi.oTiNus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15
74d75b  18  Augustine:  City  ofGod,  bk  viii, ch 8 270a-d; bk IX, CH 4
287a-288b; bk xix, ch 1-4 507a513c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  26,  a I, REP 2 150b-C; PART I-II, Q 2, A 2, RKP I 616d617b; A 4, ANS
618a-d;  a  7 620d-621c; q 4, a 4 63 Id 632c; q 5, a 4, ans 639a 640b; a
7,  ANS  642a24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d; 70d-72a; 146b-c; 389d-390a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii, 222b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71d-72a 31
Spinoza;  Ethics, part iv, prop 18, scholPROP 28 429a-431c; part v, prop
42  463b-d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 72 198a-c
36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 538a-539a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 316a-c 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 336c-d 42 Y^KST-.Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
ofMorals,  282d283d / Practical Reason, 306d-307a; 338c-348b esp 339a-b,
340c-342a,  344c-347d  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 366a- b;
374a-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 452b-455a; 461d-464d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 214c-216d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 26a27d;
BK VI 146b,d-170d esp 164a-165a, 167b168c; epilogue, 411b-412d 54 Freud:
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 793a794a / New Introductory Lectures,
878a2^(4) The role of honor in happiness 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix
[307-429] 60b-61c; bk
XII  [290-328]  85b-c  5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes [683-684] 34c 5
Euripides: Andromache
[768-789]
321d / Hecuba [299-331] 355b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c-7b; bk ix,
304a   6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  397d398d  7  Plato:
Euthydemus,  69a-b / Republic, bk ii, 310c-315c passim; bk ix, 421a-422b
/ Seventh Letter, 805d-806a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[1095^22-31]
340d-341a / Politics, bk vii, ch 13 [1332*8-27] 536d-537a; en 14
[i333*3o-*'25]
538a-c; ch 15 [1334*12-^8] 539a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1360*^19-27] 601a

[758a]
{2b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts or con^ stituents of
happiness.  2^(4)  The role of honor in happiness.) 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk hi
[59-78]
30d-31a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  21 127b-c; BK IV, CH 6
230b-232c  12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 258a-b; BK VI, sect
51  279b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  i 285a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [441-493]
115a-116b; bk VI
[886-892]
234b-235a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b;  bk x [276-286] 309b-310a; [656688]320a-321a; bk xi [376-444]
338b-340a  14  Plutarch:  Poplicola'Solon,  86a-c  / Pelopidas, 245c-d /
Lysander,  354b,d  /  Agis,  648b,d649a  /  Cicero,  717a-b  15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  iv,  267c-d  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 59-64
86b87d  / City of God, bk v, ch 12-20 216d-226a; bk viii, ch 8 270a-d 19
Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 26, a 4, ANS 151c-152a,c; part
i-ii,  q  2,  aa  2-3 616d618a; q 4, a 8, rep i 636a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 185, A I 639c-641c; part hi suppl, q 96, a 7,
REP  3  1061b-1062a  21  Dante  :  Divine Comedy, hell, hi [22-6^] 4b-d;
PARADISE,  VI  [112-126] 114d-115a 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [3041-3056]
210a  /  Parson's Tale, par 10, 500a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 161c
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  112a-d; 125a-c; 300c306a passim 26 Shakespeare:
Richard II, act i, sc i
[175185] 322b-c / 1st Henry IV, act
i,  sc  hi  [160208] 439b-d; act v, sc i [127-144] 462a-b / Henry V, act
iv, sc hi
[16-67] 555d-556b /
Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc ii [84-96] 570b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida,  act ii, sc ii 113c-115d; act v, sc hi [23-28] 137b / Othello,
ACT II, sc hi [262-270] 219d; act hi, sc hi [155-161] 223d / Coriolanus,
act  i,  sc  HI  [1-28]  355b-c  /  Sonnets, xxv 590a 29 Cervantes : Don
Quixote  esp  part  i,  32c-33a,  57d-58a,  145b-147d,  part ii, 222b-c,
227c228d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part vi, 65c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  hi,  prop 53, corol 413a; prop 55, schol 413b-d 32 Milton: Lycidas
27b-32a esp [64-84] 29a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 147-155 200b-201b; 158-164
2u2a-b;  400-401 240b-241a; 404 241a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 360c-361a;
362b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 176c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals, 256a-b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 449a -c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
124d-125d: 128b; 163d
[fn 4]; 498c-499a
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 124 44b-d; part hi, par 253
79a-c

[758b]
700  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2^(4) to 2bi5) 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-d;
312a-314b  passim,  esp 312c; 322a-c; 592d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
ii,  82a-83c;  bk  HI,  146d-147c; bk v, 214c-215a 53 James: Psychology,
189b-191a;  198b-199b  2b{5)  The  importance of friendship and love for
happiness  4 Homer: Iliad, bk xvhi [1-137] 130a-131c 7 Plato: Lysis, 18d
/  Phaedrus,  126c-129d / Symposium, 155d-157a; 164c-167d / Republic, bk
III, 325b-c; bk ix, 417b-418a / Critias, 485 b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i,  ch  ii 346c-347a; bk viii, ch i [1155*1-32] 406b,d; ch 3 [1156^6-32]
408a-c;  CH5 [1157^25-38] 409c-d; ch 6 [1158" 22-28] 410a-b; bk ix, ch 9
423a-424b;  ch  ii  425a-d  /  Politics,  bki, ch2 [1253*25-29] 446c-d /
Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 5 [1360^19-27] 601a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  iv  [10581191]  57d-59d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 22
167d170a;  BK  HI,  ch  16  191a-d;  bk  iv,  ch 2 223d224b 14 Plutarch:
Poplicola-Solon, 86a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 7-14 20d23a
/  City ofGod, bk xix, ch 3, 510d; ch 5-9 513d-516c; ch 13-14 519a-520d;
ch 17 522b523a; ch 26 528d-529a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  4,  A  8  636a-c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell, v [70-138] 7d8b;
purgatory, xv [40-81] 75d-76a; xvii [82]- xviii [75] 79b-80c 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  a?id  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza  111-112  36a;  stanza 119-128
37a-38a;  bk  hi,  STANZA  1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  117-120 69b70a; stanza
241-242 86a; stanza 250-253 87a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  i,  65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  87d-88a 26 Shakespeare: Love's
Labour's  Lost,  act iv, sc III 268b-272c / Midsummer-Night's Dream, ACT
I,  sc  I  (67-78]  353a-b 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act iv, sc h [47-64]
233c-d / King Lear, act v, sc hi [1-26] 279a-b / Timon of Athens, act i,
sc ii 397a-400a; ACT HI, sc II
[71-94] 404c-d; act
iv,  sc  i  409c-d;  sc  hi  [249-305]  413c-414a / Sonnets, xxv 590a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  demonst and schol i, 434b-435a;
appendix,  ix 448a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 100 191a-192b; 155 201b; 211 211b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws, bk xiv, 103c-d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  367d-368a  / Utilitarianism, 451 b-c 44 BoswELi.: Johnsoft,
83b-c; 107a; 423c-d; 490a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3125-3136]
76a-b;
[3374-3413]
82b-83a; part ii
[9356-9573]
227a-232a

[759a]
2b(6)  to  2^(7) Chapter 33: 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 36b 39b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  hk  m, 116c 117a; 122b c; BK V, 214c 215b; hk xi, 525c
526b;  BK XV, 642c 643b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 27c-d;
BK  VI,  158b  159a;  167b 168c: 169c170b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  774d775a; 782d-783b: 792a-d 2b{6) The eflfect of political
power  or status on happiness 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c-8a 7 Plato:
Euthydetnus, 75c-76b / Gorgias, 262a270a esp 262a 265c / Republic, bk i,
304a-c; BK II, 311a-313a; bk ix, 416a-421a csp 418d421a; bk x, 439b-440c
9   Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  7-8  431d-434a  passim,  esp  CH  7
[1177*^4-25] 432a-c,cH 8 [11 78^ 33-ii79'*i5] 433c-d / Politics, bk vii,
ch 2-3 528a-530a; ch 14
[i33^«i7]-ch
15 (13^4^8] 538a-539b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[^7-61]
15c-d;  bk  III [59-78] 30d-31a; [995-1002] 42d43a; bk v [1117-1135] 75d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk iv, ch 4-6 225a232c; ch 9-10 237d-240d 14
Plutarch:  Numa Pompilius, 51c-52b / Solon, 74c-75c / Pyrrhus, 320c-321a
/  Nicias,  425b-c  /  Crassus  438b,d-455a,c / Demosthenes, 701a702a 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk xiv, 154a-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr v, ch 10
20d-21a  18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk v, ch 24-26 227d230a,c; bk xix, ch
5-7  513d-515c; ch 19 523b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 26,
A  4,  ANS  151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q 2, a 4 618a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  66,  a  5, rep 1-2 79b-80c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xii
[100-139]
17b-d; purgatory, xi
[73-117]
69c-70a;  paradise,  VI 113c-115a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  107a-112d; 126b-131a; 382b-383d; 400b-d; 443d-446a;
486b-489b; 538d-540b 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[1-54] 81d-82a / Richard II, act iv, sc
i [162334] 343b-345a / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc i
[4-31] 482d-483a / Henry V, act iv, sc
i  [247301]  554a-c  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 193a-b; part II,
368c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 326b-327a; 362b-d; 364a-b / Political
Economy,  372b-377b  esp  373c-374a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 157b-d;
572a-c   41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  194a-d;  297c-298a  43  Mill:
Representative Government, 382b / Utilitarianism, 462c-463b passim

[759b]
HAPPINHSS 701 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 167b c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  215d  216d  54  Preud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  799c  2^(7)  The  function  of knowledge and wisdom in the
happy  life:  the  place  of  speculative activity and contemplation Old
Testament:  /  Kings,  10:1-10—  (D) /// Kings, 10:1-10 / // Chronicles,
9:1-9—  (D)  // Paralipomenon, 9:1-9 / Proverbs, 1-4; 8-9; 16:16; 17:16;
19:8;  20:15;  22:17-18;  24:13-14  /  Ecclesiastes,  1:13-18;  2:12-26;
6:8,11;  7:1112,16-19;  9:13-18—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  1:13-18;  2:12-26;
6:8,11;  7:12-1^,17-20;  9:13-18  Apoc rvph a : Wisdom ofSolomon, 6-11 —
(D)  OT,  Rool^  of  Wisdom,  6-1  1  / Ecclesiasticus, 4:1119; 6:18-37;
14:19-15:8;  24:13-21;  37:24-(D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 4:12-22; 6:18-37;
14:2015:8;  24:17-29; 37:27 5 Sophocles: Antigone [1348-135 3] 142d 5 Ri
ripides:  Medea  [292-305]  214c  d  5 Aristophanes: C/owdfi 488a-506d 7
Plato:  Charmides,  12a-13c  /  Lysis,  16c-18a  /  Euthydemus, 69a-71a;
74b-76b  /  Symposium,  167a-d  / Meno, 183d-184c / Apology 200a212a,c /
Phaedo  220a-251d  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  380d-381a; bk vii 388a 401 d /
Timaeus,  475d476b  / Theaetetus, 5 2 8c -53 la / Statesman, 587d-588c /
Philebus 609a-639a,c esp 635c639a,c / Laws, bk v, 688c / Seventh Letter,
806b-c;  808c-809a  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2 499a501c; BK
XII, CH 7 [1072*^14-29] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1097^22I098'*i9] 343a-c; bk vi, ch 12 393b-394a esp
[1143*^17-1144*6] 393b-c; bk x, ch 7-8 431d434a
/ Politics, bk vii, ch 2
[1324*23-35]
528b  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i, 81 Id 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk v
[1-54] 61a-d; [1113-1135] 75c-d;
BK  VI  [1-42]  80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 29 134d138a; bk
hi,  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  15  190a191a;  ch 22 195a-201a; bk iv, ch 4
225a228a: ch 6 230b-232c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 6 261a-c;
sect  9  261d; sect 12 262b-c; bk iv, sect 16 264d; BK V, sect 9 270b-c;
bk  vi,  sect  12  274c;  BK  X,  sect 12 298c-d 13 Virgil: Georgics, 11
[490-493]   65b   14   Plutarch:   PdT/r/^^,  121a-122b/  Caius  Marius,
353d-354a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,  154a-c  17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  iv 12b-19b csp CH 3-4 13c-14c, CH 9-10 16c-17c; tr v, ch 10
20d-21a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 34-35 338b339c; TR IX, CH 9-1 1
358d-360d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 7-9 28c29b / City of God,
bk viii, ch 8 270a-d; bk x, CH 2 299d-300a; bk xix, ch 1-3 507a-511a; ch
14 520a-d; ch 19 523b-d

[760a]
(2b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or  constituents of
happiness. 2b(J) The function of knowledge and wisdom in the happy life:
the place of speculative activity and contemplation. ) 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  26 150a-152a,c passim, esp a 2 150c-151a; part
i-ii,  Q  I,  A  6,  REP 1-2 614a-c; q 3, aa 3-8 624b629c; Q 5, a 4, ANS
639a-640b;  Q 35, a 5 775d777a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 66^ A 5 esp REP 2 79b-80c; part ii-ii, q 180 607d616d; Q 182 620b-624d
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv
[106-147]
6c-7a;  purgatory,  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b  22  Chaucer:  Prologue [285-308]
164a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  63a; 65a-b; 76c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  66.-7  Si;  28a-29c;  70d72a;  231d-238d; 399d-401a; 502c-504c;
508a512a;  541d-543a,c 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act i, sc I
[1-162]  254a-256a  27  Shakespeare:  Pericles,  act  hi,  sc 11 [26-42]
434d-435a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  145d-146a  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 18a-b; 27c-d; 71a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, i. Id
/  Discourse,  part  i,  41d-42a;  part  hi, 49d-50b / Meditations, iii,
88d-89a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 26-28 431a-c; APPENDIX, IV
447b-c;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v,  PROP 31-33 459d-460c; prop 37 461c 32
Milton:  II Penseroso 21a-25a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 73-74 185a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  SECT  44 188d-189b; sect 55-56
192c-193b  passim  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345a / Political Economy,
373c-374a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  645c-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   ofMorals,   256c257d;   267b-d   43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,
448d-449c;  451c-452a  44  BoswE-Li^i  Johnson,  118a;  299b-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro, par 20 17a; ADDITIONS, 15 118d 47 Goethe:
Faust, part i
[354-521]
lla-15a;
[3217-3246] 79a-b
48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 255a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
773b774c  3.  The  argument concerning happiness as a first principle of
morality:  the  conflicting  claims  of  duty and happiness 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  i  339a'348d passim, esp ch 4 340b-d, ch 7 342c-344a, ch 12
347a-b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 22 127c-128c; BK II, CH II
150a-151b; ch 19 162c-164b; bk

[760b]
702  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 3/0 4 III, CH 2 177c-178d; ch 10 185d-187a; ch 14
189c-190a;  ch  24 203c-210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 11-12
258a-c;  bk  hi,  sect 6 261a-c; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect i
285a-b;  sect  32  287d-288a; sect 39 288c; bk ix, sect i 291a-c; sect 7
292b  18  Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a289a; bk xiv, ch 8-9
381c-385b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q i 609a-615c passim;
q  5,  a 8 642d-643d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 2,
ANS  206b-207a;  q  91,  a 4, ans 210c-211c; Q 94, A 2, ANS 221d-223a 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 76c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  i,  65c-66b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 71d-72b 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters, 62b-68b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii,
SECT 3, 104c; BK II, ch XXI, SECT 42-73 188c199c passim 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk v, 336c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 235a-b; 236b-239a/Fw«^.
Prin.   Metaphysic   of   Morals  253a-287d  esp  256a-257d,  258d-259a,
261c-264a,  266a-b,  267b-d,  274d-275b,  282b-283d,  286a-c / Practical
Reason  291a-361d  esp 304d-307d, 325a-327d, 330c-331a, 338c-355d / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366d; 367c; 369c-373b / Intro.
Metaphysic  ofMorals,  387b388c;  389a-390a,c  /  Judgement,  478a-479a;
584d-587a; 588b
[fn
2];  591b-592c; 595a-c; 596c-597d; 604d-606d esp 604d-605c, 605d606b [fn
2]  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism 445a-476a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  ii,  par  124 44b-d; par 134-135 47b-d; part iii, par 155 57c; par
261 83a-d; additions, 76-81 128a129a; 85-87 129b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  316a-317a;  592d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkv, 127b137c
passim  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 20c-d /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 772a-b; 800c-801b 4. The pursuit of
happiness  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-8a; bk ii, 77a-b; bk III,
98b-99a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  10 345c-346c 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk i, 811d 12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk hi
[10761094] 44a,c
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch 24 203c210a 14 Plutarch: Solon,
66b-d;  74c-75b  / Caius Marius, 353d-354a,c 17 Plotinus : First Ennead,
tr  iv  12b-19b  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii, ch 4-5 84c-85c 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk x, par 29-34 78d80c

[761a]
4«  to  4^ Chapter 33: HAPPINESS 19 Aquinas: Summa Thenlogica, part i, q
23,  a  I, ANS and REP 2-3 132c 133b; part i-ii, q 5 636d-643d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy csp purgatory, xxvii-xxxiii 94c-105d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part i, 76c-d; part iv, 247c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-7a; I49b d; 541b
c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, SECT 44 188d-189b; sect
52  191d; sect 63-64 194d-195b passim 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 300a-d;
304d-307d;  345a-347a / Judgement, 584d-587a csp 584d586a 43 Declaration
of  Independence:  [7-15]  la  b  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 448a-453a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part ii, par 12^ 44a-b; par 124, 44c; par
134  47b; part hi, par 207 69b-c; additions, 78 128c-d 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  267a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 235a-238a; BK XIV, 605b-d
52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 25d27d 54 Freud: Civilization
and  Its Discontents, 771d776b esp 772a-d, 775c; 799c Aa, Man's capacity
for  happiness: diflferences in human nature with respect to happiness 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch 9 [1099^33-1100*9] 345b-c; bk vii, ch 14
[1154^20-30]  406c;  bk  x, CH 6 [1177*1-11] 431c; CH 7 [1177^26-1178*8]
432c;  CH  8 432d-434a passim, esp [1178^23-32] 433c / Politics, bk vii,
ch  8 [1328*37-^2] 532d; CH 13 [1331^24-1332*32] 536b-537a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses, bk hi, ch 24 203c210a 14 Plutarch: Caius Marius, 353d-354a,c
17  Plotinus : First Ennead, tr iv 12b-19b / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 4-5
84c-85c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 23, a I, ans and rep 2-3
132c-133b;  q  62,  a  2,  ans  and rep 2 318d-319c; part i-ii, q i, a 7
614c615a;  q 5, aa 1-2 636d-638a; a 5 640b-641a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxviii
[91-148] 97a-c
22   Chaucer:   Wife   ofBath's   Prologue   ['y^S^-6^10]  256a-269b  26
Shakespeare: As You Like It, act iv, sc i
[1-41] 617a-c; act v, sc iv [176-202] 625c-d
30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 70b-d; 73d74a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
v,  prop 42 463b-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 42
188c;  sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect  6i  194b-c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
283a-b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 338b-c; 342c-343b; 363a-366d passim 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  256d257d; 267b-d / Practical
Reason, 300a-c; 304d305d / Judgement, 584d-586a

[761b]
70? 43 Mill.: Liberty, 293b 302c csp 299b c / RrpresentatiiT Government,
367d  368a  /  Utilitarian'  i<rn,  448d-450a;  450c  453a; 461c 464d 44
Ho^wi.i.i.: Johnson, 144d 145a; 214b; 391d392a 46 Hi.(;hL: Philosophy of
Right  ,  part  mi,  par  166  59d  60a  / Philosophy of History, intro,
166b168a 48 Melville: Moby Dicl^, 54b 55a; 122b 123a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  hi. 117d; hk v, 215b d; hk vi, 235a 238a; 262d 263a; bk vim,
303a  305b;  bk xi, 480a 482b; hk xih, 577a 578b; bk xiv, 605b-d; bk xv,
630c 631c 52 D(vs toevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b137c passim; bk
xi,   307c-310c  53  James:  Psychology,  201a-202a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  633d  634a;  635c  /  Civilization  and  Its Discontents,
772b-c;  77Sc776c  4b. The attainability of happiness: the fear of death
and  the  tragic view of human life 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi [144-151] 41c;
[440-493]  44c-45a;  bk  xh  [290-328]  85b-c; bk xvii [420455] 126b-d 5
Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1186-1221]
llOb-c;
[i 524-1 530] 113c
/ Oedipus at Colonus [1211-1248] 125b-c / Antigone [582-624] 136b-c;
[1155-1171]
140d-141a / Trachiniae
[1-48] 170a-c; [121-140] 171b
5 Euripides: Alcestis
[773-802]
243d-244a / Trojan Women [466-510] 274a-b / Andromache
[91-102] 316a
/ Hecuba [619-628] 358a; [952961] 360d-361a / Heracles Mad
[497-515]
369a-b  /  Iphigenia  at Aulis [16-33] '^25b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
2b; 6c-10a csp 6c8a, 9c-10a; 20b-21a; bk ii, 64d-65a; bk hi, 98b-99a; bk
v,  160c-d; bk vii, 224c-225a 7 Plato: Apology, 205d-206d; 211b-212a,c /
Crito 213a-219a,c / Phaedo 220a-251d / Republic, BK I, 295d-297c; bk vi,
374a-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i, ch 9-1 i 345a-347a; bk vii, ch 14
[1154*^20-30] 406c; bk x, ch 7
[i 177^26-1 178*8] 432c; CH 8 432d-434a passim,
esp [1178^23-32] 433c / Politics, bk iv, ch ii
[i295*25-''i] 495b-c; bk vii, ch 13
[i35i'*241332*32] 536b-537a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi [31-93] 30b-31b; [830-1094] 40c44a,c; bk vi [1-42] 80a-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 4 108d-110a; CH 24 129a-d; bk ii, ch 16
156b-158d;  bk hi, CH 24 203c-210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect
11-12  258a-c;  bk  iv,  sect  50 268c; bk v, sect 16-18 271c-d; sect 34
273c;  bk  vii, sect 35 282a; sect 44-45 282b-c; bk ix, sect 3 291d-292a
14  Plutarch: Solon, 66b-d; 74c-75c / Aemilius Paulus, 224d-225c; 229a-c
/  Pelopidas, 245c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 91b-d 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead, tr iv, ch 4 14a-c / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 4-5 84c-85c

[762a]
(4.  The  pursuit  of happiness. 4b. The attainability of happiness: the
fear  of  death  and  the tragic view of human life.) 18 Augustine: City
ofGod, bk viii, ch 8 270a-d; BK XIX, CH 4-8 511a-516a; bk xxii, ch 22-24
-r  606d-612a 19 Aquinas: Surnma Theologtca, part i-ii, q 5 636d-643d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xi
[1-12]
122a  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 31-35 5a-b; bk hi,
stanza  i  17-120  69b-70a; BK IV, stanza 72-74 98a; bk v, stanza 262263
154b / Knight's Tale
[i 303-1 324] 181b;
[2837-2852]
206b-207a / Merchant's Tale
[9927-9954] 332a-b / Mon](s Tale 434a-448b
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65a-b; 76c-d; 79b-d; part ii, 163d-164a 25
Montaigne:   Essays,  6d'10a;  26d'36b;  70d72a;  115b-119d;  124c-125a;
149b-d;  231d233c;  312c-314b;  326b-327b;  339a-d; 402c403c; 478c-479c;
509b-512a;  528c-529b;  541b-c 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act hi, sc ii
[144185]  337a-b;  act  iv, sc i [162-318] 343b-344d; act V, sc V [1-41]
349d-350a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [129-137] 32d-33a; sc iv
[13-38] 36a-b; act
ii, sc ii
[303-322] 43d; ACT HI, sc
i [56-157] 47c-48c / Measure for Measure, act hi, sc i
[1-43]
186d-187a  /  Timon of Athens, act iv, sc i 409c-d; ACT iv, sc hi-act v,
sc  i  410c-419b  / Henry VIII, act hi, sc ii [350-372] 572c-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 26a-c; 70b-d; 73d-74a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  prop 67 444d-445a; part V, PROP 42 463b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  ii  [496-505]  122a;  bk  X  [782-844] 291b-292b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
109-110   193b-194a;   126-147  195b-201a;  156-157  201b-202a;  164-18^
202b204b;  199  210b;  386 239a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
vii,  SECT  5  132c;  CH XXI, sect 45 189b-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
383a-384a;  388a399b;  459a-460a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  283a-b  38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  338b-c;  363a-366d passim, esp 363a-b, 366b-d 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d-257d;  258b; 267b-d /
Practical   Reason,   345a-347a   /   Judgement,   584d-586a   43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  450c-453a  44 Boswell: Johnson, 95c-d; 102d-103b; 104b;
254b-c;  312b;  350d-351b;  362c-363a;  376c377a;  540b-542a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, intro, 162a170b; PART I, 245b-d; part hi, 285a-b
47 Goethe: Faust esp part i
[354-517]
11a14b, [614-736] 17a-19b.
[1064-1125] 26b-28a,
[1544-1571]
37b-38a,
[1583-1638]
38b-39b,

[762b]
704 THE GREAT IDEAS 4^/0 5
[1699-1706] 41a, [1765-1815] 42b-43a, [32173250] 79a-b, PART
II [9695-9944] 235a-241b,
[11,433-452] 278a-b,
[11,559-586] 281b-282a,
[11,934-12,111] 290b-294b
48   Melville:  Moby  Dic{  esp  175b-176a,  313b314a,  316a-b,  319a-b,
341b-342a,  357a, 360b361a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 80d-81a; bk
III,  117d;  BK  VI,  235a-238a;  262d-263a; bk VII, 294b-296a; bk viii,
303a-305b;  bk  ix,  357d-358b;  373b-374d;  bk  xh, 560a-562a; bk XIII,
577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631c;  epilogue  i, 659c-d;
671c-672a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 25d27d; bk hi,
53b-54b;  bk  v,  121d-127b;  127b137c  passim;  bk xi, 345a-c 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771a802a,c  esp 772b-c, 776b-777c,
778d-779a, 788d-789b, 793d-794a, 796b-c, 799c-800a 5. The social aspects
of  happiness:  the  doctrine  of  the  common good 7 Plato: Euthydemus,
75c-76b  /  Republic,  bk  IV,  342a-d;  bk v, 365c; bk vii, 390b-391b /
Statesman,  599c-603d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; bk v, CH
I [ii29''i 1-1130^13] 377a-c / Politics, bk hi, CH 9
[1280^31-34] 477d-478a; bk
i\, ch ii
[1295*25-^1]
495b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-3  527a530a;  ch  13-15 536b-539d 12 Epictetus:
D/>(rowr^<?/, bk i, ch 19 125b-126c; BK II, CH 10 148c-150a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations, bk h, sect 3 257a-b; BK HI, SECT 4 260b-261a; bk iv, sect 4
264a; bk V, SECT I 268b, d; sect 6 269b-d; sect 16 271c-d; sect 22 272b;
bk  vi, sect 14 274d275a; sect 45 278c; sect 54 279c; bk vii, SECT 44-46
282b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  12 286b-c; sect 23 287b; bk ix, sect i 291a-c;
sect  23  293c; sect 42 295c-296a,c: bk x, sect 6-7 297a-c; sect 20 299b
18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 1-8 507a-516a; ch 12-17 517b-523a;
ch  26 528d529a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 21, a I, ANS and
rep 1,3 124b-125b; q 60, a 5, ans 313b-314c; q 92, a i, rep 3 488d-489d;
q  96, A 4 512d-513c; part i-h, q i, a 5, ans 613a614a; a 7 614c-615a; q
19,  a  10,  ans 710b711d; Q 21, A 3 718d-719c: a 4, rep 3 719d720a,c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 59, aa 4~5 48c-49d; q 60, a 2
50d-51b;  q  90,  a  2  206b-207a;  a  3, ans and rep 3 207a-c; a 4, ANS
207d-208b;  q  91,  a  6,  rep 3 212c-213c; q 92, A I, ANS and rep 1,3-4
213c-214c;  q  93, A I, REP I 215b,d-216c; q 94, a 2, ans 221d223a; a 3,
rep  i  223a-c;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b230c;  Q 96, A 3, ans and rep 3
232b-233a;  a  4,  ans 233a-d; a 6, ans 235a-d; q 97, a i, ans and rep 3
236a-d; a 2, ans and rep 2 236d237b; A 4 238b-239b; q 98, a i. ans 239b-

[763a]
5a  to  5b  Chapter  33: HAPPINESS 705 240c; Q 99, a 3, ans 247a-248a: y
100,  a  2,  ANs  252b 253a: a 8, ans and kkp ^ 259d 261a: A II, ri:p },
263c-264d; q 105, a i, Rh:i» ^ 307d309d; A 2, ANS and km1,4 309d 316a: a
^,  ANS and REi' 5 316a-318b: i'art ii-ii, g ^9, a 2, REP 3 575b-576b: y
1S7.  a  ^,  rkp i,^ 666a669b: PART III SL PPL, q 9O, a 6, rep i i 1058a
1061b;  a 7, REP 3 1061b-1062a 23 HoBBEs: Letiathan, i'ari i, 84c 86b 30
Bacon:  Adianceryient  of  Learning, 69d 76a esp 71bc 72b c 31 Spinoz.\:
Ethics, part iv, prop 18, scmol 429a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, uk
i,  ch  ii,  SECT  6  105b-c  36 Swift: Gidliver, part i\ , 180b 184a 38
Rousseau:   Ineijualitw   323a  328a,c:  333b-c;  342c-343b;  351c-352a;
363a-366d  /  Political  Economy,  372b-377b  /  Social Contract, bk ii,
400c-40ia:  401  d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 114b-d / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  369c  -3  73b  /  Science  of Right, 438d-439a 43
Federalist:  number  45,  147c-148a  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 453a-454a:
460a-461c;  461d;  475a-476a  44  Bosvi ELI.: Johnson, 211b-c 49 Darwin:
Descent of Man, 316a-317a: 592d 52 Doi>TOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, bkv,
127b137c  passim  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents. 799a802a,c
esp  799c-800a  5a.  The  happiness of the individual in relation to the
happiness  or  good  of  other  men  5  Sophocles: Ajax [263-281] 145c 6
Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 99a 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-270c; 284a-285a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 6
[ii67*'5-i5]
420d-421a: ch 8
[ii68''28-i 169*11]
422b-d;  CH 9 423a-424b; ch ii 425a-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
ii
[i-i^]
15a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  19  125b-126c; bk II, CH 5
142c-144a;  ch  10  148c-150a  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 4
260b261a;  bk  v, sect 6 269b-d; bk vi, sect 14 274d-275a; bk viii, sect
12  286b-c;  sect  56  290c; BK IX, SECT I 291a-c; sect 23 293c; sect 42
295c-296a.c;  bk  x, sect 6 297a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
7-14 20d23a / Ciiy of God, bk xix, ch 8 515c-516a; ch 12-14 517b-520d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  i, A 5, axs 613a-614a; a 7
614c-615a;  q  4,  a  8 636a-c; q 32, aa 5-6 762a-763c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 94, A 2, ANS 221d-223a; part ii-ii, q 17, a 3
458c459a;  Q26  510b-520d  passim;  q 39, a 2, rep ^5 575b-576b; part hi
suppl, q 71 900d-917b; Q 94 1040d-1042c; q 96, a 7, rep 3 1061b1062a

[763b]
21 Dam I.: Diiine Comedy, PURf;ATORY, \v (40Sij 75d 76a: xvi (91 i^l 77d
78b  35  L<k:kf.:  Toleration,  I5d  16a 37 Fiii.DiNt;: Tom Jones, 291 d
292a;  305d;  330bc  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of l^ws, bk xxiv, 203a 38
Rousseau: Inetfuaiity, 343d-345c; 363a 366d esp 363b 364a 42 K\ST. Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  272d273a  /  Practical Reason, 304b 305c /
Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 369c 373 b esp 372a b; 373d; 375d
376b  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 450b; 452b 454a; ^60a 461c; 461d; 463a b;
469b  470c  44  lins\K  lll: Johnson, 221d-224a 46 He(;el: Philosophy of
Right,  part ii, p)ar 125126 44d-45b; par 134 47b; part hi, par 155 57c;
par 182-18^ 64a; par 189 65d-66a; par 192 66b c; par 249 78c; additions,
116  135c  d;  127  137b  47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,559-572] 281b 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 310a-319a esp 312a313a, 314b-315d, 316c 317c;
592d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk hi, 116c-117a; 127d-128d; bk v,
197b-c;  214c-216d:  bk  x  430a-b; epilogue i, 670d-671c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  25d27d;  37c-38a; bk v, 121d-127b; bk vi.
154d159a;  165b-167b  5b. The happiness of the individual in relation to
the  welfare  of  the  state:  happiness  in  relation to government and
diverse   forms  of  government  Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  11:10-11  5
Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes 27a-39a,c esp [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c 5
Sophocles:   Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [162-210]  132c-d  /  Philoctetes
182a-lS5a,c 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[8^4-1018]
385c-387b;
[1582-1684] 391d-392d
/ Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp [125 5 -1275] 436c,
[1368-1401] 437c-d
6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 6c- 7a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  397d398c:  402b-c:  bk  vi,  511c-d  7 Plato: Crito 213a-219a,c esp
216d-219a,c  /  Republic, bk i, 302c-306a; bk ii, 311b-c; bk IV, 342a-d;
bk  v,  364c-365d;  bk  vi,  379d380b; BK VII, 390b-391b; 401a-b; bk ix,
416a421a esp 418d-421a / Laws, bk v, 692c-693a: BK VI, 707c-708a: bk ix,
754a-b / Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[1094*^8-10]
339c-d / Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252*^1-6] 445a;
BK II, CH 5 [1264^16-25] 459d-460a; bk hi, ch 6
[1278^15-29]
475d-476a; bk vh, ch 1-3 527a-530a; ch 8
[i328*35-*'2]
532c-d; ch 9
[r328*'33-i329*2] 533b: [1329*21-24] 533c; ch
13-14 536b-538d; bk viii, ch i [1337*28-30] 542b

[764a]
(5.  The social aspects of happiness: the doctrine of the common good. 5
b.  The  happiness  of  the individual in relation to the welfare of the
state:  happiness  in  relation  to  govern^  ment  and diverse forms of
government.^  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 19 125b126c; BK II, CH
10  148c-150a;  bk  hi, ch 22 195a-201a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi,
sect  4  260b261a;  bk  v,  sect 16 271c-d; sect 22 272b; bk VI, sect 54
279c;  bk  vii,  sect  5  280a-b;  bk XI, SECT 21 305d-306a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 44d-45c, 48b-c / ISluma Pompilius. 51c-52b; 59d-60b
/  Poplicola-Solon  86a-87d  esp  87a-b  / Nicias, 425b-c / Demosthenes,
691b,d;  699c-700a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk ii, 226d-228a 18 Augustine:
City  ofGod, bk xix, ch 17 522b523a; ch 26 528d-529a 19 Aquinas : Su?nma
Theologica,  part i, q 60, a 5, ANs 313b-314c; q 96, a 4 512d-513c; part
i-ii,  Q  19,  A  10,  ANS  710b-711d;  q  21,  a 3 718d719c; A 4, REP 3
719d-720a,c  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, A 2
206b-207a;  a 3, rep 3 207a-c; q 92, a i, ANS and rep 1,3-4 213c-214c; q
94, a 2, ans 221d-223a; q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c; q 96, a 3, ANS and REP
3  232b-233a;  a  4, ans 233a-d; A 6, ANS 235a-d; q 97, a 4 238b-239b; q
98,  a  I,  ANS  239b-240c;  q  99,  a 3, ans 247a-248a; Q 100, A 2, ans
252b-253a; a 8, ans and rep 3 259d-261a; a ii, rep 3 263c-264d; q 105, a
2,  ANS  and REP 1,4 309d-316a; a 3, ans and rep 5 316a-318b; q hi, a 5,
rep  i  355d-356c;  PART  III  suppL,  Q  96, A 6, REP II 1058a-1061b 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-86b;  part  ii,  99a; 104b-d; 105c-d;
112b-c;  153a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  381a-388c; 480b-482b; 486b-489b;
4^0c-491d  27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i [67-167] 352a-353a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-76a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[843-902]
358a359a  35  Locke: Toleration, 16d-17b / Civil Government, ch VI, sect
57  36d-37b;  ch ix 53c-54d; ch XI 55b-58b passim; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  112a-115b esp 112a113a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  ofLaws,  bk iv, 16c; bk V, 19a-c; 26c; bk vi, 38a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 323a-328a,c; 359a-b / Political Economy, 368c; 372b-377b esp
374a-d  / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c; bk HI, 415d; 417c-418a; 421d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 350d-351a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
31d-34a,c  passim,  esp  32c-33a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 176c;
320d-321a

[764b]
706  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5b to! 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of
Eighty   438d-439a  43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15]  la-b  43
Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  lla,c  43 Federalist: number 14,
62a-d;  number  45,  147c-148a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 337b;
338b-c / Utilitarianism, 460a-461c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 221d-224a; 304c;
393a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 205 68d; par 261
83a-d;  par  294  98b-d;  par  325  107d;  par 337 109d-110a; additions,
116-117  135c-136a;  127  137b; 154-156 142a-b; 158 142d / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  164b;  192c-193a;  part  i,  213b;  part hi, 285a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a; bk xi, 475b-476c;
480a-482b; 505a-511b esp 509d-510a; 514b-515a; bk xh, 537b-538a; bk xih,
577b-c;  bk  xv,  634a-635a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
799c801a  / New Introductory Lectures, 852d-853b 6. The happiness of men
in  relation to the gods or the after-life 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xv [^J-Jj]
104c-d; bk xvi
[843-861] 121c-d
5   Aeschylus:   Agamemnon  [351-474]  55d-57b  /  Eumenides  81a-91d  5
Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1186-1221]
llOb-c; [1524-1530] 113c / Antigone [582-624] 136b-c;
[1348-1353] 142d /
Trachiniae
[121140] 171b / Philoctetes [1314-1347] 193d-194a
5 Euripides: //d'/(?« [1687-1692] 314c / Andromache
[91-102] 316a;
[1284-1288] 326c / Bacchantes [878-911] 347b-c / Hecuba [952-961]
360d-361a  / Iphigenia at Aulis [16-33] 425b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
6c-10a  esp 6c-8a, 9c-10a; 20b-21a; bk h, 77a-b; bk hi, 98b-99a 7 Plato:
Apology,  211c-d  /  Phaedo,  223a-225c;  249c-250b  / Republic, bk vii,
401a-b;  bk  x, 437c-438c / Laws, bk ii, 658c-d; bk v, 689c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch io-ii 345c-347a; BK VII, CH 14 [1154^20-30] 406c; BK X,
CH 7 431d-432c esp [1177^16-1178^8] 432b-c; ch 8
[1178^8-32] 433b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-135]
ld-2d;  BK  HI  [1-93]  30a-31b;  [978-1023]  42d43b;  BK  V [1161-1240]
76b-77b;  bk  vi  [43-79] 80d-81b 12 Epictetus : Discourses, bk iv, ch i
213a-223d  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect ii 258a-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk vi
[264-678] 218a-229a;
[724-751] 230b-231a
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 91b-d / Histories^ bk I, 190a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vi,  par 26 42d43a 7. The distinction between temporal
and  eternal  happiness 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk x, ch 18 310b-d; bk
xix, ch 4-11 511a-517b

[765a]
la  to  7c  Chapter 33: HAPPINESS 707 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  qq  2-5  615c-643d passim 22 Chaucer: Merchant's Tale (9511-9558J
325b326a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviatlian,  part  i,  65a-b  38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk iv, 437d 438b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 336c-d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazot/, bkv, 127b137c passim 7a. The eflfects
of original sin: the indispensability of divine grace for the attainment
of  natural  happiness  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 3:14-24 New Testament:
Romans,  5:14-21 / / Corinthians, 15:21-22 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
x,  par  33-34 79d80c / City of God, bk ix, ch 14-17 293a-295c; BK X, ch
2-3 299d-301a; ch 22-32 312a322a,c; bk xiv, ch i 376b,d-377a; bk xxi, ch
15-16  572c-574a; bk xxii, ch 22-24 606d612a / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  15 628b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 85 178b-184a; q
91,  a  6  212c-213c;  g  109, a 2 339c-340b; aa 7-8 344a-346a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxviii
[9i]-xxix
[36] 97a-98a; paradise,
vii 115a116c 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,788-822]
467a-b  /  Parson's  Tale, par 1-15 495a-506b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
hi,  195d-196a  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk hi [56-415] 136b144b esp
[130-134]  138a,  [227-238] 140b; bk XI [1-44] 299a-300a; bk xi [334J-BK
xii  [649]  306b-333a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 425-430 243b-247b; 447 253a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 38d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, BKv,121d127b
esp 125d-126b; bk vi, 168a-c lb. The imperfection of temporal happiness:
its  failure to satisfy natural desire 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv,
par  7-19  20d24b; bk viii, par 17 57d; bk ix, par 23-26 68a-d / City of
God,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk IX, CH 14-15 293a-294a; bk xii, ch i
342b,d343c;  BK  XIX,  ch 4-10 511a-516d; ch 20 523d524a; ch 27 529a-d /
Christian  Doctrine^  bk  i, ch 4 625b-c; ch 38 635c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2, A I, rep 3 615d-616c; a 3 617b-618a; a 8
621c622b;  Q  3,  A 2, rep 4 623a-624b; aa 6-8 627b629c; Q 5, a I, rep 2
636d-637c;  a  3 638b639a; a 4, ans 639a-640b; a 5 esp rep 3 640b641a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  d^i, A 5, rep 2 79b-80c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xi
[1-12]
122a  22  Chaucer:  Knight's Tale [1303-1324] 181b / Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,210-215] 456b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65a-b; 76c-d

[765b]
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 99b 100a 29 (^.r.RVANTP.s: Don Quixote, part it,
366d  367a  32  Mii.ton:  Paradise Lost, bk ii [496-505] 122a 33 Pascal:
PensSes,  106  193b:  109  no  193b194a; 126-147 195b 201a; 156-157 201b
202a;  164-183 202b 204b; 1S4-241 205a 217b; ^89 239b; 425 555 243b 270a
passim  35  Lockk:  Human Understanding, bk ii, cm vii, sect 5 132c; cii
xxi,  sect 45 189b-d; sect 61 62 194b-d; sect 72 198a-c 35 FIiMi:: Human
Understanding,  sect  xi,  uiv  107,  499d-500a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
366c-d  42  Kant: Practical Reason, 346b-347b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 256d;
401a-b  47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1544 1571) 37b 38a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  216d 218b; HK VI, 273c-274a,c; bk xi, 525c-526b; bk xii,
560a-562a;  epilogue  i,  650b; 659c-d; 671c672a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,   bk  v,  127b137c  passim;  bk  vi,  153d-167b  7c.  Eternal
beatitude:  the perfection of human happiness 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i,  par 31 8d-9a; BK IX, par 23-26 68a-d; bk xiii, par 50-52 124c-d/
City  ofGod,  bk  vii, ch 31 261d-262a; BK IX, CH 15 293a-294a; bk x, ch
1-3 298b,d301a; CH 18 310b-d; ch 22 312a-b; ch 32 319d-322a,c; bk xi, ch
12  329b-c;  bk xii, ch i 342b,d-343c; bk xiii, ch 20 370c-371a; bk XIX,
ch 4 511a-513c; ch io-ii 516c-517b; ch 13 519a-520a; ch 20 523d-524a; ch
27  529a-d;  BK  XXI,  CH  15  572c-573b;  bk  xxii  586b,d618d esp CH I
586b,d-587b, ch 3 588a-b, ch 29-30 614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  4  625b-c;  ch  15  628b-c;  ch  32-33  633c634b  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, a I, ans 50c-51c; q 18, a 2, rep 2 105c-106b;
q  26  150a-152a,c; q 62 317c-325b; q 66, a 3, ans 347b-348d; q 73, a 2,
rep  3 371b-d; q 75, A 7, rep I 384d-385c; q 82, a 2, ans 432d433c; part
i-ii,  q 2, a 8 621c-622b; q 3, a 8 628d-629c; qq 4-5 629c-643d; q 19, a
10, rep I 710b-711d 20 Aquinas: Sumfna Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, A 2,
REP 3 27a-d; q 62 59d-63a; q 63, a 3, ans and REP 2 65a-d; q 67 81b-87c;
q  68,  aa 2-6 89c-94c; q 69 96c-101c; q 109 338a-347d; PART ii-ii, Q 2,
AA 3-8 392d-398b; q 17, aa 2-3 457d-459a; q 26, a 13 519d-520d; part III
suppL,  Q 75, a I 935b-937a; qq 82-85 968a-992a; qq 92-96 1025b-1066a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a; paradise, hi [43-90]
109d-110b  XIV  [1-66]  126d-127c;  xxi  [1-102]  138b-139b  XXII [1-75]
139d-140c;  xxvi  [1-69]  145d-146c XXVIII [1-114] 148d-150a 22 Chaucer:
Merchant's Tale [951 1-9558] 325b 326a

[766a]
708  The  distinction  between  temporal  and eternal (7. happiness. Ic.
Eternal  beatitude:  the  perfection  of  human  happiness^  23  HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  i, 65a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 99b-100a 29 Cervantes :
Don  Quixote, part ii, 366d-367a 31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 88d-89a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part v, prop 42 463b-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241
205a-217b;  425-555  243b-270a  passim  35  Locke: Toleration, 15d-16a /
Human Understanding, BK II, CH VII, SECT 5 132c; CH XXI, sect 38 187b-c;
sect 45, 189c-d; sect 62 194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
366c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233c-234d 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
346b-347c   51   Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  216d-218b;  BK  VI,
273c-274a,c;  bk  xi,  525c-526b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkv,
120d121c;  125d-126d;  127b-137c  passim  7c(l)  The beatific vision Old
Testament:  Genesis,  32:24-30  /  Exodus,  24  esp  24:9-11; 33:11-23 /
Numbers, 12:6-8 / Deuteronomy, 34:10 /Job, 19:26-27 / Isaiah, 26:10— (D)
Isaias,  26:10  New  Testament:  Matthew, 5:8 / John, 1:18; 14:19-21 / /
Corinthians,  13:12  /  //  Corinthians, 12:1-4 / / Timothy, 6:15-16 / I
John,   3:1-2  /  Revelation  esp  4-5,  7-8,  11,  14:1-5,  16:1-19:21,
21:1-22:21—  (£))  Apocalypse  esp  4-5,  7-8,  11,  14:1-5, 16:1-19:21,
21:1-22:21 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 25 68c; bk XIII, par 18
115b-c  /  City  ofGod, bk ix, ch 15 293a-294a; bk x, ch 2 299d-300a; bk
xii,  ch  20, 355b; bk xxii, ch 29-30 614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  io-ii 627b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, aa i-ii
50c-60d;  q  26,  a 3 151a-c; q 60, a 5, rep 5 313b-314c; q 62, a i, ans
317d-318c;  a  2,  ans 318d-319c; q 64, a i, rep i 334a-335c; Q 82, A 2,
ANS  432d-433c; q 84, a 5 446c-447c; Q 89, A 2, rep 3 475a-d; q 93, a 8,
rep  4  499b500c;  Q  94,  A I, ANS and rep i 501d-503a; q 100, A 2, ANS
521c-522b;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  8 628d-629c; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 67, A 3 83b-84d; a 6, rep 3
87a-c;  q  69, a 2, rep 3 97b-98c; a 4, ans and rep 3 lOOc-lOlc; part II
II,  Q  I,  a  8,  ANS  387a-388c;  q  8,  a 7 421d422c; Q 9, A 4, rep 3
425d-426c; q 180, a 5 611d-613a; part hi, q 9, a 2 764c-765a; q 15, a 10
795b-796a; part hi suppl, q 90, a 3 1014d'1016a; q 92 1025b-1037c; q 94,
a  i  1040d-1041b;  q  98,  a  5,  ans  1075b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, v
[1-12]
112a-b;   xiv   [1-66]  126d-127c;  xv  [28-84]  128c129b;  XXI  [1-102]
138b-139b; xxviii [94-114] 149d-150a; xxxii [i39]-xxxiii [145] 156a-157d
22  Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 10, 499b-500a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 65a-b

[766b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 7c{\) to 1c{2) 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 88d-89a 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b-347a  7c(2)  The joy of the blessed: the
communion  of saints Old Testament: Psalms, 16 esp 16:10; 36 esp 36:8-9;
37;  84;  149—  (D)  Psalms, 15 esp I5-I"; 35 ^sp 35:9-10; 36; 83; 149 /
Isaiah, 65:8-25— (D) Isaias, 65:8-25 / Daniel, 7:18 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  3  -'1-9,13-15;  4:7-5:5;  5:15-16—  (D)  OT, Boo}{ of Wisdom,
3:1-9,13-15;  4:7-5:5;  5:16-17  New  Testament:  Matthew, 5:1-12,19-20;
6:1921,33;  13:43; 19:16-30 esp 19:21; 25:31-46 esp 25:34, 25:46 / Mar\,
10:17-31  /  Luke,  16:1926;  18:18-30  I John, 6:38-40; 8:51; 10:24-30;
11:23-27;  16:20-24;  17:1-3  /  Romans, 8:18; 14:17 / / Corinthians, 15
:40-55 / II Corinthians, 4:17-5:10 / Galatians, 6:8 / Ephesians, 2:18-22
/  Hebrews, 10:34 /James, 1:12// Peter, i :3-io / I John, 2:15-17; 3:1-3
/  Revelation  passim,  esp  4-5,  7,  14-15,  19, 21-22— (D) Apocalypse
passim,  esp  4-5, 7, 14-15, 19, 21-22 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv,
par  16  23b-c;  BK  IX,  par  6 63a-b; par 23-25 68a-c; bk x, par 38-39
81a-c;  par  65  87d-88a;  bk  xii,  par  23  104b-c; BK XIII, par 50-53
124c-125a,c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  11-13  328d-330b;  ch 29-33
339a-341d;  bk  xii, ch 20 355b-357a; BK xviii, ch 48 501b-d; bk xix, ch
10-11  516c-517b;  ch 13 519a-520a; ch 17 522b-523a; CH 20 523d-524a; ch
27  529a-d; bk xx, ch 17 544d-545c; bk xxii, ch 30 616d-618d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  19-22  629a-630a; CH 38 635c-d 19 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica, part i, q 95, a 4, ANS 509b-510a; q 113, a 7 580b-581a; part
i-ii,  q  2,  a  3,  REP  I  617b-618a; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a; Q 34, a 3
770c-771c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, A 4 84d-85d;
part  ii-ii,  q  18,  a  2  462d-463d;  Q 19, A II 472d-473d; q 26, a 13
519d-520d;  Q 28, A 3 528d-529c; part hi suppl, q 90, a 3 1014d-1016a; q
93 1037c-1040c; q 94, a 3 1041d-1042c; q 96 1049d-1066a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xv [4081] 75d-76a; xxviii-xxxiii 96a-105d; paradise
106a-157d esp in [43-90] 109d-110b, vi
[112-126]
114d-115a, XIV
[1-66]
126d-127c, XX
[130-138]
138a, XXI
[1-102]
138b-139b,  XXII  [52-72]  140b,  XXVIII  [94-114]  149d-150a, xxx-xxxin
151d-157d  22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  103  549b-550a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  hi, 195d 32 Milton: On Time 12a-b / At a Solemn Music^
13a-b / Lycidas [165-185] 31b / Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[135-143] 138b;
[344-415] 143a-144b; bk
vii [150-161] 220b; bk viii
[618-630] 245a-246a; bk xi
[57-66]
300b;  [696-707] 314b; bk xii [411-465] 328a329a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 643
290b-291a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234b-d

[767a]
7c{3>)  to Id Chapter 33: HAIM>INKSS 44 Bosv^EiA.: Johnson, 192d-193a 52
Dostorvsky:  Brothers  Karamazot\  bk  ii,  22b 23c; BK XI, 341d 342c 53
James:  Psychology,  199b  7c(3) The misery of the damned Old Testament:
/o^,  20:4-29  /  Psalms,  9:1617;  21:8-12; 116:3— (D) Psalms, 9:17-18;
20:913;  114:3  /  Isaiah,  5:14-15;  14:4-23; 26:10; 66:24— (O) Isaias,
5:14-15;  14:4-2:^;  26:10;  66:24  /  Eze^iel,  31:10-18— (D) Ezechiel,
31:10-18  /  Daniel,  12:2  Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:17—  (D) OT, Judith,
16:20-21  / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:16-5:2^ passim— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom,
4:16-5:24    passim   /   Ecclesiasticus,   7:17;   21:9-10—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticus,   7:19;   21:10-11   New   Testament:   Matthew,   8:12;
13:41-42,4950;  i8:6-<);  25:41-46 / Mar){, 9:42-48— (D) Mar\, 9:41-47 /
Luke,  16:19-26  /  Romans, 2 :5-9 / // Thessalonians, i •.-]-<) / Jude,
5-7  /  Revelation  passim,  esp  14:9-11,  17:1-20:15—  (D)  Apocalypse
p^ss^xm,  csp 14:9-11, 17:1-20:15 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk xi, ch 3^
341a-d; BK XIII, CH 2 360b-361a; ch 12 365d-366a; CH 14-16 366b-367d; bk
xiii,  ch  24-BK xiv, CH I, 376a,c-377a; bk xiv, ch 15 388d-390a; BK XV,
ch i 397b,d-398c; bk xix, ch 13 519a520a; ch 28 529d-530a,c; bk xx, ch 6
534a535a; ch 14-15 542d-544b; bk xxi 560a586a,c csp ch 1-3 560a-562a, ch
9-10  568d570b,  CH  13  571c-572a,  ch  17  574a-b,  ch  23 576c-577b /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 20-21 629b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 10, a 3, rep 2 42c-43b; q 21, a 4, rep i 126c-127c 20 Aquinas:
Smwna  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 87, AA 3-5 187b-189c; part hi suppl, q
70, a 3 897d-900d; q 86 992b-996a,c; q 87, a i, rep 4 997b-998c; q 90, a
3  1014d-1016a; q 94 1040d1042c; QQ 97-99 1066a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell la-52d csp iii
[1-18] 4a-b, [82-129] 5a-b, vi [100-115] 9c, vii
[100-130] lOc-d, XI 15a-16b, xiv [16-72] 19c20b, XXVII [55-136] 40a-41b, xxxiii [91-148]
50c-51a; paradise, vii [64-93] n5d-116a; xv
[ia-12] 128c
22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale [7216-7234] 283b-284a / Surmnoner's Prologue
284b-285a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  10  498b-502a  CROSS-REFERENCES For:
Matters  most  relevant to the general theory of happiness, see Good and
Evil  3a,  5a;  Pleasure AND Pain 6-6b, 6d. see Good and Evil 4b, 5b-5c.
Duty 2; Pleasure and Pain 8b; Principle 4-4b.

[767b]
709 2i IIouHKs: leviathan, part hi, 195b d 24 l<\Hi.i.Ais: Curgantua and
Pantagrucl, hk ii, 119b 122a 26 SnAKi.spi.ARh: Richard III, act i, sc iv
[42U\\  115a  b  29  C:ervanti.s:  Don  Quixote,  pari  ii,  418c419a 31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 226d 227a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
hk  i ii 93a 134a; bk VI [867-H77] 215a b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  cm  xxi,  SECT 62 194c-d; seci 72 198a c 40 Cibbon: Decline and
Fall,  188d  189a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 234a c 52 Dostocvsky:
Brothers  Karamazor, bk v, 127c-d; BK VI, 169c 170b; bk vii, 185a c 7</.
The  beatitude  of  God Old Testament: Exodus, 33 : 18-20 / [Chronicles,
29:11-13—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon,  29:11  15 / Psalms, 8; 19; 24; 104:1;
113:4;  138;  145—  (D)  Psalms,  8;  18;  23; 103:1; 112:4; 1:57; 144 /
Isaiah, 6:1-4— (D) I>(^i^s, 6:1-4 New Testament: Mar\, 8:38 / John, 8:54
/  /  Peter,  4:11  /  //  Peter,  1:16-18  /  Revelation,  5:9-14—  (D)
Apocalypse,  5:9-14  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 4 111c; par
53  124d-125a,c  /  City  of God, bk viii, CH 6 268d-269c; bk xii, ch 17
353a-354a;  bk  XXII, CH 29 614b-616d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  26  150a 152a,c; q 62, a 4, ans 320b-321b; q 63, A 3 327b-328b; q
65,  a  2,  ans 340b 341b; g 73, A 2, REP 3 371b-d; part i-ii, q 2, a 2,
rep 2 616d-617b; q 3, a i, rep i 622c-623a; a 2, REP 1,4 623a-624b; a 8,
rep 2 628d-629c; q 5, A 3, REP 2 638b-639a; a 7, ans and rep 2 642a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi, q 19, A 3 819c-820c; q 26, a i, rep
2  845b 846a; part III suppl, q 71, A 8, REP I 909d-910d; Q 92, A I, REP
5 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[1-9]
106a;  XXXIII  [46-145]  156d-157d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 17
456c-d; PROP 35-36 460d-461c 32 Milton: Upon the Circumcision 12b- 13a /
Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [56-415]  136b-144b  42 Kant: Practical Reason,
347d-348b / Judge ment, 594d [fn i]

[768a]
710  THE  GREAT  IDEAS see Good and Evil 5d ; State 2f. I. Plutarch. "Of
the  Tranquillity  of the Mind," "Whether Vice is Sufficient to Render a
Man Unhappy," in Moralia Augustine. The Happy Life Aquinas. Summa Contra
Gentiles,  bk  i,  ch  100-102;  BK  III,  CH 17-63 Dante. Convivio {The
Banquet),  fourth treatise, CH 12 . On World-Government or De Monarchia,
bk  III,  CH  16  Hume. An Inquiry Concerning the Principles ofMorals A.
Smith.  The  Theory ofMoral Sentiments, part vi Kant. Lectures on Ethics
Dostoevsky. Notesfrom Underground . The Idiot II. Cicero. De Finibus {On
the  Supreme  Good) . Tusculan Disputations, v Seneca. De Beata Vita {On
the  Happy  Life)  Sextus Empiricus. Against the Ethicists . Outlines of
Pyrrhonism,  bk  hi, ch 21-32 Pomer^us. The Contemplative Life Boethius.
The  Consolation  of  Philosophy, bk hi Abailard. Ethics {Scito Teipsum)
Maimonides. The Guidefor the Perplexed, part hi, CH 8-9 Nicolas of Cusa.
The  Vision  of  God  Teresa  of  Iesus.  The  Way of Perfection SuAREZ.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxx  (11, 14) John of the Cross. Ascent of
Mount Carmel S. Johnson. History ofRasselas HuTCHESON. A System of Moral
Philosophy Voltaire. Candide Paley. Moral Philosophy, bk i, ch 6

[768b]
For:  The  bearing  of  natural  desire on the pursuit of happiness, see
Desire  2a, 3a, 7b; Love 5a-5a(i); Will yd. The relation of happiness to
death  and  the fear of death, see Immortality i ; Life and Death 8a-8c.
Other considerations of individual happiness in relation to the state or
the  common  good,  Basic  notions involved in the Christian doctrine of
supernatural happiness or eternal beatitude, see Eternity 4d; God 6c(4),
yd,  7g; Immortality 5e-5g; Love 5a(2); Punishment 5d, 5e(i); Sin 3c-3d,
4d,  6d, 7; Virtue and Vice 8b, 8e; Will 7e-7e(2). Another discussion of
the  beatitude  of God, see God 4h. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are
works  not  included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant to
the  idea  and  topics  with  which  this chapter deals. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  1.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the
last  chapter  of  The Great Ideas. T. Reid. Essays on the Active Powers
ofthe  Human  Mind,  hi, part hi, ch 1-4 Bentham. An Introduction to the
Principles  ofMorals  and  Legislation,  ch  i  Wordsworth.  The Prelude
Schopenhauer.  The World as Will and Idea, vol i, BK iv; vol hi, sup, ch
45-50  Leopardi.  Essays, Dialogues, and Thoughts Whevvell. The Elements
of Morality, bk ii, ch Kierkegaard. Philosophical Fragments . Concluding
Unscientific  Postscript  Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  vih,  ch 2 Flaubert.
Madame  Bovary  Emerson.  The  Conduct  of Life H. SiDGwicK. The Methods
ofEthics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-6;  bk  hi, ch 14; BK IV Ibsen. A Doll's House
Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil  .  The Will to Power Hauptmann. The
Weavers  Chekhov.  Three  Sisters  Mann.  Buddenbroo}{S Dewey and Tufts.
Ethics,  part  ii, Moore. Principia Ethica, ch 2-3 ch 14-15 . Ethics, ch
1-2 Unamuno. The Tragic Sense of Life B. Russell. What I Believe, ch 4-5
.  SJ^eptical Essays, viii A. E. Taylor. The Faith of a Moralist, series
i (9) Kirk. The Vision of God Santayana. Some Turns of Thought in Modern
Philosophy,  ch  4 Maritain. Scholasticism and Politics, ch vii Adler. a
Dialectic of Morals LuBAC. Surnaturel O'Connor. The Eternal Quest

[769a]
Chapter -^^: HISTORY INTRODUCTION our language the term History,'* Hegel
obIX  serves,  "unites  the  objective  with the subjective side. ... It
comprehends  not  less what h:is happened than the narration of what has
happened.  This  union of the two meanings we must regard as of a higher
order  than mere outward accident; we must suppose historical narrations
to  have  appeared  contemporaneously with historical deeds and events."
Our  daily  speech confirms Hegel's observation that "history" refers to
that  which has happened as well as to the record of it. We speak of the
history  of  a  people or a nation, or of the great events and epochs of
history;  and  we  also  call a history the book which gives a narrative
account of these matters. It is as if we used the word "physics" to name
both  the  object  of  study  and  the  science  of that object; whereas
normally  we  tend  to  use  "physics"  for the science and refer to its
subject  matter  as  the  physical  world.  We do not say that matter in
motion  is  physics,  but  that  it is the object of physics, one of the
things  a  physicist  studies.  We  might  similarly  have  adopted  the
convention of using "history" in a restricted sense to signify a kind of
knowledge  or  a  kind of writing, and then called the phenomena written
about  or  studied "historical" but not "history." That, however, is not
the  prevailing  usage.  The  word "history" seems to have at least four
distinct meanings. It refers to a kind of knowledge. It refers to a type
of  literature.  It  means  an  actual sequence of events in time, which
constitutes  a process of irreversible change. This can be either change
in  the structure of the world or any part of nature, or change in human
I   affairs,   in  society  or  civiUzation.  Historical  knowledge  and
historical writing can be about natural history or human history. In his
classification of the kinds of knowledge, 711

[769b]
Francis  Bacon  makes  this  distinction  when  he  divides history into
"natural,  civil,  ecclesiastical, and literary." Whereas the last three
deal  with  human things, the first is concerned with the non-human part
of  the natural world. At the same time, this natural history is not, in
Bacon's  judgment,  the  same  thing as "natural philosophy," or what we
would  now  call  "natural science." In this set of great books, natural
history,  even  cosmic  history,  makes its appearance in works which we
ordinarily  classify  as  science  or  philosophy; for example, Darwin's
Origin  of  Species,  Lucretius'  On  the  Nature  of Things, or Plato's
Timaeus.  The  great  books  of  history  deal with man and society, not
nature or the universe. For the most part this is true also of the great
philosophies  of  history. They, too, are primarily concerned with human
civiUzation,  not  the  physical  world. In its original Greek root, the
word  "history"  means  research,  and  implies  the  act of judging the
evidences  in  order  to separate fact from fiction. The opening line of
Herodotus  is  sometimes  translated  not  "these  are  the histories of
Herodotus of Halicarnassus," but "these are the researches ..." The word
"research"  can,  of  course, mean any sort of inquiry— into what is the
case  as well as into what has happened. The title of one of Aristotle's
biological  works, the History of Animals, suggests that it is concerned
with  researches  about  animals.  The  book  does not deal with natural
history;  it  is  not  a  history  of animals in the sense of giving the
stages  of  their  development  in the course of time. The redundancy of
"historical  research" can therefore be excused on the ground that it is
necessary   to   distinguish   between   two   kinds   of   inquiry   or
research—scientific and historical.

[770a]
712  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Originally, research set the historian apart from
the  poet and the maker of myths or legends. They told stories, too; but
only  the  historian  restricted himself to telling a story based on the
facts  ascertained  by inquiry or research. Herodotus deserves the title
"father  of  history"  for  having  originated  a style of writing which
differs  from  poetry in this extraordinary respect. He tries to win the
reader's  belief  not by the plausibihty of his narrative, but rather by
giving  the reader some indication of the sources of information and the
reliability  of  the  evidence on which the narrative is based. The poet
tries  to  tell a likely story, but the historian tries to make credible
statements  about particular past events. He makes an explicit effort to
weigh  the  evidence  himself  or,  as  Herodotus so frequently does, to
submit  conflicting testimony to the reader's own judgment. "Such is the
account  which  the Persians give of these matters," he writes, "but the
Phoenicians vary from the Persian statements"; or "this much I know from
information  given  me  by the Delphians; the remainder of the story the
Milesians  add";  or "that these were the real facts I learnt at Memphis
from  the  priests  of  Vulcan"; or "such is the truth of this matter; I
have  also  heard  another  account  which  I do not at all believe"; or
again,  "thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  Egypt  from my own observation,
relating  what I myself saw, the ideas that I formed, and the results of
my  own  researches.  What  follows  rests  on  accounts given me by the
Egyptians,  which  I  shall  now repeat, adding thereto some particulars
which  fell under my own notice." Herodotus seems quite conscious of the
difference  between  himself  and  Homer,  especially  on  those matters
treated  by  the poet which fall within his purview as an historian. The
Trojan  War  lies in the background of the conflict with which Herodotus
is  directly  concerned— the Persian invasion of Greece—for the Persians
"trace to the attack upon Troy their ancient enmity towards the Greeks."
Herodotus  does  not  doubt  that  the siege of Troy took place as Homer
relates,  but he learns from the Egyptians a legend about the landing of
Paris  and Helen on Egyptian soil and the detention of Helen by Proteus,
king of Memphis. "Such is the tale told me by the priests con-

[770b]
cerning  the  arrival  of  Helen at the court of Proteus. It seems to me
that  Homer  was  acquainted  with  this story, and while discarding it,
because  he  thought  it  less  adapted for epic poetry than the version
which  he  followed,  showed  that it was not unknown to him." Herodotus
cites  passages  in the Iliad and the Odyssey to corroborate this point.
He is willing to use the Homeric poems as one source of information, but
not   without  checking  them  against  conflicting  accounts.  "I  made
inquiry," he writes, "whether the story which the Greeks tell about Troy
is a fable or not." When he comes to the conclusion that Helen was never
within  the  walls  of  the  city to which the Greeks laid siege for ten
years,  he tells the reader his reasons for thinking so. Homer, however,
when  he  narrates  Helen's actions during the siege, does not bother to
estabhsh the facts of the matter or to give the reader contrary versions
of  what  took  place.  That  is  not  the  poet's  task,  as  Herodotus
recognizes.  It  belongs to the historian, not the poet. The story which
may have greater probability in fact may not be the better story for the
poet.  Since he is both an investigator and a storyteller, the historian
stands comparison with the scientist in one respect and with the poet in
another.  The  special  character  of  history  as  a  kind of knowledge
distinct  from  science  or  philosophy seems clear from its object— the
singular  or  unique events of the past. The scientist or philosopher is
not  concerned  with  what  has happened, but with the nature of things.
Particular events may serve as evidences for him, but his conclusions go
beyond  statements  of  particular fact to generalizations about the way
things are or happen at any time and place. In contrast, the historian's
research  begins and ends with particulars. He uses particulars directly
observed  by  himself  or  testified  to  by  others  as  the  basis for
circumstantial inference to matters which cannot be estabUshed by direct
evidence.  The method of investigation developed by the early historians
may  be the precursor of scientific method, but the kind of evidence and
the  mode of argument which we find in Hippocrates or Plato indicate the
divergence  of  the  scientist and philosopher from the procedure of the
historian.

[771a]
Chapter  34:  HISTORY  713  The contrast between history and science— or
what  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  may be the same, philosophy— is
formiHatcd in Aristotle's statement concerning poetry, that it is **more
philosophical   than  history,  because  poetry  tends  to  express  the
universal, history the particular." History deals with what has actually
happened,  whereas  poetry,  like  philosophy,  may  be  concerned  with
whatever  is  or can be. One comparison leads to another. Unlike poetry,
history  and  science  are alike in that they both attempt to prove what
they  say.  But  in  distinction  from  science  or  philosophy, history
resembles poetry, especially the great epic and dramatic poems, in being
narrative  literature.  The historian and the poet both tell stories. If
the  poet  and  the  historian—  including, of course, a biographer like
Plutarch—  are also moralists, they are moralists in the same way. Their
works  do  not contain expositions of ethical or political doctrine, but
rather  concrete  exemplifications of theories concerning the conduct of
human  life  and  social  practices.  That fact explains why much of the
content of the great historical books is cited in other chapters dealing
with  moral  and  political,  even  psychological,  topics.  But in this
chapter  we  are  concerned  with  history  itself  rather than with the
particulars  of  history.  We are concerned with the methods and aims of
history as a kind of knowledge and literature; and we are concerned with
the historical process as a whole, the consideration of which belongs to
the  philosophy  of history. The aims and methods of writing history are
discussed  by  the  historian  himself,  as  well as by the philosopher.
Philosophers  Uke  Hobbes,  Bacon, or Descartes consider history largely
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  kind  of  knowledge  it  is and the
contribution  it  makes  to  the whole of human learning. Historians hke
Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Tacitus, and Gibbon state more specifically the
objectives  of  their work, the standards of reliability or authenticity
by   which   they   determine  what  is  fact,  and  the  principles  of
interpretation  by  which they select the most important facts, ordering
them  according  to some hypothesis concerning the meaning of the events
reported.

[771b]
I Icrcxlotus writes, he tells us, *'in the hope of preserving from decay
the  remembrance  of what men have done, and of preventing the great and
wonderful actions of the Greeks and the barbarians from losing their due
meed  of  glory." Thucydides proceeds in the belief that the war between
the  Peloponnesians  and  the  Athenians **was the greatest movement yet
known in history, not only of the I lellenes, but of a large part of the
barbarian  world  — I had almost said of mankind." Not very different is
the declaration of Tacitus: "My purpose is not to relate at length every
motion,  but  only  such as were conspicuous for excellence or notorious
for  infamy.  This  I  regard  as  history's highest function, to let no
worthy  action  be  uncommemorated,  and  to hold out the reprobation of
posterity  as  a terror to evil words and deeds." But though there seems
to  be a striking similarity in the purpose of these historians, Tacitus
alone of the three avows a moral purpose. Furthermore, each of the three
is  conscious  of  the  individual way in which he has put his intention
into  effect.  Thucydides,  for example, seems to have Herodotus in mind
when  he  fears  that "the absence of romance in my history will detract
somewhat  from  its  interest;  but  if  it  be  judged  useful by those
inquirers  who  desire  an  exact  knowledge of the past. ... I shall be
content."  Like  Thucydides,  Tacitus  is  an  historian of contemporary
events  and  he fears comparison with the historian of antiquity who can
"enchain  and  refresh a reader's mind" with "descriptions of countries,
the various incidents of battle, glorious deaths of great generals." His
own work may be instructive, he thinks, but it may also give very little
pleasure because he has "to present in succession the merciless biddings
of  a tyrant, incessant prosecutions, faithless friendships, the ruin of
innocence, the same causes issuing in the same results, and
[he
is]  everywhere  confronted  with a wearisome monotony in [his] subject-
matter."  As we have already noted, Herodotus seems satisfied to let the
reader  decide  between  conflicting accounts. Only occasionally does he
indicate  which  is  more  likely in his own judgment. Thucydides claims
that  he  has  made  a greater effort to determine the facts. "I did not
even  trust  my own impressions," he writes; the narrative "rests partly
on what I saw myself, partly

[772a]
714  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  on  what  others saw for me, the accuracy of the
report  being  always  tried  by  the  most  severe  and  detailed tests
possible.  My  conclusions  have  cost  me  some  labor from the want of
coincidence  between  the  accounts of the same occurrences by different
eye-witnesses." But he thinks that his conclusions "may safely be relied
on,"   undisturbed  "either  by  the  lays  of  a  poet  displaying  the
exaggeration  of  his  craft,  or by the compositions of the chroniclers
which  are  attractive  at truth's expense." The historians are aware of
the  difficulty  of  combining truth-teUing with storytelling. Most men,
Thucydides   remarks,  are  unwilling  to  take  enough  pains  "in  the
investigation  of truth, accepting readily the first story that comes to
hand."  The  difficulty,  according  to Tacitus, is the obscurity of the
greatest  events,  "so  that some take for granted any hearsay, whatever
its  source,  others  turn  truth  into  falsehood, and both errors find
encouragement with posterity." Reviewing the enormous scope of his work,
Gibbon  at  the  very  end concludes that "the historian may applaud the
importance and variety of his subject; but, while he is conscious of his
own   imperfections,   he  must  often  accuse  the  deficiency  of  his
materials."  Because of the scarcity of authentic memorials, he tells us
in  another  place, the historian finds it hard "to preserve a clear and
unbroken  thread  of  narration.  Surrounded  with  imperfect fragments,
always  concise,  often  obscure,  and  sometimes  contradictory,  he is
reduced  to  collect, to compare, and to conjecture; and though he ought
never  to  place his conjectures in the rank of facts, yet the knowledge
of   human  nature,  and  of  the  sure  operation  of  its  fierce  and
unrestrained  passions,  might,  on  some  occasions, supply the want of
historical  materials."  Clearly, the historians have different criteria
of relevance in determining the selection and rejection of materials and
different  principles  of  interpretation  in assigning the causes which
explain  what  happened. These differences are reflected in the way each
historian constructs from the facts a grand story, conceives the line of
its  plot  and  the characterization of its chief actors. Herodotus, for
example,  has  been  compared  with  Homer as writing in an epic manner;
Thucydides, with the dramatic writers of

[772b]
tragedy. Even if they all agreed on the ascertainment of fact, the great
historians would differ from one another as the great poets do; each has
a style and a vision as personal and poetic as Homer or Virgil, Melville
or Tolstoy. Only one of the great books is, by title and design, devoted
entirely  to  the  philosophy of history— to the formulation of a theory
which  embraces  the  whole  of  man's  career on earth. This is Hegel's
Philosophy  of  History.  Augustine's  City  of  God presents an equally
comprehensive  vision,  but  a  comparison of the two suggests that they
differ  from  one another as philosophy from theology. The point of this
comparison  is  not  that  God  and  His providence are omitted from the
philosopher's  view.  On  the contrary, Hegel regards the history of the
world  as  a "process of development and the reafization of Spirit— this
is  the  true  theodicy,  the justification of God in History. Only this
insight  can  reconcile  Spirit with the History of the World viz., that
what  has  happened  and is happening every day is not only not 'without
God'  but is essentially His Work." The difference is rather to be found
in  the  ultimate  source  of  insight  concerning human development and
destiny.  Augustine  sees everything in the light of God's revelation of
His plan in Holy Writ; Hegel and other philosophers of history from Vico
to  Toynbee  seek  and sometimes claim to find in the records of history
itself  the  laws  which  govern  and  the  pattern which inheres in the
procession  of  events  from the beginning to the end of human time. For
Augustine,  the great epochs of history are defined reUgiously. They are
stages  in  the development of the city of God on earth, not the city of
man.   Man   is   viewed  as  dwelling  on  earth  under  four  distinct
dispensations  from  God:  (i)  in  Paradise before the Fall; (2) in the
world  after expulsion from Eden and before the Promise and the Law were
given  to  the  Jews; (3) under the Law and before the coming of Christ;
(4) between the first and second coming under the dispensation of grace.
Augustine  sometimes  makes  other  divisions  of  history, but they are
always primarily religious. For example, he divides all of time into f

[773a]
seven ages, corresponding to the seven days of creation. "The first age,
as  the  first day, extends from Adam to the dekige; the second from the
deluge to Abraham. . . . From Abraham to the advent of Christ there arc,
as  the  evangelist  Matthew calculates, three periods, in each of which
are fourteen generations one period from Abraham to David, a second from
David  to  the  captivity,  a  third  from the captivity to the birth of
Christ  in  the flesh. There are thus five ages in all. The sixth is now
passing,  and  cannot  be  measured  by any number of generations. . . .
After  this  period  God shall rest as on the seventh day, when He shall
give  us  (who  shall  be  the  seventh  day) rest in Himself. . . . The
seventh  shall be our Sabbath, which shall be brought to a close, not by
an  evening,  but  by  the  Lord's  day,  as  an eighth and eternal day,
consecrated  by  the resurrection of Christ, and prefiguring the eternal
repose  not  only of the spirit, but also of the body . . . This is what
shall  be  in  the end without end." This same projection of history— in
all  essentials, at least— is laid before Adam by the archangel Micfiael
m  Milton  s  Paradise Lost, just before Adam leaves the Garden of Eden.
Unlike the four major dispensations of which Augustine and Milton speak,
Hegel's four stages of the world are epochs in the development of Spirit
as  manifested in the State. They are secularly defined as the Oriental,
the  Greek,  the Roman, and the German world and are seen as a "progress
of   the   consciousness   of  Freedom."  The  "various  grades  in  the
consciousness  of  Freedom,"  Hegel  writes, "supply us with the natural
division of universal History. . . . The Orientals have not attained the
knowledge that Spirit—Man as such— is free; and because they do not know
this,  they  are  not free. They '' only know that one isfree . . . that
one  is  therefore  only a Despot; not 2. free man. The consciousness of
Freedom  first arose among the Greeks, and therefore they were free; but
they,  \  and the Romans likewise, knew only that some are free— not man
as such. . . . The Greeks, therefore, had slaves and their whole hfe and
ihe  maintenance  of  their  splendid  liberty,  was implicated with the
institution  of slavery. . . . . The German nations, under the influence
of

[773b]
Chapter  34:  HISTORY  715  Christianity,  were  the first to attain the
consciousness that man, as man, is free." With the complete emancipation
of  man  in  the  (Jcrman-C^hristian  world,  history is consummated for
Hcgcl.  "The  grand  principle  of  being  is  realized,"  he  declares;
"consequently  the  end  of  days  is  fully  come." Another sign of the
hnality  of the German-Christian world seems to be its reconciliation of
Church  and  State: "European history is the exhibition of the growth of
each  of  these  principles severally . . . then of an antithesis on the
part of both . . . lastly, of the harmonizing of the antithesis." In the
German-Christian  world, the secular and the religious modes of life are
ultimately  harmonized,  fused  in a single order of "rational Freedom."
Apart  from  the  opposition  between  the philosophical and theological
approaches,  here  represented  by Hegel and Augustine, there seem to be
two  main  issues  in  the  general  theory  of human history. The first
concerns  the pattern of change; the second, the character of the causes
at  work.  The pattern most familiar because of its prevalence in modern
speculations  is  that  of  progress  or  evolution. The progress may be
conceived  as a dialectical motion in the realm of Spirit, contrasted by
Hegel  with  the realm of Matter or Nature, according as "the essence of
Matter  is  Gravity  . . . and the essence of Spirit is Freedom." But it
may  also be thought to occur, as in the dialectical materialism of Marx
and  Engels,  through the resolution of conflicting material or economic
forces.  "The whole history of mankind," Engels writes in his preface to
the  Communist  Manifesto,  "since  the  dissolution of primitive tribal
society,  holding  land in common ownership, has been a history of class
struggles,   contests  between  exploiting  and  exploited,  ruling  and
oppressed  classes;  the history of these class struggles forms a series
of  evolutions  in which, now-a-days, a stage has been reached where the
exploited  and  oppressed  class,  the  proletariat,  cannot  attain its
emancipation  from  the  sway  of  the  exploiting and ruling class, the
bourgeoisie,  without,  at the same time, and once for all, emancipating
society  at  large  from all exploitation, oppression, class-distinction
and

[774a]
716  THE  GREAT  IDEAS class-struggle." The four great economic systems—
the  systems  of slave labor, feudal serfdom, industrial capitalism, and
the  communistic  or  classless  society—are  thus seen as the stages of
progress  toward  an  ultimate perfection in which history comes to rest
because  it  has  at  last  fully  reaUzed its controlling tendency. The
pattern  of  progress  may  be  conceived  not  as  a dialectical motion
involving conflict and synthesis, but rather, as by Kant, in terms of an
increasing  actualization  of  the potentialities for good in human Hfe.
Giving  the name of culture to "the production in a rational being of an
aptitude  for any ends whatever of his own choosing," Kant declares, "it
is  only  culture  that  can  be the ultimate end which we have cause to
attribute  to  nature  in  respect  of  the human race." The progressive
realization  of culture consists in "the liberation of the will from the
despotism  of  desires  whereby,  in  our  attachment to certain natural
things, we are rendered incapable of exercising a choice of our own." In
these terms history moves toward a perfection vv^hich can never be fully
achieved  on  earth,  for  man's "own nature is not so constituted as to
rest  or  be  satisfied  in  any  possession  or enjoyment whatever." As
conceived by the evolutionist, progress may or may not attain its limit,
but  in  either  case  its  manifestation in human history appears to be
analogous  to  as  well as an extension of the line of development along
which  the  world  or all of living nature has gradually advanced. These
views  are  given  further  discussion  in  the  chapters  on Evolution,
Progress,  and  World. Whether or not the same pattern of change obtains
in  the historical order of nature as in the history of man and society,
is  a  question to be answered by those who deny as well as by those who
affirm  progress.  There iscycHcal change in nature, the same pattern of
birth,  growth,  decay,  and  death  repeating  itself  generation after
generation. That history too repeats itself with the rise and decline of
cities  and  civiUzations, seems to be the ancient view. It reappears in
our  day  with  Spengler  and,  somewhat qualified by the possibility of
progress,   with  Toynbee.  "The  cities  which  were  formerly  great,"
Herodotus observes, "have most of them be-

[774b]
come  insignificant;  and  such  as are at present powerful were weak in
olden  time.  I  shall,  therefore, discourse equally of both, convinced
that  prosperity  never continues long in one stay." Lucretius finds the
cyclical  pattern both in the succession of worlds and in the succession
of  civilizations.  The  myth of the golden age of Kronos and the earth-
bound age of Zeus, which Plato tells in the Statesman, also applies both
to  nature and society. According to the myth, "there is a time when God
himself guides and helps to roll the world in its course; and there is a
time,  on  the  completion  of a certain cycle, when he lets go, and the
world   being   a   living  creature,  and  having  originally  received
intelligence from its author and creator, turns about and by an inherent
necessity  revolves  in the opposite direction." Thus the history of the
world  runs  through  "infinite  cycles  of years," and one age succeeds
another  in  an  endless  round.  There is still a third view which sees
history  as neither cyclical nor simply progressive. Virgil reverses the
order  of  the Platonic myth by placing the golden age in the future. It
dawns  with  Rome, where, in the words of the 4th Eclogue, "the majestic
roll  of  circling  centuries  begins anew: Justice returns, returns old
Saturn's  reign, with a new breed of men sent down from heaven . . . and
the  iron  shall  cease,  the golden race arise." Rome for Virgil is not
only  the  beginning  of  the golden age; it is also the consummation of
history.  In  the  Aeneid Jupiter himself declares that he has given the
Romans  "dominion  without  end"— that he has ordained for them "neither
period nor boundary of empire." The "gowned race of Rom.e" shall be "the
lords  of  the world"; then "war shall cease, and the iron ages soften."
Thus, Jupiter says, "is it willed," and so "a day will come in the lapse
of  cycles."  The  perpetuity of Rome seems to leave little room for any
further  essential progress and no chance for another cycle of decay and
regeneration.  The Christian dogma of the fall of man from grace and his
return  through  divine  mediation  to grace and salvation seems to give
history  a  pattern  that is partly Platonic in the sequence which makes
the  loss of a golden age the occasion for striving to regain it. But it
also seems

[775a]
Chapter 34: HIS'I'ORY to be Virgilian in part. The epochal transitions I
of  history  happen  only  once.  The  coming of Christ is an absolutely
singular  event,  after  I which there is no essential progress in man's
condition  until  the  Last  Judgment at the end of the world. Common to
these  diverse  conceptions  of  the  pattern  of history is the problem
concerning the causes which are at work as history unfolds. Whatever the
factors,  they  will  operate in the future as they have in past, unless
the millenium is already upon us or about to dawn. From the knowledge of
their  own  past  or from their dim perception of divine providence, men
derive  a  sense  of  the  future;  but they look fonvard to that future
differently  according  as some part of it will stem from choices freely
made,  or  according  as  all  of  it is inexorably determined by causes
beyond  their  control.  The  basic alternatives of fate and freedom, of
necessity  and  contingency, God's will and man's choice, are considered
in  the  chapters  on  Chance,  Fate,  and  Necessity  and  Contingency.
Sometimes the issue is resolved in the same way for the course of nature
and  the  course  of  history:  necessity  reigns  in  both; as there is
contingency  in the events of nature, so there is freedom in the acts of
history.   Sometimes   the   processes   of   nature   and  history  are
distinguished:  the  motions  of matter are governed by inviolable laws;
whereas the motions of men are directed by laws which leave them free to
work  out  a destiny which is determined by, rather than determines, the
human  spirit.  Those  who  do not deny freedom entirely in the realm of
histor}^  seldom  give it unhmited scope. What men can do is conditioned
from  below  by the operation of material forces, and irom above by what
Hegel  calls  "God's  purpose  with  the  world." The vast "arras-web of
Universal  History"  is woven by the interaction between God's will (the
Absolute  Idea)  and human purposes or interests, which Hegel calls "the
complex of human passions." History for him is "the union of Freedom and
Necessity,"  where "the latent abstract process of Spirit is regarded as
Necessity,  while  that  which  exhibits itself in the conscious will of
men,  as  their  interest,  belongs  to the domain of freedom." But this
freedom which coheres

[775b]
717  uith  necessity  seems  to belong more to the human race as a whole
than  to  individual men. The individual man is tossed aside if he tries
to  obstruct  the  path  of  histor)'.  I  Ic is powerless to change its
course. Not even great men can make or determine history. They are great
only  because,  sensing  the  next phase of the historical process, they
identify  themselves  with  the  wave  of  the  future and conform their
purposes  to  the  march  of  events— the dialectical development of the
Absolute  Idea.  A  few  men  thus  become "worldhistorical individuals"
because  their own "particular aims involve those large issues which are
the   will  of  the  World-Spirit."  They  have  "an  insight  into  the
requirements  of  the time —what was ripe for development . . . the very
Truth  for  their age, for their world; the species next in order, so to
speak, and which was already formed in the womb of time." Like Hegel and
unhke  the  ancient  historians,  Tolstoy also regards the leadership of
great  men  as  illusory.  To believe in the efficacy of heroes or great
men,  he  thinks, is to commit the fallacy of the man "who, watching the
movements  of  a  herd  of cattle and paying no attention to the varying
quality  of  the  pasturage  in  different parts of the field, or to the
driving  of the herdsman, attributes the direction the herd takes to the
animal  which  happens to be at its head." Great men are only celebrated
puppets,  pushed  ahead  on  the  moving front of history. The motion of
history  derives its force and direction from the individual acts of the
innumerable  nameless  men  who  comprise the human mass. The act of the
individual  counts  httle.  The  mass  motion  is a complex resultant of
slight  impulses  tending  in  many  directions.  But however slight the
impulse  each  man  gives,  his  contribution  to history is a free act,
conditioned only by the circum.stances under which he makes a choice and
by  the  divine  providence which grants him the freedom to choose. Like
"every human action," history, according to Tolstoy, thus "appears lo us
as   a   certain   combination  of  freedom  and  inevitaDifferent  from
speculations on a grand scale concerning the whole historical process is
that

[776a]
718  THE  GREAT IDEAS 3. The writing of history : research and narration
causes  45.  Theories  of causation in the historical process history 5.
The theology of history

[776b]
i  type  of  philosophizing  about  history which On the practical side,
political  writers  like  considers its place in education— the light it
Machiavclli,  Montesquieu,  and the FederaUsts aflfords to the mind, and
the  lessons  it teaches use history to exemphfy or confirm their genfor
the  guidance  of conduct. eralizations. They agree with Thucydides that
Montaigne,  for  example,  makes  the reading "an exact knowledge of the
past  is  an  aid  to  the  of  history and biography the window through
interpretation  of  the  future, which in the which a man looks out upon
the  world.  "This course of human things must resemble if it does great
world,"  he  writes,  "is  the mirror wherein not reflect it." Most men,
adds  Tacitus,  "learn  we  are  to behold ourselves, to be able to know
wisdom  from the fortunes of others." ourselves as we ought to do in the
true bias." It is on these grounds that the great books Only against the
large  scene  history reveals of history belong with treatises on morals
and  and  amidst  the  variety  of  human  nature it politics and in the
company  of  philosophical exhibits can a man truly know himself and his
and theological speculations concerning the own time. In a similar vein,
Gibbon  declares  nature and destiny of man. Liberal education that "the
experience  of  history exalts and enneeds the particular as well as the
universal,  larges  the horizon of our intellectual view." and these are
combined  in the great historical Hegel, on the other hand, insists that
"what  exnarratives.  Apart  from  their  utiUty, they have perience and
history  teach  is  that  peoples and the originality of conception, the
poetic  qualgovernments  never  have  learned  anything  from  ity,  the
imaginative  scope  which  rank  them  history,  or  acted on principles
deduced  from it. with the great creations of the human mind. OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  PAGB  1.  History  as knowledge and as literature: its kinds and
divisions;  its  distinction  from poetry, myth, philosophy, and science
719  2.  The  light and lesson of history : its role in the education of
the  mind and in the guidance of human conduct 720 3a. The determination
and  choice  of fact: the classification of historical data 721 3*^. The
explanation   or   interpretation  of  historic  fact:  the  historian's
treatment  of  4.  The  philosophy of history 722 (2) Material forces in
history:  economic,  physical,  and  geographic  factors  723  (3) World
history as the development of Spirit: the stages of the dialectic of (4)
The  role  of  the individual in history: the great man, hero, or leader
4c. The spirit of the time as conditioning the politics and culture of a
period  724  5«.  The  relation of the gods or God to human history: the
dispensations  ofprovidence  5^.  The  city  of God and the city of man;
church and state 725

[777a]
c  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc  the volume and page numbers ot the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homhr: IliacJ, bk ii [265 28^] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  ot page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one column, the letters a and b refer to the upperand lower
halvesof  the page. For example, in53 James :Pi;v<r/io/o^V, 116a- 11 9b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. History as knowledge and as
literature:  its kinds and divisions; its distinction from poetry, myth,
philosophy, and science 6 Herodotus : History, bk ii, 71a-73b esp 72a-b;
75b;  BK  IV, 127a-b; bk vii, 242c-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i, 354a-d 7 Plato: Cratylus, 112b / Republic, bk ii, 323d324a / Timaeus,
447a  / Critias, 479d / Laws, bk hi 663d-677a 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 9
[1451*36-^32]  686a-c; CH 23 695a-c 14 Plutarch: Theseus, la-c / Romulus
15a-30a,c   passim,  esp  15a-18d  /  Themistocles,  102a,  /  Pericles,
128d-129a  / Timoleon, 195a-b / Cimon, 390b-d / Alexander, 540b,d-541a /
Dion,  794c-795a  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 60d; bk iv, 71d-72b; BK XI,
107c;  BK  xiii, 133b / Histories, bk ii, 228a-b 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  2728 650a-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 67b-c;
71c-d   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-c;  41c-42a;  199a200d;  305d-306a;
347c-350d; 457a-b 26 Shakespeare: Richard HI, act hi, sc i [7288] 123c-d
/ Hemy V, prologue 532b,d

[777b]
Chapti-k  34:  HISTORY  719  28  Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 473b 29
Cervantes:   Don   Quixote,   part  ii,  213b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement
ofLearning,  32d-39a esp 32d-33a, 38c-39a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 87,
123b 31 Descartes: Rules, in, 3b-d / Discourse, part I, 43a-b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  628  287a / Vacuum, 355a356a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
iv, ch xvi, SECT 7-11 368d-370a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii,
div 65, 479b-c; sect xii, div 132, 509c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 19a-20a;
49b-50c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 88a-d; 97c-98d passim; 211a; 398b;
471c-d      41     Gibbon:     Decline     and     Fall,     337c     44
BoswELL:7oA«Jo/?,203a-b;258d-259a:353b-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy ofRight,
intro,  par  3, 10a11c; PART III, par 355, 112d / Philosophy of History,
intro, 153a-158a; 182d-183d; 193d194a; part i, 230c-231b; 248c; part hi,
285d286a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 430d-431a; bk XI, 469a-470c;
bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue II 675a-696d passim 53 James: Psychology, 863b
[fn 2]

[778a]
2.  The  light  and  lesson of history: its role in the education of the
mind  and  in  the guidance of human conduct Old Testament: Deuteronomy,
6:20-25;  7  •6"  11,17-19; 8; 16:1-12; 29 / Joshua, 24:1-27— (D) Josue,
24:1-27  / / Samuel, 12:6-25— (D) I Kings, 12:6-25 / Ezra, 4:7-23— (D) /
EsdraSy  4:7-23 / Nehemiah, g—(D) II Esdras, 9 / Psalms, 44:1-3; 78; 81;
105-106;  136 esp 136:10-24— (D) Psalms, 43:1-4; 77; 80; 104105; 135 esp
135:10-24  /  Ecclesiastes,  i:ii;  2:16  / Isaiah, 46:8-11— (D) Isaias,
46:8-11  /  Jeremiah,  2:1-9—  (Z)) J^remias, 2:1-9 / Ezel{iel, 20:1-44—
(Z)) Ezechiel, 20:1-44 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 2:2-4— (D) OT, Boo\
of Wisdom, 2:2-4 New Testament: II Peter, 2 / Jude 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix
[485-605]  62a-63b  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 2b; bk v, 175b; BK VIII,
273b-c; bk ix, 309d-310a 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i, 354b-c;
379c-d 7 Plato: Timaeus, 452b / Statesman, 587d / Philebus, 612a / Laws,
bk  hi  663d-677a  esp  667a-b;  bk  xii, 788a 8 Aristotle : Sophistical
Refutations, ch 34
[183^16-184^8]
253a-d  /  Metaphysics, bk i, cH3-io501c-511d esp ch 3 [983^1-7] 501c-d,
CH  10 511c-d; BK II, CH I [993^30-^19] 511b, d512a; bk hi 513b,d-522a,c
passim, esp ch i
[995^23-^4] 513b, d; bk xii, ch i[io69^25-29]
598b;  CH 8 [1074^1-14] 604d-605a/ 5ow/, bk i 631a-641d passim, esp ch 2
[403*^20-23] 633a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1181*^12-24]
436c / Politics, bk vii, ch 10
[1329^40-^35]
533d-534b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1360^30-37]  600d; bk ii, ch 20
[i393^25-*'3]  641a 12 Aurelius : Meditations, bk vi, sect 46 278c-d; bk
VII,  SECT I 279b; sect 49 282d; bk ix, SECT 28 293d-294a; bk x, sect 27
299d;  bk  XI, sect 26 306b 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b / Timoleon,
195a-b;  201b-202c  / Nicias, 423a-c / Alexander, 540b,d-541a / Cato the
Younger,  634a-c  /  Demetrius,  726a-d  15  Tacitus :y472;2rt/j,BK III,
58b-d;60d;BK  IV,  71d' 72b / Histories, bk i, 189d-190a; bk iii, 255b-c
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk ii, par i 9a; bk x, par 3-6 72a- 73a; bk
xi,  par  i 89b-c / City of God, bk I, CH 8-9 133a-135a; ek iv, ch 33-34
206c-207a,c;  bk  v,  ch 25 228b-c; bk xi, ch 18 331d-332a; bk xv, ch 21
415b-416a;  bk  xvii  449a-472a,c  esp  ch  3 450c-451c; bk xxii, ch 3c,
618a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 28 650a-d; ch 39 654c-655b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 97, A I, ANS 236a-d 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise, vi [31-111] 113d-114d; xi [43-139] 122c-123c;
xii [22-126] 123d-125a; xv [88]-xvi [154] 129b-132a; xvii
[103
142] 133b-c

[778b]
«l  720  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2/0  3  22 Chaucer: Mon](s T«/^ 434a-448b 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch vi, 8c-d; ch xivXV, 22a-b; ch xviii 25a-26a 23
Hobbes:   Leviathan,   part   i,  53c-54a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  58a-59d  25  Montaigne  :  Essays,  24a-c; 41b-42a;
68b-69d; 198c-200d; 455d-456b 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc i
[45-96] 483b-d
29  Cervantes:  Do« Quixote, part i, 23c-d; 32c33a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  4c-6c;  32d34b;  85a-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 98
126d-127b   31   Descartes:   Discourse,   part   i,  43a-b  32  Milton:
Areopagitica,  384b-386b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 619-641 284b-290a / Vacuum,
355a-358b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii, sect 100112 47c-51b
passim, esp sect 103 48b-c / Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect ii
369d-370a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect viii, div 65, 479b-c 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 420a-c; bk IV, 428a-435a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 334c-343d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 33c;
211a;  632a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  13d;  194a-d; 311a312b;
326d-328a,c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-8d;  248d-250a,c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  266d  [fn  2]  /  Practical  Reason,  357c-d 43
Federalist:  number  i,  30b; number 5, 37b-c; NUMBER 6, 39a; number 17,
70a-d; number 18-20 71a-78b; number 30, 102b; number 70, 211b-d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 456a-b 44 Bosw ELI.: Johison, xiia-c; 3c-4c; 116b; 258di
259a;  314c-315b;  347c-d;  458d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
155b156a;  157b-c;  168d-169d;  174d-175d;  178a184b; PART I, 230c-231b;
part  iv,  368d-369a,c  47  Goethe: Faust, part i [570-585] 16a 50 Marx:
Capital,   7b-d   50   Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415a425b  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk x, 291b-d 3. The writing of history:
research  and  narration  Apocrypha: // Maccabees, 2:22-7,1 — (D) OT, //
Machahees,  2  :23-32  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i la-48a,c passim, esp
la,c,  2b, 4d-5a, 23a-b; bk ii, 68b-d; 75b; bk VII, 242c-d 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349a355a  passim;  373c;  bk  v,  489a-b  9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 9 [1409^23-34] 660d; ch 16 670c-672a

[779a]
3a  to  3b  CMM>Tr.K 34: HISTORY 721 14 Pli'tarch: Themistodes, 102a,c /
PtrUlts, 128d-129a / Timoleon, 195a-b / Cimon, 390b d / Nicias, 423a-c /
Demos/hcncs,  691b,d-692b  /  Dion,  794c-795a 15 Tacitus: Annals, hk i,
lab;  iik  ii,  44d  -ISa;  BK  111, 48c; 49c-d; 60d-61a; hk i\ , 66b-d;
71d72b;  BK  XII, llSd; bk xvi, 179d / Histories, BK I, 189a-b; 190a; bk
hi,  255b-c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 67b c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
24a-c;  41b  42a;  68b69a; 198c-200d; 347c-350d; 455d-457b 29 Cervantes:
Don Quixote, part i, 23c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 32d-38c csp
34b-35a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  97-98  126c  127b; aph 101-103
127c-128a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  622-628  286a-287a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  209b  210b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 19a-20a; 49a-50c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, lb; 87a; 96c-d; 213a-214b; 234b; 240b-c; 648d-649c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  atid  Fall, 112a-b; 161a-163d; 186a-b; 255b-c; 598a,c;
635d
[n
57]; 639a-d
[n i]; 755d-756a [n 41]; 756d-757a [n 61]; 790d791a,c [n 98]
44 Boswell: Johnson, xia-xiiia; la-4c; 5c-d; 99a; 120c; 217a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 153a158a; 181b-182c; part i, 230c-231b;
part  hi,  285d-286a  48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 195a-201a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  hi,  134a-c; bk IX, 366d-367b; bk x, 405a-406c 3<». The
determination  and choice of fact: the classification of historical data
6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 2b; 17c; 23a-b; bk II, 49a-56b passim; 59a;
60a;  60c-61b;  69b-d;  71a-73b; 76a-b; 76d; 77b-c; 80b-c; bk hi, 89c-d;
97d-98a;  99b-c;  114a-b;  115b-d;  bk  iv,  127a-b;  142c-d; 150b-151c;
158a-b;  bk  v,  161b;  168b-c;  bk  vh, 221b-c; 242c-d; 254c-d; BK vni,
261b-c; 281d-282b; bk ix, 305d; 306b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i,  349a355a;  373c;  bk ii, 391c-d; 399c; bk hi, 439b; 442c-443a; bk v,
487d;  500d-501a;  bk vi, 523c-524d passim 14 Plutarch: Theseus la-15a,c
passim,  esp  la-c  / Romulus 15a-30a,c passim, esp 15a-18d / Lyctirgus,
32a-b  /  Numa  Pompilius,  49a-b  /  Themistocles,  102a,c / Caniillus,
llla-b;  116a117a passim / Pericles, 128d-129a / Coriolamis, 191d-192b /
Aristidcs, 262b,d-263c / Cimon, 390b-d / Nicias, 423a-c / Pompey, 502d /
Alexander,  540b,d-541a  /  Cato  the  Younger,  634a-c  /  Demosthenes,
691b,d-692b: 698b699a / Galba, 859d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 48c; 49c;
60d-61a;  BK  IV, 66b-d; 71d-72b; bk vi, 87d; bk xi, 107c; BK xiH, 133b;
bk  xiv,  157c;  bk  xm, 179d / Histories, bk i, 189a-b; 190a- b; bk 11,
228a-b; bk hi, 255b-c

[779b]
b  18  Augustinr: Confessions, bk h. par i 9a; bk X, par 4-5 72ac / City
of  God, bk x, cm 14 ?.07c 308a: bk xv, cm 1-5 397 b.d 400c; bk x\ii, CH
1-2  449a-450c;  rk  x\iii,  «  h  ^o  495a b; bk xxii, en ^o, 618c d 23
HoBBi-s: Ijcviathan, pari i, 67b-c 25 M()ntai(;ne: F.ssays, 41b 42a; 68b
69a;  81a  c; 199a c; 305b 306a; 347c 350d; 457a b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 13d-14b; 32d 39c csp 32d-33d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi, 64a 33 Pascal: Pensees, dii) 286b; 628 287a; 786-7S7 325b 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 209b- 2 10b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 19a-20a; 49b 50c 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
88a-d;  96b,d;  97c98d  passim;  103c;  201b-204d  passim,  esp  203a-b;
212b-214b esp 729b-c
[n 31], 213a d;
232b 234a,c csp 232c, 736d
[n 1S2];
295c296c;  354c  d;  413b d; 428b-c; 471c-d; 648d649b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 311a-312b; 337c; 501c-503a; 639a-d [n i]; 660d [n 149]; 710a-b
[n
i];  756d  [n  60]  44 Boswell: Johnson, Ib-c; 2d-4b; 5c-d; 27c-d; 119a;
139a;  177d-178a;2I0d;  254b;  286b;  311d312a; 347c-d; 359d-360a; 425a;
458d;  575b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 153a 154c; 155b;
186c-i82c;   196d-199d   esp   199d;  203b-206a,c;  part  i,  209b-210c;
230c-231b; 247d-248a; p^u^t iv, 319a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 86d
[fn 4]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xih,  582 b-d; 584a54 Freud: General
Introduction,   450d-451a  5b.  The  explanation  or  interpretation  of
historic fact: the historian's treatment of causes 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  ii,  51a-54b;  bk  hi,  96c;  97d-98a; bk vi, 201b-c; 204b-c; bk vh,
221a-b;  226c;  237a-b;  238d-239c;  250b-d; bk VIII, 265b; bk ix, 289c;
292a; 309d-310a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 349a355c; 371b-c;
384b-386d  passim;  bk  v,  489a-b; bk vhi, 586b-d 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
17b-18d   /  Camillus,  107b-d;  109c-110a  /  Coriolamis,  191d-192b  /
Timoleon,  201c-d / Flamininus, 307d-308a / Cimon, 390b-d / Demosthenes,
698a-699a  / Dion, 794d-795a / Marcus Brutus, 815b-c; 822a-b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  hi,  58b-d;  bk vi, 91 b-d; BK XVI, 179d / Histories, bk i,
189b-190b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; cH 36 149c-d; BK
V,  ch  i  207d-208c; ch 11-26 216c-230a,c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 200b 30
Racon: Advance?nent of Learning, 34c; 37a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vhi, sect 100112 47c-51b

[780a]
(3. The writing of history: research and narration, 'ih. The explanation
or  interpretation  of  historic  fact:  the  historian's  treatment  of
causes.^  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 428a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  ii,  148d-149a;  BK  V, 305b-309a,c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  179a-d;  190a-d;  200a-201b;  207b;  211a'C; 232b-233c; 294a296d;
409b-410a; 456c-457a,c; 630b,d-634a,c esp 631a-632a 41 GiBBoys : Decline
and Fall, 244b-245a; 386a-b; 451c-453a,c 44 Bos-wEi.!.: Johnson, 166c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy ofRight, intro, par 3, 10a11b; PART II, par 124 44b-d
/ Philosophy of History, intro, 154c-158a; 165a-166d; 182d184b; part iv,
368d-369a,c  50  Marx-Engels:  Cofnmunist  Manifesto, 430b433d passim 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; BK X, 389d-390a; 405a-b;
430b-432c;  447c448c;  bk  xi, 469a-470c; bk xiii, 563a-564a; 582b-d; bk
xiv,  588a-589a;  610d-611c;  bk XV, 619c-620a; epilogue ii 675a-696d 4.
The  philosophy  of  history 4a. Theories of causation in the historical
process  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v 502a-519d passim 12 Lucretius :
Nature  of Things, bk i [449-482] 6c-7a; bk ii [1105-1174] 29a-30a,c; bk
v [65109] 62a-c;
[170-194] 63b-c;
[772-1457]
71a80a,c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b; BK IX, SECT 28
293d-294a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; CH 36 149c-d; BK
II,  CH  2-3  150c-151c;  bk  iv, CH 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i 207d-208c; ch
11-26 216c-230a,c; bk xi, ch 18 331d-332a; bk xii, ch 21 357a-b; bk xiv,
ch 28-BK xv, ch i 397a-398c; bk xv, ch 21-22 415b-416c; bk xviii, ch 1-2
472b,d-473d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c;  PURGATORY, XVI [52-114] 77b- 78a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xiv,
21b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a,c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
456d-457a,c;  63Gb,d-634a,c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 451c-453a,c 43
Federalist:   number   3,   33c   43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
327b,d-332d  pas>sim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 115
42b-c;  PART  III,  par  340-360 110b-114a,c esp par 342 llOc-d, par 347
lllb-c;  additions,  153  141d  / Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 156d170b;
190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d, 194b-196a; part I, 258b-d; part ii, 262c-263d;
274a275a

[780b]
722  THE GREAT IDEAS 4 to 4^(1) 49 Darwin: Descent ofMan, 323a-328d ' 50
Marx:  Capital,  6d-7d; 8a-lld passim; 35b-c; 36c-d [fn 2]; 181d [fn 3];
377c-378d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 416c417a,c; 419b,d-425b
passim;  428b-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk ix, 342a-344b; bk XI,
469a-472b;  bk  xin,  563a-575a;  bk  xiv,  588a-590c; 609d-613d; bk xv,
618b-621b;  EPILOGUE  I,  645a-650c; epilogue ii 675a696d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk xi, 345a-c 53 James: Psychology, 361b 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  781a789b  esp  787a-788d;  791b-d;
799a-802a,c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  834b-c; 882b884c 4a{\) The
alternatives  of  fate  or  freedom,  necessity  or  chance 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i, 21d-22a; bk ix, 291b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
BKiv,462a-b 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 679a-c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v,
sect 8 269d270b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [254-296] llOa-llla 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  18d;  20b-c  /  Camillus,  109c-110a / Coriolanus, 188d-192b /
Timoleon  195a-213d  esp  201a-203b / Philopoemen, 300b-c / Demosthenes,
698b-699a  / Marcus Brutus, 814d-815c; 822a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
49c;  bk  iv,  69a-b;  bk  VI,  91b-d  /  Histories,  bk i, 194b; bk ii,
232d-233a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk v, ch i 207d208c; CH 11-26
216c-230a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-129] 77b-78a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi,
8d-9b; ch xxv 35a-36b 26 Shakespeare: Juliits Caesar, act iv, sc hi
[215-224] 590d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 609b-c; 630b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
590a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 340 llOb-c; par
342-345 llOc-lllb; par 348 Hid / Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-190b
esp  156d-158a,  158c-160b,  161d-162a, 166b-168b, 170d-172b, 178a-179c;
203a-206a,c;  part  i,  258b-d;  part  ii, 283d-284a,c; part hi, 285a-b;
300a-301c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,849-872]  264a-b  50 Marx:
Capital,  6d;  7b-c;  lOb-llb;  174a-c; 378b-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto, 421d42 2c passim 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 143a-c; bk
IX,  342a-344b;  bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xiii, 563a-b; bk xv, 618b-621b;
626d-630a; epilogue I, 645a-650c; epilogue ii 675a696d

[781a]
4a(2)  to  4^  Chapter  34:  HISTORY  723 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  801  d802a,c  4a{2)  Material forces in history: economic,
physical,  and  geographic factors 6 Herodotus: ///V/ory, bk ii, 50a-56c
csp  51b  d;  BK III, 114b-c; BK VII, 237b-c; bk ix, 314a,c 6Thucydides:
Peloponncsian  War, bk i, 349b-d; 350d; 352a d; 372c-d 7 Plato: Timaeus,
444d-445b  /  Statesman,  587b-589c  /  Laws,  bk  hi, 663d 666d; bk iv,
677a-678c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3c-d; bk VIII, 56b-57c;
bk xiv 102b,d-108d; bk x\ iixviii, 122a-129c; bk xxi 153a-173d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 3a-6d: 8b^ 10b; 34a-b; 71a-d; bk hi, 173b-d;
177c-179a;  bk  IV, 189c-191a; 243b.d-246d; bk v, 305b 309a,c 40 GiBBOs:
Decline  and  Fall,  89b-d; 90c-d; 236c237a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
220b-225a   passim,   esp  224b;  338b-c;  355c-d;  427b-428a  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d passim, esp 331b-332d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 346 111b / Philosophy of History,
intro,  190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d, 194a-195c, 199d201a,c; 203a-b; part i,
236d-237a;  243d244c;  248c-d;  part  ii,  259d-260a;  part  hi, 286b 49
Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 323a-328c passim, esp 323a-b 50 Marx: Capital,
6d-7d;  lOb-lld;  25c-d;  35b36c;  86c;  181d [fn 3]; 187a-c; 239b-241a;
377c378d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  415a434d  esp  416c-d,
419b,d,  421d-422a,  427a-b, 428b-d 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
834c; 882c883 b; 884c 4a{'5) World history as the development of Spirit:
the  stages  of  the dialectic of history 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi, par 279, 94b-d; par 340-360 110b-114a,c; additions, 153 141d /
Philosophy  ofHistory,  intro,  156c162a;  163a-165b; 166b-c; 169d-171b;
176b-c;  177d-190b;  203a-206a,c; part iv, 368d-369a,c 4a{4) The role of
the  individual  in history: the great man, hero, or leader 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253^29-31]
446d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[756-892] 231a-235a;
bk  VIII  [608-731]  275a-278b  14 Plutarch: Theseus la-15a,c esp 9a-d /
Romulus  15a-30a,c  /  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  47a-48c  / Numa Pompilius
49a-61d  esp  59c-60b  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c  / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp
129c-130b, 140c-141a,c / Timoleon 195a-213d

[781b]
b csp 212c 213d / Flamininus, 307d 308a / Lysandcr, 358b d / Pompey 499a
538a.  c  /  Caesar  577a  604d  / Antony 748a 7 79d csp 750a b / Marcus
Brutus  802b,d  824a,c 15 Tachus: Annals, bk ii, 44d-45a 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  en  vi  Sc-lOa;  cn xx, 30d; CH xxv-xxvi, 35c-37d 24 Rabi L.Ms:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk iv, 267c 270b 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Cromwell
69a-b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  65d 68a 38 RovssEAv:
Inequality, 362a- b / Political Economy, 373c-374a / Social Contract, bk
ii, 400c402a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 633d 634a,c 41 GiBBos: Decline
and  Fall, 220b; 251d-253a,c; 327d-328a,c; 492a 43 I-"i:nKRALisT: number
72,  217d-218a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  332a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 93 36a-b; par 102 39a-b; part ii, par
124  44b-d;  part  hi, par 167 60b; par 318 105b; par 344 Ilia; par :}48
Hid; par 350 112a; additions, 58 125c; \86 149b / Philosophy of History,
INTRO,  162a-170b;  184b-d;  part  i,  241d-242b; PART II, 259b-c; 273a;
275d-276a; 280b-281a; 281d-282d; 283c-d; part hi, 298a-b: 300a301c; PART
IV,  360b-c;  361d-362a;  366b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [570-580] 16a 48
Melville:  Moby Dic{, 107a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace passim, csp bk i,
8d-10d,  BK  HI, 143a-c, 162b-164a,c, bk ix, 342a-344b, bk x. 389a-391c,
405a-b,  430b432c,  447c-448c,  465c-467a,  bk xi, 469a-470c, 497c-499c,
507a,  bk  xih, 563a-575a, bk xiv, 610d-611c, BK XV, 619c-621b, epilogue
i,  645a-650c,  epilogue  ii 675a-696d passim 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its Discontents, 800a- / New Introductory Lectures, 834 b-c 4b. The laws
and  patterns  of  historical  change:  cycles,  progress,  evolution  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2b  6 Thucydides: Peloponncsian War, bk i,
349a352a  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vih,  403a-d  / Timaeus, 444d-445b /
Statesman,  587b-589c  / Laws, BK HI, 663d-666d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
iv,  ch  14  [223*'24-3o]  303c-d/ Metaphysics, bk xh, ch 8 [1074^11-13]
605a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[11051174]
29a-30a,c; bk v
[65-109] 62a-c;
[170194] 63b-c; [772-1457] 71a-80a,c
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 14 258d; BK VI, SECT 46 278c-d; bk
vii,  sect i 279b; SECT 49 282d; bk ix, sect 28 293d-294a; bk x, SECT 27
299d 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b / Aeneid, bk vih
[306-336] 267b-268a
14 Plutarch: Sulla, 372a-c

[782a]
724  (4.  The  philosophy  of  history.  4b.  The  laws  and patterns of
historical  change:  cycles, progress, evolution^ 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi,  51b-52b; 58b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; bk
xi,  ch  18 331d-332a; bk xv-xviii 397b,d-507a,c; bk xxii, ch 30, 618c-d
20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 97, A I, ANS 236a-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[67-96]
lOb-c;  XIV  [94-120]  20c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 439c-440b; 443a-b;
465a-c 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc i
[45-91] 483b-c / Julius Caesar, act iv, sc hi
[218-224] 590d
36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 79a-80a; part hi, 121a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 544d 545d; 632a634a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 62c-d; 349a
42  Y^ym:  Judgement,  584d-587a  43  Mill: Liberty, 300d-301c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 340 llOb-c; par 344 Ilia; par 347
lllb-c;  par 354-360 112c-114a,c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 161a-c;
174d-175c;  178a-179c;  187a-c;  203b-206a,c; part i, 235d'236a; 258b-d;
part  II,  259c-d;  282d-284a,c;  part  hi,  286c-287a; 308a-b; part iv,
315b-317d;  342d343a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 323a; 327a-330a,c esp
327b  50  Marx:  Capital,  lOb-lld;  377c-378d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  416c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-472b; EPILOGUE
I,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a696d  54  Freud:  Beyond  the Pleasure
Principle,  65  Id652 d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 781a789b esp
785c;  799a-802a,c  /  Neiu Introductory Lectures, 834c; 882c-883a; 883c
4c. The spirit of the time as conditioning the politics and culture of a
period  33  Pascal: Pensees, 354 234b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 362a-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, pref, 6c-7a; INTRO, par 3 10a-12c; part hi,
par  218  72c-d  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 173a-175c; 177c-178a;
182d-183a; 185a-185d; 187d-189a; PART I, 211a-219d esp 219c-d; 219d-235c
esp  22Gb-221a,  222a-223a,  233b-235c;  247b-257c;  PART II, 259d-260c;
263d-281b;  part  hi, 286c29Sa 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [570-580] 16a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue i, 645a64dc 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karainazov, bk xi, 345a-c

[782b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 4c to 5a 5. The theology of history 5a. The relation of
the  gods  or  God to human history: the dispensations of providence Old
Testament: Genesis, 3; 6-9 passim; 16-17; 21:1-24; 22:1-18 esp 22:15-18;
28:11-16;  35:9-13;  45:1-13;  46:1-4  / Exodus, 3-20 passim; 23:20-33 /
Deuteronomy, 4:1-40; 7-1 1 passim; 29 / Joshua, 6:1-20; 10; 24:1-25— (D)
Josue,  6:1-20;  10; 24:1-25 / / Samuel, 12:6-2^— (D) I Kings, 12:6-25 /
Nehemiah,  9:1-10:29—  (D) II Esdras, 9:110:29 / Psalms, 44:1-3; 78; 81;
105-106; 136 esp 136:10-24 —(D) Psalms, 4^:1-4; 77; 80; 104-105; 135 esp
135:10-24  / Jeremiah, 43:8-13; 44:30; 46— (D) Jeremias, 43:8-13; 44:30;
46  Apocrypha:  Judith passim, esp 5-6, 8-16— (D) OT, Judith passim, esp
5-6,  8-16  New  Testament:  Romans,  i-ii  /  / Corinthians, 15:19-55 /
Galaiians, 3-4 / // Thessalonians, 1:7-2:14 / Hebrews passim / // Peter,
3:3-13 / Revelation— {D) Apocalypse 5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d esp
[737-908]
23a-24d  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d esp [436502] 44c-45a 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk i, 21d-22a; bk vi, 204b-c; bk vii, 214d-220b esp 218b-220b;
237a-b;  238d-239a;  250b-d;  bk viii, 273b-c; BK IX, 309d-310a 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  44a-45a  / Symposium, 157b-159b / Republic, bk vi, 378a-b /
Critias  478a-485d  /  Statesman,  587a-589c  /  Laws,  BK  IV,  679a-b;
682d-683d;  bk  x,  765d768d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi, ch 22
195a201a;  BK  IV,  ch  i  213a-223d;  ch  3  224b-d;  ch 7 232c-235a 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 258a-b; BK III, SECT II 262a-b; bk
vi,  sect  44  278b-c  13 Virgil: Aeneid 103a-379a 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
18d;  28b-29c / Numa Pompilius, 50d-5ic / Camillus, 107b-d / Coriolanus,
188d-192b  /  Sulla  372a-c  /  Demosthenes,  698a-699a / Marcus Brutus,
822a-b 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 189b-190a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  xiii,  par  49-51  124a-d  /  City  of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; ch 36
149c-d;  BK  II, CH 2-3 150c-151c; bk iv, ch 33-34 206c-207a,c; bk v, ch
11-26  216c230a,c; bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; bk xi, ch i 322b,d-323a; ch 18
331d'332a;  bk  xii,  ch  21  357a-b;  bk xv, ch i 397b,d-398c; ch 21-22
415b-416c;  bk  xvii, ch 1-3 449a-451c; bk xviii, CH 1-2 472b,d-473d; bk
xxii, ch 30, 618c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 73, A I, rep
I 370a-371a

[783a]
5h  Chapter  34: HISTORY 725 20 Aquinas: Summa T/ieologica, part i-ii, q
98,  A  6  244c  245b;  (^  106, a a ^ ^ 323a 325c; part ii-ii, Q I, A 7
385c-387a; part hi, q i, aa 5-6 707a-709c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
ii
[1^-27) 2d;
VII
[61-96]
lOb-C; PURGATORY, XVI (52 I29J 77b-78a; xxix 97d 99b; xxxii
[^7) xxxiii
[78]
102d 105a; paradise, vi
[i-iii|
113c114d; viii [9I-M81 117d 118c: xi [28 ;59l 122b; XII
[37-45]
124a; xviii
[52]-xx
[148]
134a138b passim; xxx [i24]-xxxii li^8] 153a 156a 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  xxvi,  36b  37a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 306a d 26 Shakespeare: Richard
III  105a  148a,c  csp  ACT  V,  so  III 143b-147d 30 Bacon: Advancement
oflearning,  19b-d;  35b; 37c-38a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 9^ 125d126a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost
93a-333a csp bk i
[i26] 93b-94a, bk hi [80-134] 137a-138a, bk v
[224-245] 180a-b, [519-543] 186b-187a, bk vi
[169-188]
200a, bk VII
[139-173]
220a-221a,  BK X [1-21] 274b-275a, [616-640] 288a-b, [720844] 290a-292b,
bk xi [334]-bk xii [605] 306b332a / Samson Agonistes [60-67] 340b-341a;
[300-325] 346a-b; [373-419] 347b-348b; [667709] 354a-355a
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 611-613 282b-283a; 619-736 284b-317b esp 655 292b,
699  302b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 292d-293b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  343  llOd-llla  /  Philosophy  ofHistory, intro,
156c160b;  part hi, 303c-309d; part iv, 321b-d; 368d-369a,c 48 Melville:
Moby  Dicl{, 85a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 343 b-c; epilogue II,
675a-677b;  680b-c;  684b-d  5b.  The  city  of God and the city of man;
church  and state Old Testament: Psalms, 2; 46:4; 48:1,8; 72:811 ; 87:3;
101:8;  127:1 — (D) Psalms, 2; 45:5; 47:1,9; 71:8-11; 86:3; 100:8; 126:1
/  Isaiah,  60:14—  (D)  Isaias, 60:14 / Daniel, 2:44; 4:3,34; 7:14— (D)
Daniel, 2:44; 3:100; 4:31; V 7:14

[783b]
Ai'ocryimia:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 6:2-4 — (D) C )'I\ Boo/( of II isdom,
6:^5  New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:^y. 17:24-27; 22:15 22- i^^) Matthew,
d:^^',  i7:25-26;22:i522  /  Murf(, 12:13-17 / I.ul^e, 12:31; 20:21-26 /
John,  18:^ ^-^7 / Acts, 5:29 / Romans, 13:1 8 / / Corinthians, 15:24-25
/ Ephcsiuns, 2:19 / Colossians, 1:12 13 / / Timothy, 2:1-3 / Titus, VI /
/  Peter, 2:1^-17 12 Im'ictktus: Discourses, hk n. f:ii 5. 143d 144a; en
14,  155a  b  12  Ai REi.ius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 11 262a b; BK IV,
sect  23  265c  18  Augi'stine:  City  of  God, bk i, pkki 129a d; CH 35
149b-c;  BK IV, en \t, i,j\ 206c 207a,c; bk V, CM 15-16 220d 221b; en 25
228b  c; bk XI, CH I 322b,d 323a; bk xiv, cii 28 hk xv, cii 5 397a 400c;
bk  xv,  ch  21-22 415b 416c; BK XVII, CH 1-3 449a-451c; bk xviii, ch 12
472b,d-473d;  hk xix, ch 5 513d-514b; cii 11 516d-517b; ch 14 520a-d; ch
17  522b-523a; CH 19-26 523b-529a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 10 627b
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii
[20-30] 2d3a; XIV
[94-120]
20c-d; xxxiv
[6r
68] 51d52a; purgatory, vi [91-96] 61d; xiii [91-96] 72d; xvi
[52-132]
77b-78b; xxix 97d-99b; xxxii [37]-xxxiii
[78] 102d-105a; paradise,
VI
[i-iii]
113c-114d; xvHi
[52]-xx
[148)
134a-138b passim; xxx
[i24]-xxxii
[138]
153a-156a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  151a-c;  160a-c; PART HI,
177c-180a;  191b-204a:  240a-c; part iii-iv, 245c-249b; part iv, 266a-c;
275a278d 32 WiLTOs: Paradise Lost, bk xh [485-551] 329b331a 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  435a-439c  esp 437c-438c 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  442c-  d;  444a-c / Judgement, 509d-510a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intr(^,  175c177d;  205d-206a,c;  part i, 245d-247b; part III,
308b-c;  311b-d;  part  iv,  315d:  316a-d;  331b-342a;  348a  369a,c 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazoi, hk ii, 28d32c

[784a]
726  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  CROSS-REFERENCES  6-6c; Universal and Particular
7-7C. see Religion 4; State 2g.

[784b]
For:  The  general  consideration of history as a kind of knowledge, see
Knowledge  5a(5);  Memory  AND  Imagination  3d;  Time 6e; and for other
comparisons  of history with poetry, science, and philosophy, see Nature
4c;  Philosophy  id; Poetry 5b; Science 2b. The educational significance
of  history or of historical examples, see Education 4d; Virtue and Vice
4d (4). Other discussions of the logic or method of historical research,
see  Logic  4c;  Reasoning  6d.  The theory of historical causation, see
Cause  8; and for the factors of chance and fate, freedom and necessity,
see  Chance  6b;  Fate  6;  Liberty  6a;  Necessity  and Contingency 5f;
Progress la; Will 7b. The idea of progress in the philosophy of history,
see  Evolution  7c; Progress i-ic; and for a cyclical theory of history,
see  Labor  la;  Man 9a; Progress ic. Other discussions of a materialist
philosophy  of  history,  see  Dialectic  2d;  Labor 7c-7c(3); Matter 6;
Opposition  5b;  Progress  la;  War  and  Peace  2c;  Wealth  ii.  Other
considerations of history as a dialectical process in the development of
Spirit,  see  Dialectic  2d-2d(2); Liberty 6a; Mind iof-iof(2); Progress
4b.  The  role  of  the  great man or hero in history, see Honor 5d. The
historian  or  philosopher  of  history  as a prophet, see Fate 6. Other
expressions  of  historical  relativism, see Custom and Convention g-gh;
Relation  Divine  providence in relation to the events of history and to
the  issue  of  necessity  and  freedom  in history, see Fate 4; God 7b;
Liberty  5a-5b;  Will  7b.  Other discussions of the city of God and the
city  of  man,  or of the issue of church and state, ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed  below are works not included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. BoDiN.
Method   for   the   Easy   Comprehension  of  ^'  History  Montesquieu.
Considerations  on  the  Causes  ofthe  Bossuet. Discoiirs sur Vhistoire
universelle Grandeur and Decadence of the Rofnans Vico. The Netv Science
Gibbon.  An Essay on the Study ofLiterature, lxxviiiVoltaire. "History,"
in  A  Philosophical Dictionary Lxxxii . The Philosophy of History Kant.
The  Idea  of  a  Universal  History  on  a  CosmoHerder.  Outlines of a
Philosophy of the History of Political Plan Man Hegel. The Philosophy of
Mind,  sect  11, sub-sect c Condorcet. Outlines of an Historical View of
the  J.  S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk vi, ch io-ii Schelling. The Ages
of  the World W. James. "Great Men and Their Environment," Schopenhauer.
The  World  as  Will and Idea, vol hi, in The Will to Believe sup, ch 38
Guizot.  General  History  of  Civilization  in  Europe,  ^^'  lect i-ii
Polybius.  Histories,  vol ii, bk xii (xvii-xxviii) Macaulay. "History,"
in  Miscellaneous  Essays  LuciAN. The Way to Write History F. Schlegel.
The Philosophy of History

[785a]
MiCHELET. Introduction ^ Vhistoire unwerscllc BiicHEZ. Introduction H la
science  de riiistoire T. Carlyle. On History . On Heroes, Hero- Worship
atui  the  Heroic in History Emerson. "History," in Essays, i CoMTE. The
Positive  Philosophy,  rk vi . System of Positive Polity, vol hi, Social
Dynamics   Ranke.   Uber  die  Epochen  der  neueren  Geschichte  LoTZE.
Microcosmos,  bk  vii Buckle. History of Civilization in England Froude.
The  Science of History BuRCKHARDT. Forcc and Freedom, ch 4-6 Nietzsche.
The  Use and Abuse of History Renouvier. Essais de critique generale, iv
. Uchronie Bernheim. Lehrbuch der historischen Methode B. Adams. The Law
of  Civilization  and  Decay  Acton.  Essays  on Freedom and Power, ch i
Langlois  and  Seignobos.  Introduction to the Study of History Bradley.
Collected  Essays,  vol 1(1) FiSKE. Essays: Historical and Literary, vol
11(1)  H.  Adams.  The  Degradation  of  the  Democratic Dogma Bury. The
Science of History

[785b]
CnAPTKR  34:  HISTORY  727  I-AMi'RKCHT.  What Is History? v. Hardy. The
Dynasts  Pi-TKiE.  Revolutions  of  Civilization  Parkk).  The  Mind and
Society,  vol  iv,  cm  i ^ SpF.Nf;LER. The Decline of the West Peniy. a
Cuildsman s Interpretation of History HiiKiiARiN. Historical Materialism
liEARD.  The  Economic  liasis  of  Politics  Shoiavell.  The History of
History Berdyayev, The Meaning of History Troeltsch. Der Historismus und
seine  Uberwindung  Teggart.  Theory  of  History  Dawson.  Progress and
Religion  Becker.  Everyman  His Own Historian Sturzo. The Inner Laws of
Society,  intro  Collingwood.  The  Idea  of History Croce. History, Its
'Theory  and  Practice  .  History as the Story of Liberty Kent. Writing
History  Ortega  y  Gasset. Toward a Philosophy of History Cassirer. The
Myth  of  the  State,  part hi (15-17) M. R. Cohen. The Meaning of Human
History  Neff.  The Poetry of History ScHRECKER. Work^ and History A. J.
Toy  N  BEE.  A  Study  of  History  . Civilization on Trial, ch 1-3, 13
LowiTH. Meaning in History

[786a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  notions  of  honor  and fame are sometimes used as if
their  meanings  were  interchangeable,  and  sometimes as if each had a
distinct  connotation.  In the tradition of the great books, both usages
will  be found. It is seldom just a matter of words. The authors who see
no  difference  between  a  man's  honor  and  his  fame  are opposed on
fundamental issues of morality to those who think the standards of honor
are  independent  of  the  causes  of fame. This opposition will usually
extend  to  psychological  issues  concerning  human  motivation  and to
political issues concerning power and justice. It entails contrary views
of the role of rewards and punishments in the life of the individual and
of  society.  Praise  and  blame  seem  to  be  common  elements  in the
significance of fame and honor. The meaning of honor seems to involve in
addition  the  notion of worth or dignity. But whether a man is virtuous
or not, whether he deserves the good opinion of his fellow men, does not
seem  to  be  the  indispensable  condition  on which his fame or infamy
rests.  Nor  does  his  good  or ill repute in the community necessarily
signif)'  that  he is a man of honor or an honorable man. The connection
and  distinction of these terms would therefore appear to be the initial
problem  of  this chapter. Any solution of the problem must consider the
relation  of the individual to the community, and the standards by which
the  individual  is  appraised— by himself and his fellow men. Honor and
fame  both  seem  to  imply public approval, but the question is whether
both presuppose the same causes or the same occasions for social esteem.
"The  manifestation  of the value we set on one another," writes Hobbes,
"is  that which is commionly called Honoring and Dishonoring. To value a
man at a high rate, is to honor him;

[786b]
Chapter  ly.  HONOR at a low rate, is to dishonor him. But high and low,
in  this  case,  is to be understood by comparison to the rate that each
man  setteth  on himself." Does Hobbes mean that the value a man sets on
himself  is the true standard of his worth } Apparently not. Let men, he
says,  "rate  themselves  at  the highest value they can; yet their true
value  is  no  more  than  it is esteemed by others." What, then, is the
measure of such esteem.? "The value, or worth of a man," answers Hobbes,
"is  as of all other things, his price; that is to say, so much as would
be  given for the use of his power; and therefore, is not absolute but a
thing  dependent on the need and judgment of another." Here, then, honor
is  not  what  a  man  has in himself, but what he receives from others.
Honor is paid him. He may think him.self dishonored if others do not pay
him   the  respect  which  accords  with  his  self-respect,  but  their
evaluation  of  him  is  somehow independent of the standard by which he
measures  him-self.  It  depends  on  the relation in which he stands to
them,   in   terms   of   his   power   and   their   need.  Virtue  and
duty—considerations  of good and evil, right and wrong—do not enter into
this  conception  of honor. The distinction between honor and fame tends
to  disappear when honor reflects the opinion of the community, based on
the  political  utility  rather  than the moral worth of a man. There is
axother  conception  of honor which not only separates it from fame, but
also  makes  it  independent  of  public  approbation.  This  is  not an
unfamihar  meaning  of  the  term. The man who says "on my honor" or "my
word  of  honor"  may  not  be  an  honest man, but if he is, he pledges
himself  by  these  expressions  to  fulfill  a promise or to live up to
certain expectations. He is saying that he needs no ex728

[787a]
CHAPTIR  35  ternal  check or sanction. A man who had to be compelled by
threat or force to honor his obHgations would noi be acting from a sense
of  honor.  "It  is  not  for  outward show that the soul is to play its
part,"  Montaigne  writes,  "but for ourselves within, where no eyes can
pierce  but  our  own;  there  she defends us from the fear of death, of
pain,  of  shame  itself;  there  she  arms  us  against the loss of our
children,  friends,  and fortunes; and when opportunity presents itself,
she  leads us on to the hazards of war: 'Not for any profit, but for the
honor  of honesty itself.'" A sense of honor thus seems to function like
a  sense  of  duty.  Both  reflect  the Hght of conscience. Both operate
through  an  inner determination of the will to do what reason judges to
be  right in the particular case. If there is a difference between them,
it  is  not  so  much  in their effects as in their causes. Duty usually
involves  obligations to others, but a man's sense of honor may lead him
to  act  in  a  certain  way though the good of no other is involved. To
maintain his self-respect he must respect a standard of conduct which he
t  has set for himself. Accordingly, a man can be ashamed of himself for
doing or thinking what neither injures anyone else nor ever comes to the
notice  of  others.  A sense of shame— the reflex of his sense of honor—
torments  him  for  having  fallen  short  of  his  own ideal, for being
disloyal  to his own conceptions of what is good or right; and his shame
may  be  even more intense in proportion as the standard he has violated
is not one shared by others, but is his own measure of what a man should
be  or  do.  Dmitri Karamazov exhibits these mixed feelings of honor and
shame  when he declares at the preUminary legal investigation: "You have
to deal with a man of honor, a man of the highest honor; above ail—don't
lose  sight of it—a man who's done a lot of nasty things, but has always
been,  and  still  is,  honorable  at  bottom, in his inner being. . . .
That's  just  what's  made me wretched all my life, that I yearned to be
honorable,  that I was, so to say, a martyr to a sense of honor, seeking
for it with a lantern, with the lantern of Diogenes, and yet all my life
I've been doing filthy things."

[787b]
:  HONOR  729  The sense of honor and llir sense of dutv differ in still
another  res|-K*ct.  Duly  [)rcsup{XKCS  law.  The essence of law is its
universality.  A  sense  of  duty,  therefore, leads a man to do what is
expected  of  him,  but  not  of  him alone, for he is no diflerent from
others  in  relation  to  what  the  law  commands. In contrast, a sense
ofhonor  presupposes self-consciousness o{ \\xi\i^ in the individual. It
binds  him  in  conscience to live up to the image of his own character,
insofar  as  it has lineaments which seem admirable to him. Without some
self-respect,  a  man  can  have  no sense of honor. In the great tragic
poems,  the  hero who dishonors himself in his own eyes dies spiritually
with  the  loss  of his self-respect. To live on in the flesh thereafter
would  be  almost  a  worse  fate than the physical demise which usually
symbolizes  the  tragic  ending.  The  sense in which a man can honor or
dishonor himself is closely akin to the sense in which he can be honored
or  dishonored  by  others.  Both involve a recognition of virtue or its
violation.  But  they  differ in this: that a man's personal honor is an
internal  consequence  of virtue and inseparable from it, whereas public
honor  bestowed  upon  a  man is an external reward of virtue. It is not
always  won by those who deserve it. When it is, "it is given to a man,"
as  Aquinas  points out, "on account of some excellence in him, and is a
sign  and  testimony  of  the excellence that is in the person honored."
There  can be no separation between what a community considers honorable
and what it considers virtuous or excellent in mind or character. But it
does  not  necessarily follow that the man who is actually virtuous will
always receive the honor which is due him. Public honor can be misplaced
either  undeservedly  given or unjustly withheld. The virtuous should be
prepared  for  this, in the judgment of Aquinas, since honor is not "the
reward  for  which the virtuous work, but they receive honor from men by
way  of  reward,  as  from  those  who  have nothing greater to offer.''
Happiness,  he  goes  on to say, is the "true reward . . . for which the
virtuous  work;  for  if  they  worked  for honor, it would no longer be
virtue, but ambition."

[788a]
730  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Tolstoy,  however, deplores the injustice of the
honor  given  Napoleon  and  the  dishonor  in  which  Kutuzov was held.
"Napoleon,"  he  writes,  "that  most  insignificant tool of history who
never  anywhere,  even  in  exile,  showed human dignity—Napoleon is the
object  of  adulation  and enthusiasm; he is grand. But Kutuzov— the man
who  from  the  beginning to the end of his activity in 1812, never once
swerving  by  word  or deed from Borodino to Vilna, presented an example
exceptional  in history of self-sacrifice and a present consciousness of
the  future  importance  of  what  was  happening—Kutuzov  seems to them
something  indefinite  and  pitiful, and when speaking of him and of the
year  18  12  they always seem a little ashamed." Kutuzov later received
some  measure  of  honor  when  he was presented with the rarely awarded
Order of St. George. But what is perhaps a much higher honor came to him
after  his  death when Tolstoy enshrined him as one of the heroes of War
and  Peace.  Sometimes  the virtuous or truly honorable man, living in a
bad  society,  goes  without honor in his own time to be honored only by
posterity. He may even be dishonored by a society which has contempt for
virtue.  Sometimes  a  man  of indifferent character and achievement, or
even  one  who is actually base and ignoble, wins honor through cleverly
simulating  the  possession of admirable traits. It seems appropriate to
consider the proportion between a man's intrinsic worth and the honor he
receives.  The  distribution  of  honors  raises questions of justice—in
fact,  it  is  thought  to  be one of the chief problems of distributive
justice.  For those who hold that honor and fame are utterly distinct in
principle,  this is the clear mark of their difference. Justice does not
require that fame be proportionate to virtue. Though there is a sense in
which  fame may not be deserved, the qualities in a person which justify
fame are of a different order from those which honor should reward. Fame
belongs  to  the great, the outstanding, the exceptional, without regard
to  virtue  or  vice. Infamy is fame no less than good repute. The great
scoundrel can be as famous as the great hero. Existing in the reputation
a man has regardless of his character or accomplishments, fame does not

[788b]
tarnish,  as  honor does, when it is unmerited. But for the same reason,
fame  is  often  lost  as  fortuitously  as it is acquired. "Fame has no
stability,"  Aquinas observes; "it is easily ruined by false report. And
if it sometimes endures, • this is by accident." The distinction between
honor  and  fame  Is  not  acknowledged  by  those who ignore merit as a
condition  of  praise.  Machiavelli, for example, places fame— or, as he
sometimes  calls it, glory—in that triad of worldly goods which men want
without  limit and without relation to justice. If the aim of life is to
get  ahead  in  the world, money, fame, and power are the chief marks of
success.  A  man  is  deemed  no less successful if he acquires power by
usurping  it, or gains it by foul means rather than fair; so, too, if he
becomes  famous through chicanery or deception and counterfeits whatever
form of greatness men arc prone to praise. Along with riches, fame, says
Machiavelli,  is "the end which every man has before him." This men seek
to obtain by various methods: "one with caution, another with haste; one
by  force,  another  by skill; one by patience, another by its opposite;
and  each one succeeds in reaching the goal by a different method." Some
methods,  he  admits in another place, "may gain empire, but not glory,"
such  as  "to  slay  fellow-citizens,  to deceive friends, to be without
faith, without mercy, without religion." Nevertheless, he declares: "Let
a  prince  have  the credit of conquering and holding a state, the means
will  always be considered honest, and he will be praised by everybody."
Because  fame  seems  to  be  morally  neutral, it replaces honor in the
discussions  of  those  who  measure  men in terms of success instead of
virtue,  duty,  or  happiness.  Because it is morally neutral, it is the
term  used  by those who wish to judge, not men, but the impression they
make.  What  counts  is  the  magnitude  of  that  impression,  not  its
correspondence  with  reality.  To  be  famous  is  to  be  widely,  not
necessarily  well,  spoken of by one's fellow men, now or hereafter. The
man  who stands above the herd, whose outlines are clear and whose deeds
are  memorable,  takes  his place among the famous of his time or of all
times.  Plutarch  the  moralist  certainly does not regard the men whose
lives

[789a]
he writes as paragons of virtue. On ilic conitrary, he plainly indicates
tliat  nianv  ot  them  are  examples  of  extraordinary  depravity. But
Plutarch  the  biographer  treats them all as famous. He takes that as a
matter  of  historic fact, not of moral judgment. Good or bad, they were
acknowledged  to  be great men, leaders, figures of eminent proportions,
engaged  in momentous exploits. They were not all victorious. Few if any
were successful in all that they attempted or were able to preserve what
successes  they  achieved. But each ventured beyond the pale of ordinary
men;  and each succeeded at least in becoming a symbol of great deeds, a
monument  in human memory. The opposite of fame is anonymity. In Dante's
moral  universe,  only  the  Trimmers  on  the  rim  of Hell are totally
anonymous;  neither  good nor bad, they lack name and fame. Because they
"lived  without  infamy and without praise," Hell will not receive them,
"for  the  damned  would have some boast of them." To them alone no fame
can  be  allowed.  Honor  and  glory belong only to the blessed, but the
damned in the pits of Hell, by the record they I left for men to revile,
are  as  well  remembered, and hence as famous, as the saints in Heaven.
That  men  normally  desire  the  esteem of their fellow men seems to be
undisputed.  "He  must  be of a strange and unusual constitution," Locke
writes,  "who  can  content  himself  to  live  in constant disgrace and
disrepute  with  his  own  particular  society.  Solitude  many men have
sought, and been reconciled to; but nobody that has the least thought or
sense  of a man about him, can live in society under the constant disUke
and ill opinion of his familiars, and those he converses with. This is a
burden  too  heavy  for  human  sufferance."  A society of misanthropes,
despising  each  other,  is  as unthinkable as an economy of misers. The
social  nature  of  man  requires  sympathy and fellow feeling, love and
friendship,  and  all of these involve some measure of approval based on
knowledge or understanding. According to one theory, the highest type of
friendship  springs  from  mutual admiration, the respect which men have
for  one  another.  The  old  saying that "there is honor among thieves"
suggests that even among bad men there is a

[789b]
CuAPTiK 35: HONOR 731 desire to hold the approbation of those wlio share
a  common  life.  With this in mind apparently, William James descriJK-s
fame  and  honor  as  a man's "image in the eyes of his own 'set,' which
exalts  or  condemns  him  as he conforms or not to certain requirements
that  may  not  be  made  of one in another walk of life." Though Pascal
regards  "the  pursuit  of  glory" as "the greatest baseness of man," he
must  admit  that  "it  is also the greatest mark of his excellence; for
whatever possessions he may have on earth, whatever health and essential
comfort,  he is not satisfied if he has not the esteem of men. He values
human  reason  so highly that, whatever advantages he may have on earth,
he  is  not  content  if he is not also ranked highly in the judgment of
man.  .  .  .  Those  who most despise men, and put them on a level with
brutes,  yet  wish  to  be  admired  and believed by men, and contradict
themselves  by  their  own feelings." But is this universal wish for the
esteem  of  others a desire for honor or a desire for fame? Does it make
any  difference  to  our conception of happiness whether we say that men
cannot  be  happy without honor or that they cannot be happy unless they
are  famous.?*  Even those who do not distinguish between honor and fame
are  led  by these questions to discriminate between fame and infamy. As
we have already noted, fame and infamy are alike, since both involve the
notoriety  enjoyed  by  the  outstanding,  the  exceptional,  the great,
whether good or bad. If what men desire is simply to be known by others,
and  to  have  a  kind of immortality through living on in the memory of
later generations, then evil will serve as well as good repute. All that
matters  is  the  size  of  the reputation, and its vitality. But if the
desire  is  for  approbation or praise, good opinion alone will satisfy,
and then the question becomes whether the object is fame or honor. Which
does  lago  have in mind when he says, "Good name in man and woman, dear
my  Lord,  is  the  immediate jewel of their souls" .'^ Opposite answers
seem  to  be  determined  by  opposite  views  of human nature and human
happiness.  Those who, like Plato, think that virtue is an indispensable
ingredient of happiness, include honor among the "good things"

[790a]
732  THE  GREAT IDEAS which the virtuous man will seek in the right way.
Possession  of good things by itself is not sufficient, Socrates says in
the  Euthydemus.  A  man  must also use them and use them well, for "the
wrong  use of a thing is far v/orse than the non-use." Applied to honor,
this  would  seem to mean that the virtuous man will not seek praise for
the  wrong  reasons—either for that which is not praiseworthy in himself
or from others whose lack of virtue disqualifies them from giving praise
with honesty. The virtuous man will not seek fam.e or be unhappy lacking
it,  for  fam.e,  like  pleasure or wealth, can be enjoyed by bad men as
well  as good and be sought for wrong as well as right reasons or in the
wrong  as  well  as  the  right way. Virtue, according to the moralists,
protects  a man from the seductions of money, fame, and power the things
for which men undisciplined by virtue seem to have an inordinate desire.
In the theory of virtue, honor, unhke fame, belongs only to the good and
is  always  a  good  object,  worthy  of pursuit. Honor is, in fact, the
object  of  two  virtues  which  Aristotle defines in the Ethics. One of
these  virtues  he  calls "ambition," and the Greek nam.e for the other,
which   is   literally   rendered  by  "high-mindedness,"  is  sometimes
translated  by  the  Enghsh word "magnanimity" and sometimes by "pride."
The Christian connotation of "pride" makes it a difficult word to use as
the  name  for  a  virtue, but it can nevertheless be so used when it is
understood  to mean a justifiable degree of self-respect—not conceit but
a   middleground   between   undue   self-esteem  and  inordinate  self-
deprecation.  When  the  Aristotelian  names  for  these  two  vices are
translated  in  EngHsh by "vanity" and "humility," it is again necessary
to  point  out  that  "humihty" must be understood, not in its Christian
significance  as  meaning  the  virtue  of  the truly religious man, but
rather  as  signifying  an  exaggerated  meekness  or pusillanimity. The
difference between pride and ambition lies in the magnitude of the other
virtues  they  accompany  and  the  scale  of  honor with which they are
concerned.  Both  are  concerned  with honor, which Aristotle calls "the
greatest  of  external  goods."  In  both  cases, "honor is the prize of
virtue, and it is to the good that it is rendered." The proud man is one
"who, being

[790b]
truly worthy of great things, also thinks himself worthy of them; for he
who  does so beyond his deserts is a fool, but no virtuous man is fooUsh
or  silly." The proud man will be pleased "only by honors that are great
and  that  are conferred by good men . . . Elonor from casual people and
on  trifling grounds, he will utterly despise, since it is not this that
he deserves." Humility and vanity are, according to Aristotle, the vices
of  defect  and  excess  which  occur  when a man fails to be proud. The
unduly humble man, underestimating his worth, does not seek the honor he
deserves.  The vain man, at the other extreme, overestimates himself and
Vv'ants  honor out of proportion to his quafities. Honor, like any other
external  good, "may be desired more than is right, or less, or from the
right sources and in the right way. We blame both the over-ambitious man
as  aiming  at  honor more than is right and from the wrong sources, and
the unambitious man as not wilUng to be honored even for noble reasons."
However  words are used, the point seems to be clear. It is possible for
men  to desire honor more than they should and less. It is also possible
for honor to be rightly desired. Honor desired to excess or in the wrong
way  may  be  called  "fame,"  even as the excessive desire for honor is
sometimes  regarded  as  the vice of ambition or an aspect of the sin of
pride. The word "pride" seems to have both a good and a bad connotation.
But  the point remains that the difference between these two meanings of
"pride,"  like  the  difference between honor and fame, is understood by
m.oralists  in terms of virtue, and it is discounted by those who reject
the  relevance  of  virtue.  Though honor may be regarded as inseparable
from  virtue  in  moral  theory, certain pofitical philosophers make its
separation from virtue the principle of a type of government. In Plato's
Republic, monarchy and aristocracy are defined in terms of the virtue of
the  rulers—either  of  the  one  wise  man  or  of  the  excellent few.
Government  by  the few is oligarchy rather than aristocracy when wealth
rather  than  virtue is the principle of their selection. Plato sees the
possibility  of an intermediate between these two which occurs as a kind
of transitional form when aristocracy

[791a]
tends   to   degenerate  into  oligarchy.  He  calls  that  intermediate
"timocracy"  and  describes  it as "a mixture of good and evil" in which
the  ruler  is  "a lover of power and a lover of honor, claiming to be a
ruler,  not  because  he is eloquent, or on any ground of that sort, but
because  he  is  a  soldier  and has performed feats of arms." In such a
state,  heclaims,"one  thing, and one thing only, is predominantly seen—
the  spirit  of  contention  and  ambition;  and  these  are  due to the
prevalence  of  the  passionate or spirited element." In a timocracy, in
other  words,  honor  is divorced from virtue and wisdom and becomes the
only qualification for public office. With Montesquieu, the situation is
quite  reversed.  For  him,  virtue  is  absolutely requisite in popular
government  or  democracy,  and  to  a less extent in that other form of
republic  which  he  calls  "aristocracy."  As  virtue is necessary in a
republic,  so is honor in a monarchy. "Honor — that is, the prejudice of
every  person  and  rank—supplies  the  place  of  political  virtue.  A
monarchical  government  supposes pre-eminences and ranks, as likewise a
noble  descent. Since it is the nature of honor to aspire to preferments
and  titles,  it properly placed in this government." Though Montesquieu
and  Plato  differ  in  their classification of the forms of government,
they  seem  to  agree  that honor divorced from virtue is a counterfeit.
Honor identified with ranks and titles, honor which moves individuals to
serve  the  public  good  in  order  to  promote  their  own  interests,
Montesquieu  admits  is  a false honor, "but even this false honor is as
useful  to  the  public  as  true  honor  could  possibly  be to private
persons."   Considering   the   laws   of  education  characteristic  of
monarchical  governments,  Montesquieu  points  out  that  it  is not in
colleges  or  academies, but in the world itself, which is the school of
honor,  that  the  subjects  of  monarchy are chiefly trained. "Here the
actions of men are judged, not as virtuous, but as shining; not as just,
but  as  great;  not  as  reasonable,  but  extraordinary."  Heroism  is
discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Courage,  and the role of the hero— the
leader  or  great  man— in the chapter on History. Here we are concerned
with the hero in the esteem of

[791b]
Chai»ti:k  35:  HONOR  733 his fellow men, the symbol of human greatness
and  the  object  of human admiration. Honor, fame, and glory combine in
various  proportions  to  constitute  the  heroic  figures  of classical
antiquity:  honor,  to  llic extent that none is without some virtue and
each  possesses  certain  virtues at least to a remarkable degree; fame,
because  they  arc  the  great  among  men,  outstanding and well-known,
godlike  in  their  pre-eminence;  and  glory, almost in the theological
sense, inasmuch as the heroes celebrated by Homer and Virgil are beloved
by  the  gods. It is not accidental that the central figure in the Greek
tragedies  is  called  a  "hero,"  since  in the ancient view the tragic
character  must  necessarily  belong  to  a  great  man,  a man of noble
proportions,  one who is "better than the ordinary man," says Aristotle.
If  he  also  has  some  fault  or flaw, it is a consequence of strength
misused,  not  a mark of individual weakness. Such weakness as he has is
the  common  frailty In the modern world heroism and the heroic are more
difficult  to  identify  or  define. We tend to substitute the notion of
genius in considering the exceptionally gifted among men. Glory is dimly
recognized  and honor takes second place to fame. That portion of modern
poetry  which  deals  in  heroes—as,  for  example,  the  tragedies  and
historical  plays  of Shakespeare— borrows them from, or models them on,
legendary  figures.  The  great  modern novels, counterparts of the epic
poems of antiquity, portray exceptional men and women without idealizing
them  to  heroic  stature. One of these novels, Tolstoy's War and Peace,
seeks  to  deflate the fame of great men. They do not deserve even their
reputation  for  great  deeds, much less the honor owed the truly great.
"If  we  assume  as  historians  do  that great men lead humanity to the
attainment  of  certain  ends  .  .  .  then  it is impossible," Tolstoy
declares,  "to  explain  the  facts  of  history without introducing the
conceptions  of chance and genius.'' But in Tolstoy's opinion "the words
chance  and genius do not denote any really existing thing and therefore
cannot  be  defined."  We  can dispense with these meaningless words, he
thinks,  if  we  are willing to renounce "our claim to discern a purpose
immediately  intelligible  to  us" and admit "the ultimate purpose to be
beyond

[792a]
734  THE  GREAT  IDEAS our ken." Then "not only shall we have no need lo
sec  exceptional  ahilily  in  Napoleon  and Alexander, but we shall l)e
unable  to  consider  them  to be anything but like ordinary men, and wc
shall  not  be  obliged to have recourse to chance for an explanation ol
those  small  events which made these people what they were, but it will
be  clear  that  all  those  small events were inevitable." This view of
history,   with   its  emphasis  on  impersonal  forces,  finds  another
expression  in  Marxist  theory. 'I'he m;»chine and the proletariat mass
arc  the  heroes of history, or of the revolution. Yet the modern period
is  not  without  an opposite strain of thought. Machiavelli calls for a
great  man,  a  hero, to become the "liberator" of Italy, "who shall yet
heal  her  wounds  and  put  an  end  to  the ravaging and plundering of
Lombardy,  to  the  swindling aiul taxing of the kingdom and of Tuscany,
and cleanse those sores that for long have festered." Mis maxims for the
prince  may be read, not merely as advice for getting and holding power,
but  as  preparing  for an heroic eflort in which the prince's power and
fame will be used for liberty. The great man has the historic mission of
a  pioneer, not the role of a pup|H-t. Even in the Renaissance, however,
Machiavelli is answered by Montaigne, who prizes mcxJcration too much to
praise  heroism  more than a little. (Comparing vSocrates and Alexander,
Montaigne  places  all  of the latter's actions under the maxim, "Subdue
the  world," whereas Socrates, he says, acts on the principle that it is
wise  "to  carry on human life conformably with its natural coiulition."
To  Montaigne,  "the virtue of the soul does not consist in flying high,
but  in  walking  orderly;  its  grandeur  dcxrs  not exercise itself in
giaiuleur,  but  in  mediocrity."  The mediaeval Christian conception of
heroism  centers  on  the  practice  of  heroic  virtue,  by  which  the
theologian  defines  sanctity. In the calendar of saints, there is every
tv(>e   of   spiritual  excellence,  but  all  ahke—  martyrs,  virgins,
confessors,   doctors—are   regarded   as  having,  with  (ichTs  giace,
superhuman  strength.  \\\c  saints  not  only perform acts of exemplary
jxtfcction; they are godlike n\en in their exemptioi\ from the frailties
of human flesh. The heroes of antiquity also wear an aspect

[792b]
of  divinity,  but,  like  Achilles,  each  has a weakness in his armor.
Moreover,  the  heroes of the Iliad, the Odyssey, and the Aeneid are men
of overweening pride. They are relentlessly jealous of their honor. They
strive not so much for victory as for the due meed of honor which is its
fruit. Nothing grieves them so much as to have their deeds go unrequited
by  abundant  praise. In the contribution made by this love of praise to
the growth of the Roman empire, Augustine sees the
[Providential
working  of CkkI. In order that that empire "might overcome the grievous
evils  which  existed  among  other  nations," he writes, God "purposely
granted it to such men as, for the sake of honor, and praise, and glory,
consulted  well lor their country, in whose glory they sought their own,
and  whose  Siifety  they  did  not  hesitate  to  prefer  to their own,
suppiessing the desiie of wealth and many other vices lor this one vice,
namely,  the love of praise." To Augustine, however, this glory found in
human  pniise is far removed from the true glory. It is, in fact, a sin.
"So  luKstile  is  this vice to pious faith," he writes, "if the love of
glory  be  greater  in the heart than the fear or love of Clod, that the
Lord  said,  'How  can  ye believe, who look lor glory from one another,
antl  do  not  seek the glory which is from CJod alone?' " The Christian
hero, consequently, seeks not his own glory, but the glory of (icxl, and
in  contrast  lo  the  pagan  hero,  he  is  great, not in pride, but in
humility.  His  model  is  seen  in  the  Apostles,  who,  according  to
Augustine,  "amidst  maletiiclionsand  ie[)roaches,  and  most  grievous
persecutions  and  cruel  (Punishments,  were  not  tie t erred from the
preaching  of  human salvation. And when . . . great glory followed them
in  the  church  of  Christ, they did not rest in that as in the eiui of
their  virtue, but referred that glory itself to the glory of Ciod . . .
Vox their Master had taught them not to seek to be goml for the s;ike oi
lunnan  glory,  saying,  'Take  heed  that  ye do not your righteousness
before  men  to  be seen of them' . . . but 'Let your works shine before
men,  that they may see your giKxl deeds, and glorify your Father who is
in  heaven.'  The word "glory" in its theological connotation thus has a
meaning  distinct  from, antl even oppt)sed to, the sense in which it is
sometimes i

[793a]
A  a:^  .1  synonym for **Umc.* In ihc liiurjjy fullness \i\ Himself and
the  height  of  all  jxrhc  church,  the  ps.Ums and hymns (esjx-cially
feciion";  nevertheless,  Nfontaigne  writes,  '*His sc ot the doxoloijv
which  sing the glon'j nan\c mav Ix- augmenleil and mcrraseti hv the -•:
and  ihr  gloru tn rvrrisis /)<-r>) rrndcr vuilo Mcssmj; .\\\d praise we
atlnhuic  lo  His  exicnor  |Gtxl  the homage whicli is due His inliniie
gixxiworks."  ttcss,  the rctlexive splendor of which is the diAccording
to  Danle.  "the  glorv  ol \{\n\ who vine glor\\ As in the strict moral
sense  honor  on  moves  evervthing jx-nelrates through the unithe human
plane is due to virtue alone, so in a verse, aiui is resplenilenl in one
pail more and strict theological sense glorv l^elongs onlv to in another
less."  In  his lournev thrxnigh ParaCkxI. dise, he Ix-holds the Sirints
whom Citxl loves c$- Stricily. Gixl's glory cannot Iv iiu u.i>cd by
[xxially, each with
a distinct degree of glory human recognition. Yet every act of religious
according  to the proximity with which he apdevotion is s,ud to rtdouiui
lo  ihc  greater  glorv  pnuches the presence of C»<xl. Their halos antl
ofGixi  and  to dilhise His glory among creatures aureoles, m the mwgerv
of  Christian  art,  are through the divinity they acquire when they the
symbols  of the glory in which they are love CiOti and arc Ix-loved bv I
lim.  Cuxl  is "all Ixilhed as in rellecltxl light. OUTLINE OF TOPICS 1.
The  relation  of honor and fame: praise and reputation 736 2. Honor and
fame  in  the  life o{ the indi\ idual 737 2J. The sense oi honor and of
shame:  loyalty  to  the gixxl 2h. Honor as an object of desire and as a
fiictor   in   virtue  Awd  happiness  2c\  Honor  as  due  self-esteem:
magnanimitv  or  projx^r  pride  739  2</.  Honor  or fame as a nnxlc ot
immonaliiv  2f.  Honor  as the pledge of friendship: ihc cckIcs ot honor
among  social  equals  740 3. The social realization oi honor and i\u\\c
^j.  The  reaction  of  the community to its gtxxi or great men 3/>. The
conditions  of honor or fame and the causes ot dishonor or infamy 741 4.
Honor  in  the [xilitical communiiy and in government 742 4J. Honor as a
principle  in the organi/^uion ol the state: limocracv and monarchy 4/'.
The  scale  o(  honor  in  the  organi/aiion  of  the  stale:  ihe  jusi
distribution of 4r. Honor as a
[x>liiical leclinique: the uses of praise, prestige, public opinion
5.  Honor, fame, and the heroic 744 5^. Honor as a moti\alion ol heroism
5/'.  Hero-worship:  the  exaltation  of  le.iders  ^c. The occasions of
heroism in war and peace 745 5^y. The estimation of the role ot the hero
in  history  6.  The idea of glory: its distinction from honor Ai\d fame
746  6j. The glory of Gcxi: the signs and the praise of the divine glory
6b. The reflected glory of the angels and s;iints

[793b]
Chapter 3S: HONOR 735 rxGB

[794a]
n^  THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The relation
of  honor and fame: praise and reputation 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i 3a-9a,c 5
Euripides: Andromache [319-332] 318a; [693705] 321a-b / Hecuba [251-257]
355a;
[623628] 358a / Heracles Mad [140-205] 366b-d
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 395d396a 7 Plato: Protagoras,
52a-b / Laws, bk xii, 788d-789a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii, ch ii
[115^29-35]
162a,c; bk vi, ch 8 [146^20-24] 200c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[1095^22-30]
340d-341a;  bk iv, ch 3-4 370b-372d; bk viii, . ch 8 [1159^13-26] 411b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9 608c-611c 12 AuREhixjs: Meditations, bk vi, sect 16
275b-d;  SECT  51  279b-c; bk ix, sect 30 294b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[441-493]  115a-116b 14 Plutarch: Marcellus-Pelopidas, 262d / Aristides,
265c-d  /  Marcus  Cato, 282a / Agis, 648b,d-649a / Demetrius, 737b-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  73b-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
21-23  24c25a  / City of God, bk v, ch 12-20 216d-226a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, aa 2-3 616d-618a

[794b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehefniah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 22
Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 25-27 24b-25a; stanza 53-55
28b;  stanza  100-115  34b-36b;  stanza  162-163 42b-43a; bk III, STANZA
22-25  57b;  STANZA  36-50  59a61a  /  Knight's Tale [3041-3056] 210a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  viii,  13b-c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i,
71d-76b  esp  73b-c, 76b; part ii, 146d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 126b-127c;
300c-307a;  390a-391c;  411a-d;  445c-446a;  450c-453c;  462b-c; 494b-d;
496c-d 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act iv, sc I
[1-40] 264b-d / Richard II, act
i, sc i
[165-185] 322b-c
27  Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc III [38-241] 122d-125a
/ Othello, act ii, sc III
[262-277] 219d; act hi, sc hi
[155-161]
223d  /  Cymbeline,  act hi, sc iv 466d-468d / Henry VIII, act hi, sc ii
[350-458]   572c-573d  /  Sonnets,  lxix-lxx  596d-597a;  cxxi  604d  29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii, 203a-b; 222b-c; 227d-228d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  91d-92b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 29
405b;  prop 53, coROL 413a; part iv, prop 58, schol 441d-442a 32 Milton:
Samson Agonistes
[960-996] 360b361a
i

[795a]
2/0  23  Chapter 35: HONOR 737 33 Pascal: Pensees, 147-159 200b 202a: ^3
232b; 400-401 240b-241a; 404 241a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 119a 121b
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  223d-224b 38 MosTESQmT.v : Spirit ofLaws, dk
111.  lie  12a;  BK  IV,  13b,d-15a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 360a 362d
passim,  esp  362b-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iv, 434b435a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  412b  d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c d; 312a 313a passim 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  hi,  146d-147c;  BK IV, 170d-171c; bk v,
204a-b;  214d-215a; BK VI, 241c-242b; 247a-c; 250c; bk mii, 304c; BK XV,
619c-621b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk x, 273a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  189b-191a  2.  Honor and fame in the life of the individual
2a. The sense of honor and of shame: loyalty to the good 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk  i  [1-510]  3a-8b;  bk  hi  19a23d;  BK  IV  [326-418] 27b-28a; bk v
[520-532]  35c;  BK VI [312-358] 43b-d; [440-465] 44c-d; BK IX 57a-64a,c
esp [96-114] 58a-b, [307-429] 60b-61c,
[606-619]
63b; bk xii
[290-328J
85b-c; BK xxii
[99-130]
156b-c;
[289-305]
158b 5 Sophocles: Ajax [430-480] 146d-147b / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50-122] 182d-183b 5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-430]
228b-d  /  Heracleidae  [i-ii]  248a;  [484-596]  252c-253b / Suppliants
[857-917] 266a-b / Helen
[838854] 306b-c / Hecuba [342-383] 355d-356a /
Heracles  Mad  [275-311] 367c-d / Phoenician Maidens [991-1018] 387a-b 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  187b-188d;  bk  VII,  225d-226b;  238a-c;
255b-259a;  bk  ix,  304d-305c  7  Plato: Symposium, 152b-d; 154d-155a /
Apology,  205d-206a  /  Laws,  bk i, 651a-652a; DK V, 686d-688a; bk vii,
730d-731d;  bk  xii,  788d-789a / Seventh Letter, 802c-803a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk iv, ch 3-4 370b-372d; CH 9 375d-376a,c; bk x, ch 9
[i 179^4-1 180^1 1]
434b-d / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 6 629d-631c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch 5 llOb-c 13 \'irgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[1-30]
167a- b; bk x ,ci
[656-688] 320a-321a
14  Plutarch:  Aristides, 264a-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lla-b; bk hi,
58a;  bk VI, 92c; BK XVI, 180d-183a; 183d-184a / Histories, bk iv, 266d;
267b-268a; 289d290a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 9 lOd-lla; par
16-17  12c-13a;  bk  viii,  par 18-30 57d-61c / City of God, bk v, ch 12
216d-219b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 53-59 28b-29a;
stanza 100-115 34b-36b;

[795b]
stanza  162-163  42b 43a; bk hi, stanza 2225 57b; STANZA 36 50 59a 6Ia /
Prolnguf  (4? 78) 159b 160a / Knight's Tale [S59 i'>'>4l 174a 176b; (vMi
^056] 210a / Franklins Tale
[ri.667 928 J
361b  366a  /  Physicians  Tale  366a 371a esp [12,1^7-191] 369b 370b 24
Rahi-i.ais:  Gargantua and Pantagrucl, hk i, 65c d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
13d-14c;  16a-d;  174d  176a;  300c  307a;  386a 388c 26 Smaki:speaki: :
Richard  II,  acti,  sc  i [165-185] 322b c / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v
[21-47] 494c-d / Much Ado About Nothing, act iv, sc I 520b 523d / //rwrv
P", act iv, sc vii [124]- sc viii
[77I 560a 561b
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [5^^^'! 59b-c / Troilus and
Cressida,  act  ii, sc ii 113c-115d / Measure for Measure, act ii, sc iv
[87-187]  185c-186c;  act  hi,  sc  i  [133-176]  188b-c  /  Antony  and
Cleopatra, act ii, sc vii,
[61-90] 326a-c
/ Cymbeline, act i, sc i
[55169] 450a-451c /
Winter s Tale, act hi, sc ii
[92-117] 502b-c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part i 32c-34d; 57d-58a; 81b-84c; l23a-b;
147b-d;  part ii, 203a b; 222c: 227d 228d; 254d-255a; 290a-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part iv, prop 58, schol 441d-442a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 630 287 b
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  36a-38b  esp  38a  b;  146b-147a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 69, 30c-d; part hi, par 207 69b-c; par
244  77c;  par  253  79a-c;  additions,  130  137c-d;  149  140d-14Ia  /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 214d-215a; part iv, 320c; 334b-c ' 49
Darwis  : Descent ofMan, 310d-314besp310d, 312a-313a; 322b-c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk ii, 102b-d; rk IV, 173d-179a esp 177d-178a; bk vii,
281a-d;  291a-292b; 301b-302d; bk viii, 321d-323b: 333b-334c; 336b-337d;
bk ix, 365d-366a; bk XI, 527b-528b; epilogue i, 650d-652a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk ii, 41a-b; bk hi, 54b-58a; bk vi, 153d 157b; bk
IX,  245a-b;  260a-263a  53  James: Psychology, 190a-191a; 207a 208a 2b.
Honor as an object of desire and as a factor in virtue and happiness Old
Testament:   Esther,   5   :9-i4   /   Proverbs,   25   :6-7  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus, j:^—{D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:4// Maccabees, 3 : 1 4 ; 9
:  i  o—  (  D) OT, / Mdchabees, 3:14; 9:10 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [1-510]
3a-8b; bk ix 57a64a,c esp
[96-114] 58a-b, [307-429J 60b 61c,
[606-619] 63b; bk XII [290-328] 85b-c / Odyssey, BK
I  [267-305] 185d-186a 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes [68^-684] 34c 5
Sophocles: Philoctetes
[50-122]
182d-183b;
[1314-1347] 193d-194a

[796a]
(2. Honor andfame in the life of the individual. 2 b. Honor as an object
of  desire  and as a factor in virtue and happiness^ 5 Euripides: Rhesus
[756-761]  209d  /  Hippolytus  [373-430]  228b-d / Andromache [768-801]
321d-322a  /  Hecuba  [299-331] 355b-c / Heracles Mad [275-311] 367c-d 6
Herodotus:  Historyy  bk i, 6c-7b; bk hi, 118a-c; 122a-d; 123c-d; bk vi,
205a-b;  bk VII, 215c-216b; 243d-245a; 255c-d; bk viii, 264c; 282c-283a;
bk  ix,  304a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  PF^r,  BKi,370a-c;  BK II,
397d-398d;  bk  v,  486a-d  7  Plato:  Euthydetnus,  69a-b  / Symposium^
154d-155a  /  Apology,  205d-206a  /  Republic^  BK II, 310c-315c; bk v,
370b-c;  bk  viii, 404d405a; bk ix, 421a-422b / Laws, bk i, 651a652a; bk
v,  686d-688a; bk xii, 788d-789a / Seventh Letter, 805c-806a; 807d-808a;
810d811a; 814b-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 8
[146^20-24]
200c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[1095^22-30]
340d-341a;  ch  10  [1100*10-31]  345c-d;  bk  ii, CH 7 [1107^22-1108^1]
353b-c; bk hi, ch 10
[1117^24-36]
364b-c; bk iv, ch 3-4 370b372d; CH 7 [1127^9-22] 374d-375a; bk vii, ch 4
398a-399a; bk viii, ch 8 [1159^13-26] 411b; BK IX, ch 8
[1168*28-34] 421d-422a; bk x,
ch 9
[1179^4-1180*11] 434b-d /
Politics, bk VII, ch 13
[1332*9-29]
536d-537a; ch 14
[1333*30-^10] 538a-b
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1360^1361^2] 600d-602a
esp
[1361*25-^2]
601d-602a; ch 6
[1362^10-28]
603b-c esp
[1362^20-23] 603c; CH II [1371^7-17] 614c
12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk hi [59-86] 30d-31b; bk v [1105-1135]
75c-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 21 127b-c; BK IV, CH 6, 230b-c
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 258a-c; bk iv, sect 33
266c-d; bk vi, sect 51 279b-c; bk viii, sect i 285a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk VI
[886-892]
234b-235a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b; bk x [276-286] 309b-310a; [656688] 320a-321a; bk xi [376-444]
338b-340a 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 2c-3b / Themistocles, 89a-90b; 95d-96a /
Alcibiades 155b,d-174d / AlcibiadeS'Coriolanus, 194b-195a,c / Aristides,
264a-b;  265c-d  /  Marcus  Cato,  282a  /  Flamininus  302b,d-313a,c  /
Lysander,  354b,d  /  Sulla, 369a-d / Lysander-Sulla, 387d-388a / Pompey
499a-538a,c  /  Alexander 540b,d576d esp 542a-d / Caesar, 599b-d / Agis,
648b,d-649b / Cicero 704a-723d esp 706b-c, 717a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
iv,  73b-d;  bk  vi,  92c-d;  bk  XI,  101c-102a; bk xiv, 154a-b; bk xv,
162c-163a  / Histories, bk i, 195a-b; bk ii, 226d-228a; bk iv, 267b-d 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 13, lid;

[796b]
; 738 THE GREAT IDEAS Ih BK X, par 59-64 86b-87d / City of God, bk v, CH
12-16  216d-221b;  bk  viii, ch 8, 270a-b 19 Aquinas: Sumina Theologica,
part  i, q 26, a 4, ANS 151c-152a,c; part i-ii, q 2, aa 2-3 616d-618a; q
4,  a  8, rep i 636a-c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, A
5,  ANS 53a-54d; part ii-ii, q 25, a i, rep 2 501b-502a; q 185, a i, ans
and  rep  1-2  639c641c;  part  hi suppl, q 96, a 7, rep 3 1061b1062a 21
Dante  : Divine Comedy, hell, hi [22-69] 4b-d IV 5c-7a; vi [76-93] 9a-b;
xiii [31-78] 18b-c; XVI [1-90] 22c-23b; xxiv [43-60] 35a-b; xxxii
[i]-xxxiii
[9]
47c-49c; purgatory, xi
[73117] 69c-70a; paradise,
i [13-36] 106a-b; vi
[i 12-126] 114d-115a; ix [37-63] 119a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 53-55 28b; stanza
100-115 34b-36b; stanza 162-163 42b-43a; bk hi, stanza 22-25 ^^b; STANZA
36-50  59a-61a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-d 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   llOd-llla;  112a-d;  125a-c;  300c-307a;  462b-c;
495d-496d 26 Shakespeare: Titus Andronicus, act v, sc hi
[35-64] 196d-197a / Love's Labour's Lost, act
IV, sc I [1-40] 264b-d / Richard U, act i, sc i
[165-185] 322b-c; act iv, sc
i  [162-334]  343b345a  /  1st Henry IV, act i, sc i [78-90] 435b; sc hi
[160-208] 439b-d; act hi, sc ii
[129161] 454b-c; act v, sc
i [127-144] 462a-b; sc IV [59-101] 464d-465b / Henry V, act iv, sc i
[261-301]
554a-c; sc hi
[18-67] 555d-556b;
sc  V  558a-b  / Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii [8496] 570b 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc II 113c-115d; act v, sc hi [23-28] 137b
/  Othello, ACT II, sc HI [262-270] 219d; act hi, sc hi [154-161] 223d /
Coriolanus,  act i, sc HI [1-50] 355b-d / Sonnets, xxv 590a 29 Cervantes
:  Don  Quixote  esp  part i, 32c-33a, 57d-58a, 147b-d, part ii, 222b-c,
227c-228d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 65c-d; 66d67a,c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  hi, prop 53 413a; prop 55, scHOL 413b-d; part iv, prop 52
439d-440a  32  Milton:  Lycidas  [64-84]  29a-b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 100
191a-192b;  158-164  202a-b; 400-401 240b-241a; 404 241a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  90c-d;  bk  ii,  CH  XXVIII,  SECT  10-12  230b-231c  37
Fielding:  Tom Jones, 146c-147a; 223d-224b; 273b; 313d-314d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  360a-362d esp 360c361a, 362b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i,  44d-45c;  bk  IV,  269d-271a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 3a 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 176c; 194c; 494b,d495a 42 Kant: Fund} Prin.
Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b; 258b-c

[797a]
2c  to  2d  CiiAPTKR  35:  43  Federalist: number 57, 177b-c; number 72,
217a-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448d 449c 44 BoswELLiJo/wson, I28b; 163d
[In  .}];  479a-d; 498c-499a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par
124  44b-d;  part  hi,  par  207  69b-c; par 25^ 79a-c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic/(,  45b-46a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c-d;  312a  317b esp
312c-313b;  322a-c;  592d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15d-16a; bk
III,  146d-147c;  bk  iv,  177d-178a:  bk v, 214c215a; bk ix, 365d-366a;
370c-372a; bk xiv, 590d-604b 53 James: Psychology, 189b-191a; 198b-199b;
203a-204b;  207a-b;  208b  2c.  Honor as due self-esteem: magnanimity or
proper  pride  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon  [914-957]  61d-62b  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk vi,
513a-d  7 Plato: Apology, 208c-209b / Laws, bk v, 686d-689c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ii, ch 7
[1107^22iio8«i] 353b-c; bk iv, ch 2-4 368d-372d esp
CH2   [1122*^19-24]  369c;  CH7  [i  127^9-33]  374d375a  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk i, ch 19, 125c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 16
275b-d  14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  283b-d / Cicero, 706b-c; 713 b-c /
Demosthenes-Cicero,   724c-d   15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  73c-d  18
Augustine: Confessions, bi^x, par 59-65 86b88b / City of God, bk xiv, ch
13  387c-388c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, A 5, ANS
53a-54d; q 66, a 4, rep 3 78c-79b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi
[46120] 69b-70a
25   Montaigne:   Essays,   180c-181d;  307a-320b  passim,  esp  307a-c;
322b-323b;  408b-409c;  456c-d 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
ii,  sc  ii-iii  113c-118c  /  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp ACT I, sc IX
359c-360c, act ii, sc ii [71164] 364d-366a, sc iii
[44-162] 366b-367d,
act  III,  sc  II  [39-145]  374a-375a, act iv, sc vii [28-59] 384c-d 29
Cervantes:  Do« Quixote, part i, 40b-c; 57d58a; 123a-b; 177a-b; part ii,
203a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[561-594]
244b-245a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 100 191a-192b; 147-159 200b-202a / Vacuum,
361a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv, 13b,d15a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  362b-d  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 321b-329a esp 325a327d /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 376b-c 43 Federalist: number 70,
212a

[797b]
HONOR     739     43     Mill:     Utilitarianism,    448d    449c    44
H()s\vi.LL:/«/j«jo«,xiid-xiiia;  16d  17a;73a  b  116b  117c;  383c d 46
Hi:c;i:l:  Philosophy of History, part ii, 267c 268b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk ir, 72d 74a 102b d; BK III, 133b-c; hk iv, 173d 179a cs{ 177d
178a;  bk  vii, 291a 292b; 301b 302d bk viii, 321d-322d; 335b 337d; 338b
339c  esp 339b-c; bk ix, 365d 366a; hk x, 442c 443b; bk xi, 498b d; 527b
528b;  bk  xm  569d-570a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv 104b
109a,c;  bk  v,  110c  111c  53  James:  Psychology, 211a-212a 54 Freud:
Narcissism,  407b  409c passim / Ego and Id, 707c 2d. Honor or fame as a
mode  of  immortality  Old Testament: Psalms, 72:17— (D) Psalms, 71:17 /
Proverbs, 10:7 / Ecclesiastes, 2:16 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 4:1-2;
8:9-1^  -(D) OT, Boof^ of Wisdom, 4:1-2; 8:9-13 / Ecclesiasticus, 37:26;
39:9-11;  44:8-15;  46:1112—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 37:29; 39:12-15;
44:8-15; 46:13-15 / / Maccabees, 3:1-7— (D) OT, / Machabees, y.i-'j I II
Maccabees, 6:2131 -(D) OT, // Machabees, 6\:l\-m 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix
[307-429] 60b-6ic;
bk  XII  [290-328]  85b-c;  bk  xxii  [289-305J  158b / Odyssey, bk xxiv
[191-202]  319a  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [683-684]  34c 5
Sophocles: Philoctetes
[1408-1444]
194d195a,c  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 398a-c 7 Plato:
Symposium, 166b-167a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 1, ch 10
[1100*10-31]
345c-d  /  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1312*23-39]  514d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 19, 126b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 10
261  d262a;  bk  iv, sect 3, 263d; sect 19 265a; sect 33 266c-d; sect 35
266d;  sect  48 267d268a; bk vi, sect 18 275d; bk vii, sect 6 280b; SECT
34  282a; bk viii, sect 21 287a; sect 44 289a; bk ix, sect 30 294b-c; bk
x,  sect  34  301a  13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [450-465] 115b 14 Plutarch:
Pericles,  125b  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  195b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, hi
[22-69]
4b-d; IV 5c-7a; vi [76-93] 9a-b; xiii [31-78] 18b-c; XVI
[1-90] 22c-23b; xxxii
[i]-xxxiii
[9] 47c-49c; purgatory, xi [73-117] 69c-70a;
paradise,  IX  [37-63]  119a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 77a-b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
112d-113a; 267a-b; 301b-c; 304d-306a 27 Shakespeare: Sonnets, lv 594c-d;
lxv 596a-b; lxxxi 598c-d

[798a]
740 THE GREAT IDEAS (2. Honor andfame in the life of the individual. 2d.
Honor  or  fame  as a mode of immortality^ 28 Harvey: Circulation of the
Blood,  312c-d  29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part ii, 226d-228d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  27d-28c;  29a-b;  36a-c;  72c-73a 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 148 201a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 535a-536a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  273b;  274d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a-b; 219d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  494b,d-495a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 428b-429a 44
Bosw  ELI.  :  Joh7JSon,  57d-58a;  163d  [fn 4] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part hi, par 348 llld / Philosophy of History, part i, 211d212c;
255b-d;  part  ii, 274a-'275a 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [9981-9982] 243a
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazot', epilogue, 408a-c 2e. Honor as the
pledge  of  friendship:  the codes of honor among social equals 4 Homer:
Iliad,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk ix 57a-64a,c 5 Euripides: Alcestis [509-604]
241c-242b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 31d-32a: bk hi, 91d-92b; bk v,
183b-c;  bk  vi,  191a-b 6 TuuCYDiDES : Peloponnesian War, BKii,396c-d 7
Plato:  Symposium,  152b-d;  154d-155a  /  Apology,  205d'206a  / Crito,
213d-214b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv, ch 6 373d-374b; BK viii, CH 8
[1159*^13-26]  411b; CH 14 415d416d; bk IX, ch 2 [1165^15-35] 418a-b; ch
8
[1168^28-34]
421d-422a;
[1169^12-^2]
422d423a  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22, 169b170a; BK IV, ch 2
223d-224b  20  Aquinas:  Su?mna Theologica, part ii-ii, q 25, a I, rep 2
501b-502a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 63-64 96b-97a;
stanza  206  115b;  stanza  211212 116a; stanza 231-239 118b-119b; bk v,
stanza  235-244  151a-152a  /  Knight's  Tale  174a-211a 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xvii,  24a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 125b'126b; 181d-183c 26
Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act  IV,  sc  I  245b-246b 27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and Cressida, act hi, sc II [165-212] 121d-122b /
Timon of Athens, act III, sc II
[71-94] 404c-d; sc
iii
[27-42]
405b; act iv, sc i 409c-d; sc hi
[249-305]
413c-414a  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 8c-10b; 71c-73a; 120b-134b
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXVIII, sect 10-13 230b-231c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  70b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 313d-314d 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 90b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall 389b-d

[798b]
2e  to 3a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 207 69b-c; par 253
79a-c; additions, 130 137c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 317a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk II, 72d-74a; bk iv, 173d-179a; bk vi,
241c242b;  bk  viii,  328a-c;  bk  x,  442c-443b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  153d-157b  53  James : Psychology, 189b-191a 3. The
social  realization  of honor and fame 5a. The reaction of the community
to  its  good  or  great  men Old Testament: Genesis, 41:14-45 / Joshua,
g:S-ii—  (D)  Josue, 9:8-11 /Judges, 8:35-9:20 / / Samuel, 18:6-8— (D) /
Kings,  18:6-8  / // Sa?nuel, 1:17-27— (£>) // Kings, 1:17-27 / I Kings,
4:30-34;  10—  (D)  ///A:z>2^^, 4:30-34; 10 / / Chronicles, 14:17— (D) I
Paralipomenon,  14:17  /  H  Chronicles,  9:1-28— (Z)) II Paralipomenon,
9:1-28  /  Esther,  6 /Job, 16:20-17:6; 19:9-21; 29-30 / Proverbs, 10:7;
20:7;  22:1;  31:10-31  esp 31:23, 31:28, 31:31 / Ecclesiastes, 10:5-7 /
Isaiah,  g:i'^—{D)  Isaias,  9:15 Apocrypha: Judith, 8; 15:7-16:25— (Z))
OT,  Judith,  8; 15:8-16:31 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:1-2— (D) OT, Boo}^ of
Wisdom,  4:1-2  /  Ecclesiasticus, 10:19-20,24; 37:26; 39:1-11; 4450 esp
44:1-15—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:2324,27; 37:29; 39:1-15; 44-50 esp
44:1-15  /  Susanna,  4—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13:4  / / Maccabees, 3:1-9;
5:63-64;  9:19-21;  10:59-65;  13:25-30;  14:4-49—  (D) OT, I Machabees,
3:1-9;  5:63-64;  9:19-21;  10:59-65;  13:25-30;  14:4-49 New Testament:
Matthew,  4:23-25;  9:30-31;  13:53-58  /  Mar\, 1 :27-28; 6:1-6 / Lu\e,
4:1430,36-37;  5:15 /John, 4:44 4 Homer: Iliad, bk x [203-217] 67a-b; bk
xxiiiXXIV 161a-179d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[31-57] 99b-d,
[463-511]
103c-d,
[1187-1221]
llOb-c / Antigone
[683-704] 137a-b
/ Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [430-480J 146d-147b,
[10471421] 152a-155a,c
5  Euripides: Hecuba [299-331] 355b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 14a-d;
bk  ii, 85d86b; bk hi, lOlc-d; 122a-d; 123c-d; bk iv, 134d-135b; 136a-c;
bk  vi,  192c;  195d-196c;  198a-199a;  211a; bk vn, 233d-234b; 248d; bk
viii,  282c-283a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 383d384a; bk ii,
395c-399a  esp  395c-d,  399a;  bk  V, 484c-485c; bk vi, 513b-d 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk v, 362a-b; 366c-367b; bk VII, 401b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
iv, ch 3-4 370b-372d; bk viii, ch 14
[1163^^5-13] 416a-c
/  Politics^  BK  II,  CH  7  [1267^12-17]  462d  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361*25-^3] 601d-602a

[799a]
3a to 31? Chaptkr 35: HONOR Ml 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk iv, sect t^,
263d 13 ViRG\h: Aeneid, bk i [142-156] 107a; (450 465] 115b 14 Plutarch:
Themistoclcs,  95b-c;97b-d  /  Camillus, 117a-c / Fabins 141a-154a,c csp
149b  c  /  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d csp 161 d 162b, 165c-d / Coriolanus,
177b-179c   /  Timolcon,  212c-213d  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  226c  229c  /
Pelopidas,   245a-d   /  Marcellus,  256b-d  /  Aristides,  265c-266b  /
Flamininus, 309a-b; 310b / Sertorius, 464a-c / Pompcy, 499a- b / Caesar,
598d-601a  /  Cato  the Younger, 624a-625b; 637a-c / Cicero, 712d-713b /
Demetrius,  737b-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk ii, 33c; 41c-d; 43c-44a; BK
III,  45a-46b;  60d;  bk iv, 73b-d; bk xiv, 153d-155a 18 Augustine: City
ofGod,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218b-c;  CH 15 220d-221a; ch 17-18 221b-224b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2, A 2 616d-617b 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy, hell, iv [64-147] 6a7a; PURGATORY, VIII [121-139] 65c-d;
xi [73ii7]'69c-70a; paradise, xvi
[16-154]
130a132a;  xvii  [46-142]  132c-133c  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch xviii,
25d-26a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 73b-c; 75a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
181d-183a;  445c-446a  26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc i [^y65]
568d-569a; act v, sc v 595a-596a,c esp
[68-81] 596a,c
27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc III [175-233] 124b-125a
/ Coriolaftus 351a392a,c esp act i, sc ix 359c-360c, act ii, sc i
[134-247]
362b-363c, sc ii-iii 364a-369a / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v 406d-408a
29  CervaxNtes:  Don  Quixote,  part i, 65c-68b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  20b-c  32  Milton: Areopagitica, 383a 33 Pascal: Pensees, lyj
232b-233a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28b;  part  hi,  119a121b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jo?ies,  54d-55a;  313d-314d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
360a-362d  passim,  esp  360b-c  / Political Economy, 374d-375b / Social
Contract,  bk  iv,  434a  40  Gibbon  -.Decline  and  Fall, 28b-29b;92a;
219d220a;  298b;  381b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 318b-319b 42 Ka^t:
Judgement,  504a-b  43  Federalist:  number 57, 177a-c 43 Mill: Liberty,
278c-279a;  298b-299a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  xia;  8a-c; 383c; 479a-d;
498c-499a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 348 llld /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  167a168a;  part ii, 262a-c; 272c-273a;
280b-281a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1011-1021] 25b-26a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  79a-82b;  84b-85a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv, 171c-173d; bk
VIII, 338c-d; bk xiii, 578b; 582a-584b; bk XV, 619c-621b; 629b-c

[799b]
3A. The conditions of honor or fame and the causes of dishonor or infamy
Old  Tistamkni  :  Joshua,  6:27  —  1'/))  h^''^^ ^^'^y I Judges, 5 / /
Samuel, iH:6 8
[D)
I  Kings, 18:6-8 / / Kings, 10 -(D) III Kings, 10 / / Chronicles, 29 : 1
2  —  (  D)  /  Paraltpomenon,  29:12  /  //  Chronicles, 9:1-28— (D) //
Paralipomenon,   9:1-28   /   Proverbs,   3:16;   4:8,18;  8:18;  14:28;
31:23,25,28-31 / Ecclesiastes, i:ii; 2:16; 7:1 — (D) Ecclesiastes, i:ii;
2:16;  7:2  / Isaiah, 14:20— (D) Isaias, 1^:20 / Jeremiah, 9:23-24 — (D)
Jeremias,  9:23-24  Apocrypha: Judith, 8:8— (D) OT, Judith, 8:8 / Wisdom
of  Solomon,  3:16-17;  4:1-8; 8:9-10— (D) OT, Book^ of Wisdom, 3:16-17;
4:1-8  S  :g-io / Ecclesiasticus, 1:19; 10:5; 10:19-11:2 37:26; 44:1-15-
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  1:24  10:5;  10:23-11:2;  37:29;  44:1-15 / /
Maccabees,  2:50-51—  (D)  OT, / Machabees, 2:50-51 New Testament: Acts,
21:26-40  /  Romans,  14:15-18  /  // Corinthians, io:S-i8; 11:16-30 / /
Thessalonians, 1:6-10 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i 3a-9a,c; bk hi 19a 23d; BK VI
[312-358] 43b-d; [503-529] 45b-d; bk
IX 57a-64a,c esp [307-429] 60b-61c; bk x [102130] 66a-b; bk xh [290-328]
85b-c; bk xxh
[99-130] 156b-c; [289-305] 158b
5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c 5 Sophocles:
Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[31-57] 99b-d,
[463-511]
103c-d,
[1187-1221]
llOb-c   /   Antigone  [163-210]  132c-d;  [441-525]  134d-135c  /  Ajax
143a-155a,c   esp   [430-480]   146d-147b,   [1047-1421]  152a-155a,c  5
Euripides:  Rhesus  [149-203]  204c-205a / Suppliants [857-917] 266a-b /
Hecuba
[251-257]
355a;  [299-331]  355b-c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii, 70c-d; 76a b;
85d-86b;  bk  hi,  93c; bk iv, 134d-135b; bk v, 160d-161a; 168d-169a; bk
vi,  206d-207a;  BK  viT,  231d;  233d-234b;  248d;  257a;  257c; bk IX,
303c-304a;  305a-c  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350b; BK II,
395d-396a;  398d-399a;  402c-d; 403c404a; bk hi, 427a-c; bk vi, 513a-d 7
Plato: Laches, 27b-d; 31a-c / Symposium, 152d-153b; 154d-155a / Apology,
265d-206a  /  Republic,  bk i, 296c-d; bk v, 366c-367b; 370b-c; BK VIII,
405d-406a;  bk ix, 422a / Laws, BK III, 673d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii,
ch ii
[115^22-35]
161d-162a,c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 3-4 370b-372d / Politics, BK
V, ch id
[1312*23-39] 5I4d
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [i36i"27-34] 601d; ch 9 608c-611c; bk ii, ch ii
[i388'»28-^28] 635b636a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[11051135] 75c-d
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 3, 263d; BK VII, SECT 34 282a ^:

[800a]
(3.  The  social  realization  of  honor andfame, 3 A. The conditions of
honor or fame atid the causes of dishonor or infamy.) 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk i
[441-493]
115a-116b;
[561-568] 118b; BK IX [590-620] 295a-b
14   Plutarch:  Camillus,  117a-c  /  Fabius  141a154a,c  esp  149b-c  /
Alcibiades  155b,d-174d  esp  172b / Akibiades-Coriolanus, 194a-195a,c /
Aemilius Paulus, 224d-229c / Pelopidas, 243c-244b / Marceilus-Pelopidas,
262d  /  Aristides, 264a-d; 265c-d / Cimon, 392d-393b / Nicias, 425c-d /
Agesilaus,  497a-b  /  Pompey,  509d-510a / Caesar, 598d-601a / Phocion,
604b,d-605d  / Cato the Younger, 637a-c / Agis, 648b,d-649b / Cleomenes,
659d-660a  /  Cicero,  712d-713b  /  Demetrius, 737b-d / Dion, 784a-b 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, 16d-17a; bk ii, 33c; 41c-d; BK III, 60d-61a; bk
iv, 72d-73d; bk xi, 101c-102a; bk xv, 169a / Histories, bk ii, 226d228a;
bk  hi, 248b-c; 259c-260a; bk iv, 289d290a 18 Augustine : City ofGod, bk
v,  ch  12-20 216d226a passim 19 Aquixas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
2, AA 2-3 616d-618a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, A 10,
ANS  128a-d;  part  ii-ii, q 25, a i, rep 2 501b-502a; q 43 585a-592d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[22-69]
4b-d; VI [76-93] 9a-b; vii
[1-66] 9c-10b; xiii
[31-78] 18b-c; xvi
[1-90] 22c-23b; xxiv [4360] 35a-b; xxxii [i]-xxxiii
[9] 47c-49c; purgatory, VIII [121-139] 65c-d; XI [73-117] 69c70a; par.\dise, xvi [16-154] 130a-132a; xvii
[46-142] 132c-133c
22  Chaucer: Parson s Tale, par 10, 500a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch viii
12d-14c  esp  13b-c;  CH  xiv-xix 21b-30a; ch xx, 30d; ch xxi 31d-33a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  74c-75b;  part ii, 146d; part iv, 261c 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   7a-d;  103c-104d;  112d113d;  126b-127c;  130b-d;
302b-306a;   314c316a;  390c-391c;  445a-446a;  450c-453c;  495d496d  26
Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry VI, act i, sc ii 36b37c / Richard II, act v, sc
ii  [1-40]  346b-d  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  i  [247-301]  554a-c  27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act iv, sc iv [46-66] 59b-c / Troilus and Cressida,
act ii, sc ii 113c-115d; ACT III, sc hi [74-233] 123b-125a / Coriolanus,
act  ii, sc i [220-275] 363b-364a; ACT III, sc ii-iii 373c-377a; act iv,
sc  vii  [2757]  384c-d / Henry VIII, act hi, sc ii [350458] 572c-573d /
Sonnets,  xxv  590a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 227a228d; 303a-c
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  83c;  92a-b  32 Milton : Lycidas
[64-84]  29a-b  /  Paradise  Lost,  BK  II  [430-456] 120b-121a / Samson
Agonistes
[960-996J 360b-361a

[800b]
742  THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 4a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 319-324 229b-230b; 337
232b-233a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 15b-16b; part hi, 119a-121b 37
Fielding:   Tom  Jones,  9a-d;  38b;  146c-147a;  223d-224b;  308a-310a;
313d-314d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  360a-362d  esp 362b-d / Political
Economy,  372d;  374d-375b / Social Contract, bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 354c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 2a; 3a;
92a;  435a436b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 27c-29a; 31b,d32c; 68a-b;
71b,d;  176c-d;  209d;  494b,d495d;  504C-5O5C 43 Federalist: number 68,
206b-c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 452c-453a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 62b-c;
124d-125d;   140b141a;   160b;   189d-190b:   194c-195a;  197c;  198b-d;
250d-251a;  256d; 299a-b; 412b-d; 479a-d; 498c-499a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par  244 77c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3734-3763]
91a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  79a-82b;  84b-85a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  iv,  170d-171c  173d-179a  esp  177d-178a;  bk  v, 204a-205b
228b-234a;  bk  vi,  247a-c;  250c;  bk  viii,  304c  338c-d;  bk  xiii,
582a-584b; bk xiv, 610c611c; BK XV, 619c-621b 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  767a  4.  Honor  in  the  political  community and in
government  4a.  Honor  as a principle in the orgaaization of the state:
timocracy  and  monarchy 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii [290-328] 85b-c 7 Plato:
Symposium,  152b-d / Republic, bk viii, 402b-405c 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk v, ch 10
[1310^401311*7]
513b; bk vii, ch 2
[i324''2-i325*7]
528c-529a 14 Plutarch: Themistocles, 99b-c / LysanderSulla, 387d-388a 18
Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch 12, 218d219b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 74b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 181d-182c 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act
iv,  sc  i [162334] 343b-345a; act v. sc n [1-40] 346b-d 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus, act hi, sc i [142161] 370d-371a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
120a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 11c12b; bk IV, 13b,d-15a; bk
v,  32d;  bk  viii,  53b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 326b-327a; 360a-362d
passim, esp 360a-361a / Political Economy, 375a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 630b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81c-d; 317b-318b

[801a]
4*  to  4r Chapter 35: HONOR 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
27^,  91c-d / Philosophy of History, part ii, 262a-c; PART IV, 334b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vi, 241c -242b 4b, The scale of honor in the
organization   of  the  state:  the  just  distribution  of  honors  New
Testament:  Romans,  ly.-j  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk i [1-510] 3a 8b; bk ix
57a64a,c;  bk  xii  [290-328)  85b-c  5  Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[1011-1084]  38b-39a,c  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210] 132c-d / Ajax
143a-155a,c esp
[430-480] 146d-147b, [10471421] 152a-155a,c
5  Euripides: Hecuba [299-^5^1] 355b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk 11, 85a;
bk vi, 194d195b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d399a; bk hi,
427a-c;  bk  vhi,  587a  b  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk i, 305d-306b; bk v,
366d367a  /  Laws,  bk hi, 673d-674b; bk iv, 683b-c; bk v, 686d-688a; bk
vi, 699d-700b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 2
[1130^:^0-34]
378b; CH 3 [1131*24-29] 378d; ch 6 [ii34''i-7] 382b; bk vhi, ch 14
[1163^5-13]
416a,c   /  Politics,  BK  I,  ch  12  [1259^5-8]  454a;  bk  ii,  ch  7
[i266^36-i267*2]462c; [1267*37-41] 463b; ch 9 [1270^18-25] 466d-467a; ch
11
[1273*32-^7]
469d-470a; bk hi, ch 5
[1278*35-39]
475c; ch 10
[1281*29-34] 479a; ch
13 481b-483a; bk V, ch 2
[i302*i6]-ch
3
[i302''2o] 503b504a;
ch 4
[1304*17-38]
505d-506a; ch 8
[1308*8-11] 510a; [1308^10-17] 510d; [1309*1315] 511b; ch 12 [1316^21-24] 519d; bk vh, ch
14
[1332^42-1333*16]
537d-538a  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 12, par i 557b-c 14 Plutarch :
Pompey,  505a-c / Cato the Younger, 636d-637c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi,
105d-107b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch 12, 218b-c 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xxi,  32d-33a  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 73b-c; 74b-c;
75b76b;  part  ii,  103c-d;  104b;  146d;  156c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
181d-183a   32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [430-456]  120b121a  /
Areopagitica, 383a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 305 228a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
i, 15b- 16b; 28a- b; part III, 119a-121b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  hi,  11c12b;  BK  V,  23c-25c;  31a-b;  bk  xi, 71d-72a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 326b-327a; 358b-c; 360a-362d passim, esp 360b,d
[fn
i]  / Social Contract, bk hi, 408c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 17a-b;
240c-244c  esp  240c-241b,  244b-c;  245d-247a  passim;  501c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  39d;  81c-d;  317b318b  42  Kant: Science of Right,
444c-445a

[801b]
743  43  Articles of Confederation: vi [8793! 6b 43 ("onstitution of the
U.S.: article i, sect 9 [2S9 295I 14a 43 Im-oeralist: number 84, 252a 44
Roswi-ll:  Johnwn,  141a;  197c 46 Hkc.el: Philosophy of Right, pari hi,
par  206  68d 69b; par 319, 106b c / Philosophy of History, part i, 222a
224a 47(J<)iTHi;: Faust, part ii
[10,849-976]
264a267a  48  Melville: Moby Dtcl{, 108a 112a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
»k  hi,  131c-135c;  BK v, 206b c; 228b 234a; bk vi, 241c-242b; 250c 4c.
Honor  as  a  political  technique: the uses of praise, prestige, public
opinion 4 Homer: Iliad, bk x [60-71] 65d 5 I'ajripides: Hecuba [251-257J
355a;  [299-331J 355bc 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d399a;
bk  hi,  427a-c  7  Plato: Republic, bk i, 305d 306b; bk vi, 377a-379c /
I^ws, bk vh, 730d-731d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 12
[i259*'5-8]
454a; bk ii, ch ii [1273*32-^7] 469d-470a; bk HI, CH 5
[1278*35-39]
475c; BK v, ch 8
[i3o8''io-2o] 510d;
ch ii
[1315*4-24] 517d518a;
bk vh, ch 2
[i324''io-23]
528c-d / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 9 608c-611c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[142-156]
107a;
[450465] 115b
14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45c-46b / Alcibiades, 165c-d / Caesar, 598d-599b
/  Cleomenes,  659d660a  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  209d-210b  23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi, 32d-33a; ch XXII, 33c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part   h,   146d;  156c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-183a;  306a-d  27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and Cressida, act hi, sc HI [38-241] 122d-125a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  15b-16b; part hi, 119a-121b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 11c12b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 358b-c; 360a-362d
passim,  esp  360a-b  /  Political  Economy,  375a-b 30 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  iv,  269d270d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 4d; 644d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-d; 317b-318b 43 Federalist: number 57,
177b-c;  number  68,  206b-c;  NUMBER  72, 217a-c 44 Bosw ELI.: Johnson,
124d; 127b-c; 141a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 318 105b;
additions, 186 149b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,849-976]
264a267a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv, 170d-173d; BK V, 204c-205b;
228c-d; 230b; 232a-233b; BK VI, 241c-242b; bk ix, 366d-367b

[802a]
^44  5.  Honor, fame, and the heroic 4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d 6 Herodotus:
History, bk ii, 70c-d; bk ix, 293c-294c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk ii, 395d399a 7 Plato: Cratylus, 92c-93a / Republic, bk v, 366d'367a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 3-4 370b-372d 14 Plutarch: Theseus la-15a,c
esp 2c-3b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[22-69]
4b'd; IV 5c-7a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 77c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
181d-183a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes 339a-37Sa esp [2367] 340a-341a,
[164-175]
343a-b,
[340-372]
347a'b,
[521-540]
351a-b,
[667-709]
354a355a,
[1065-1300]
362b-368a,
[1334-1362]
368b-369a  38  Rousseau: Political Economy, 373c-374a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  31b,d-32c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk ii, 89b-d; bk hi,
131c-135c;  146d-147c;  150a-164a,c; bk vi, 1^>- 250c; bk IX, 344b-346a;
366d-367b;  bk  x,  442c-443b;  bk  xv,  619c-621b 53 James: Psychology,
826a-827a  5a.  Honor  as  a  motivation of heroism 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
3a-9a,c; bk hi [139-160] 20c; BK V
[520-532]
35c; bk vi
[440-465]
44c-d; bk viii [130-156] 52c; bk ix 57a-64a,c; BK XII
[290-328]
85b-c; BK XXII
[99-130]
156b-c;   [289-305]   158b  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [430-480]  146d-147b  5
Euripides: Heracleidae [i-ii] 248a; [484-596] 252c-253b / Suppliants
[857-917]
266a-b  /  Hecuba [343-383] 355d-356a; [482-603] 357a358a / Heracles Mad
[275-311]  367c-d / Phoenician Maidens [991-1030] 387a-b 5 Aristophanes:
Knights  [565-598]  477a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 226b-c; 234a-b;
255c-d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
395d399a esp 397d-398c; 402c-404a; bk v, 484a-c; bk vii, 556b-d 7 Plato:
Syinposium,  152b-d;  166b-167a  /  Apology, 205d-206a / Republic, bk v,
366c367b  /  Laws,  bk  i,  651a-652a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 6-9
361a-364b; BK IV, CH 3 370b-372b passim, esp [1123^3133] 370d,
[1124^7-9] 371b-c /
Politics,  bk  v,  CH  10  [1312^24-39]  514d  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i
[441-493] 115a-116b; bk X [276-286] 309b-310a; bk xi [376-444] 338b340a;
bk  xii  [650-696]  371b-372b 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 2c-9a esp 3a-b, 3d /
Romulus-Theseus,  30a-b  /  Poplicola, 83b-84a / Coriolanus, 175d-176b /
Pelopidas,  238b239c  /  Flamininus,  302b  /  Alexander  540b,d576d esp
542a-d,   553b-c   /  Caesar,  583b-585d;  599b-d  /  Cato  the  Younger
620a-648a,c

[802b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 5/0 5^ 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49d; bk xvi, 180d183a;
183d-184a  /  Histories,  bk i, 195a-b; bk II, 226d-228a; bk hi, 248b-c;
256b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk v, ch 12 216d219b 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and Cressida, bk i, stanza 68-70 10a / Knight's Tale [859-1029]
174a-177a  26  Shakespeare  : 1st Henry IV, act i, sc hi [194208] 439d /
Henry V, act iv, sc hi
[16-67]
555d-556b /Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii [84-96] 570b; act v, sc v [68-81]
596a,c  27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii 113c-115d 29
Cervantes : Don Quixote esp part i, 82c-d, 122d-123a, 147b-c, 190d-191d,
parth,  203a-b,  227b-d,  256a-d, 280b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 800 328a 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
3a-b;  92a-b; 93d94b; 217d-220d esp 219c-220d; 370b-d; 376a-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  324c-325a  42  Kant: Practical Reason, 326b-327d 43
Mill:   Utilitarianism,   452c-453a   46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,
additions,  189  149d  / Philosophy of History, intro, 166b168a; 184b-d;
part  iv,  341a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dicf{, 45b-46a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  322c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk i, 21d-22b; bk II, 77c-81b;
89b-d;  97c-106d;  bk  hi,  146d147c;  150a-164a,c;  bk  ix,  366d-367b;
369a372a;  bk  xi,  527b-528b;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  bk XIV, 590d-604b
passim,  esp  603a-604b;  bk  XV,  618b-619d; epilogue i, 673d-674a,c 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk x, 273a-d; epilogue, 408a-c 54 Freud:
War  and  Death,  765a-b  5b.  Hero-worship: the exaltation of leaders 4
Homer:  Iliad,  bk xii [290-328] 85b-c 5 Aristophanes: Frogs [1008-1098]
576b-577c  6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 168d-169a; 183d184a; bk vi, 192c;
bk  vii,  235b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d398a; bk v,
485b-c  7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 340a-b; bk v, 366c367b; BK VII, 401b 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 14 [1332^1727] 537b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk i
[267-290]
llOa-llla; BK VI
[756-892]
231a-235a; bk viii
[608731] 275a-278b
14 Plutarch: Theseus, 14c-15a,c/ Romulus, 28a30a,c / Themistocles, 99b-c
/   Pericles,  140c141a,c  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  226c-230d  /  Lysander,
361d-362a  /  Demetrius,  729d-731a; 734b735a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv,
73b-d  /  Histories, BK I, 198c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk iv 267c-270b

[803a]
5c  to  5d  Chapter  35; HONOR 745 25 Montaigne: Essays, 103c 104d; 126b
128d; 145d-146d; 362a 365a; 390c-391c; 452d 453b 26 Shakespkark: Richard
II, act v, sc ii
[i
40! 346b-d / King John, act i 376a 379c / Julius Caesar, act i, sc i
[37-65] 568d-569a; sc
11
[90-161] 570b-571a; act V, sc v [68-75] 596a,c
27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and Cleopatra, act v, sc II [82-100] 347a-b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part i, la-8c; 32c33a; 41a-c; 82c-d; part ii,
254d-255a  32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax 68b-69a / Lord Gen. Cromwell
69a-b  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  373c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  12b-c;  28b-d; 92a; 263a; 298b; 471c-d; 627a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  131b;  209d; 415d416c; 536c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 298d-299a 48
Melville: Moby Dicl(, 107a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 9c-10d; bk
ii,  97c-101c;  BK  III, 135c-137c; 140c-142d; 159b161b; 162b-164a,c; bk
iv,  170d-173d;  bk  v,  230b  234a;  bk  vi,  238c-243d  esp  242c-243c
260a-262a;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  354a 355c 366d-367b; 382a-388a,c; bk x,
405a-406c  444a-445d;  bk  xi,  518c-d; bk xiii, 578b; 582a584b; BK XIV,
600d;  610c-611c; bk xv, 619c621b; epilogue i, 647b-649d; 673d-674a,c 53
James:   Psychology,  826b-827a  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  669a-c;
674b675b;  676b-c;  683c-684a; 686b-689d; 691d693a / War and Death, 762c
5c.  The occasions of heroism in war and peace 4 Homer: Iliad3a'179d esp
bk iv [220-418] 26b28a, bk V [520-532] 35c, bk x [203-253] 67a-c, bk XII
[290-328J 85b-c / Odyssey, bk i [267305] 185d-186a 5 Euripides: Rhesus
[149-263]
204c-205c   /   Heracles  Mad  [140-205]  366b-d  /  Phoenician  Maidens
[991-1018]  387a-b  6  Herodotus:  History, bk ii, 69a-b; bk hi, lOlc-d;
122a-i23d;  bk  iv,  134d-135b;  bk  vi,  187b-188d;  bk vii, 233d-234b;
238a-c;  248d;  255a-257d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a;  303c-304a 6 Thucydides:
Pelopomjesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d399a;  bk iv, 457b-c; bk v, 484c-485c;
502b-c  7  Plato:  Apology, 205d-206a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 6-9
361a-364b;  bk  iv,  ch  3  370b-372b  passim  /  Politics, bk vii, ch 2
[1324^10-23]  528c-d  13  Virgil:  Aefieid, bk ix [168-449] 283b-291a 14
Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c / Poplicola, 83b84a / Coriolanus, 1 74b, d-
179c  / Aemilius Paulus, 219d-229c / Marcellus 246b,d-261a,c / Alexander
540b,d-576d  /  Cato  the Younger 620a-648a,c / Demosthenes, 695d-703b /
Cicero,  712d-713b  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lla-b; bk hi, 49d; bk VI,
92c;  BK  XVI,  180d-183a;  183d-184a  / Histories, bk i, 200b-c; bk ii,
226d-228a; BK hi, 246b-c; 248b-c; 249b; 256a-c

[803b]
20  AguiNAs: Summa Theologica, part in st ppl, g 96, AA 5-7 1055c 1062a;
aa  ii  12  1063d  106Sb  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi 38a 39c 22
C^hauckr:  Truilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii, stanza 25 29 24b 25b; stanza
88-92  33a  b;  uk  v,  STANZA  258  154a / Prologue [4^ 78] 159b 160a /
Knight's  Tale 174a-211a esp [859-1004] 174a176b 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
en  xxvi  36b-37d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part i, 73b 76b 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and Pantagrucl, uk i, 32c-35a; 42a-44a; 50c-52d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   302b-303a;   340a   343b   passim;  362a  365a;  390c-391c  26
Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  hi,  sc  i 543d544b; act iv, sc hi [16-67]
555d-556b  27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc II 113c-115d
/ Coriolanus, act i, sc i [256280] 354b-c; act ii, sc i
[130-178] 362b-c;
sc  HI  [86-128]  366d-367b / timon of Athens, act hi, sc V 406d-408a 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp part i, 147b-d, PART II, 203a-b, 280b-c 32
Milton:  Lord  Gen. Fairfax 68b-69a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv,
437d-438c   40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  217d-220d  esp  219c-220d;
240b-247a  passim;  369d-376c  esp  370a-c, 375b-c: 644d-645c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  19d-20a;  357c359c;  415d-416c;  534b-536d  passim;
549c550c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 241 d242b; 247a; part
ii, 262c-363a; 274a-275a; 281d-282d; part hi, 298a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk ii, 77c-81b; 89b-d; 97c-106d; bk hi, 146d-147c; 150a164a,c; bk
vi,  25Gc;  bk  ix,  366d-367b;  369a372a;  bk  xiv,  590d-604b  5d. The
estimation of the role of the hero in history 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[756-892] 231a- 235a;
BK  VIII  [608-731]  275a-278b  14 Plutarch: Theseus la-15a,c esp 9a-d /
Romulus  15a-30a,c  /  Lycurgus  32a-48d  csp  47a-48c  / Numa Pompilius
49a-61d  esp 59c-60b / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp 129c-130b, 140c-141a,c /
Timoleon  195a-213d  csp  212c-213d  /  Flamiiiinus, 307d-308a / Poinpey
499a-538a,c  /  Caesar 577a-604d / Antony 748a- 779d esp 750a-b / Marcus
Brutus 802b,d-S24a,c 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi, 9a-b; ch xx, 30d; ch
xxv-xxvi,   35a-37a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,
267c-268a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  362a-365a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws, bk x, 65d-68a 38 Rousseau : Inequality, 362a-b; 364a-b / Political
Economy,  373c-374a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  II,  400c-402a 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 633d-634a,c

[804a]
(5. Honor, fame, and the heroic. 5d. The estima' tion of the role of the
hero  in  history.)  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 220b; 251d-252a 43
Federalist:  number  72, 217d-218a 43 Mill: Liberty, 298d'299a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 93 36a-b; part ii, par 124 44b-d; part
hi, par 318 105b; par 344 Ilia; par 348 Hid; par 350 112a; ADDITIONS, 58
125c;  186  149b / Philosophy of History, intro, 162a-170b; 184b-d; PART
I,  241d-242b;  part  ii, 259b-c; 273a; 274a-275a; 275d-276a; 280b-281a;
281d282d;   283c-d;   part  hi,  298a-b;  300a-301c;  PART  IV,  360b-c;
361d-362a; 366b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [570-580] 16a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  107a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace passim, esp bk i, 8dlOd, BK III,
143a-c,  162b-164a,c,  bk  ix,  342a344b,  350d-355c,  bk  x, 389a-391c,
405a-b,  430b-432c,  447c-448c,  465c-467a,  bk xi, 469a470c, 497c-499c,
507a,  bk xiii, 563a-575a, bk XIV, 610d-611c, bk XV, 619d-621b, epilogue
I,  645a-650c,  epilogue  ii  675a-696d  passim  53  James:  Psychology,
826b-827a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  800a- / New
Introductory Lectures, 884b-c 6. The idea of glory: its distinction from
honor  and fame New Testament: /o/jw, 5:44 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
v,  ch  12,  218b-c;  CH 14 220a-d; ch 17-19 221b-225b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 2, a 2, REP 2 616d-617b; a 3, ans and rep 1-2
617b-618a; q 4, a 8, rep i 636a-c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  Q  90,  A  2  1013d-1014d; q 96, a 7, rep 3 1061b1062a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[1-9]
106a;  VII  [1-9]  115a-b;  xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
300c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 227d-228d 33 Pascal: Pensees,
793  326b-327a  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  347d-348b  53  James:  Psychology, 203a-204b 6a. The
glory  of  God:  the  signs  and  the  praise  of  the  divine glory Old
Testament:  Exodus,  15:1-21  / // Samuel, 6: 22-(D) II Kings, 6; 22 / /
Kings,  S-{D)  III  Kings, 8 / / Chronicles, 16:7-36; 17:16-27; 29:10-19
(D) I Paralipomenon, 16:7-36; 17:16-27; 29:10-19 / Psalms passim, esp 8,
1819,  24,  29-30,  33-34,  47,  57, 66, 68, 81, 92-93, 95-96, III, 117,
134-136,  138,  145-150— (^) Psalms passim, esp 8, 17-18, 23, 28-29, 3^"
33,  46,  56, 65, 67, 80, 91-92, 94-95, no, 116, 133-135, 137, 144-150 /
Isaiah,  6:1-6 esp 6:3; 12:1-6; 25-26; 42 esp 42:8-12— (D) IsaiaSy 6:1-6
esp 6:3; 12:1-6; 25-26; 42 esp 42:8-12

[804b]
b  746  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6 to (ib Apocrypha: Tobit, 8:15-17; 12:6-7; 13—
(D)  OT,  Tobias, 8:16-19; 12:6-7; ^3 / Judith, 16:1-18— (D) OT, Judith,
16:1-22.  I  Rest  of  Esther,  13:8-18—  (Z))  OT,  Esther,  13:8-18  /
Ecclesiasticus,    18;   39:12-35;   42:15-43:33;   51:1-12—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  18;  39:16-41;  42:15-43:37;  51:1-17  /  Song of Three
Children,  28-68-(D)  OT, Daniel, 3:51-90 / / Maccabees, 4:24— (D) OT, /
Machabees,  4:24  New Testament: Matthew, 5:13-16 / Lul^^ 1:46-55,68-79;
2:8-14  /  John,  8:54 / 7 Peter, 4:11 / II Peter, 1:16-19 / Revelation,
5:9-14;   7:9-17;  11:16-18;  21-22—  (D)  Apocalypse,  5:9-14;  7:9-17;
11:16-18;  21-22  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i la-b; par 4 2a;
par  31  8d-9a;  bk  ii,  par 13, lid; bk v, par I 27a-b; bk vii, par 19
49c-d;  par 23 50b-c; BK IX, par i 61c-d; par 34 70c-d; bk x, par 38 81a
/  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  14 220a-d; CH 17 221b-222a; bk viii, ch 6
268d-269c; bk XI, CH 29 339a-b; bk xii, ch 4-5 344b-345b; BK XXII, CH 29
614b-616d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  a  4, ANS
151c-152a,c;  q  44,  a  4  241a-d;  q 65, a 2 340b-341b; q 70, a 2, ans
364b-365a; part i-ii, Q 2, A 2, REP 2 616d-617b; a 3, rep i 617b-618a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 25, A I, REP 2 501b-502a; q 31,
a  i, rep i 536d537c; PART III, Q 19, A 3 819c-820c; q 25 839c845a; part
hi   suppl,  qq  90-92  1012a-1037c  passim  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,
purgatory, xi [1-30] 68d-69a; paradise, i
[1-9]
106a; vii
[1-9]
115a-b; xiii
[1-30] 125b-c; xxvii
[1-9] 147b;
xxxiii [49-145] 156d-157d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 161b-163d; part
IV, 261c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 300c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop
36, schol 461 b-c 32 Milton: On Time 12a-b / Upon the Circumcision 12 b-
13a I At a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[56-415]
136b-144b esp [80-134] 137a-138a; bk v [136-208] 178a179b; bk vii
[565-640] 229b-231a / Samson
Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[23-67]
340a-341a,
[164-175] 343a-b, [340-375] 347a-b, [667-709]
354a-355a,
[1130-1155]
364a-b,
[1262-1286J
367a-b,  [1570-1758]  374a-378a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 233, 216a 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  347d-348b / Judgement, 594d [fn i] 47 Goethe: Faust,
prologue [243-270] 7a-b 6b. The reflected glory of the angels and saints
Old  Testament:  Exodus,  34:29-35  / Psalms^ 84:11; 85:8-9— (D) Psalms,
83:12;  84:9-10/  Isaiah,  60— (D) Isaias, 60 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
44-50 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 44-50

[805a]
\eb Chaptfr 35: HONOR 747 New Testament: Matthew, ^WT^-xd I Mar\, S:^8 /
Luke,  2\c)  /  John, 5:44; 8:54; »7-22 / Romans, 8:18 / // Corinthians,
3:18  /  // Thessalonians, I :j-io / II Peter, 1:17/ Revelation, 21-22 —
(D)  Apocalypse, 21-22 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk v, ch r6-i8 221a224b
passim;  bk  xviii,  ch 48 501b-d: bk xix, CH 13 519a-520a; bk xx, ch 17
544d-545c;  bk  XXII,  ch 29-30 614b-618d 19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica,
part  i, q 62 317c-325b; part i-ii, q 2, a 3, ans and rep i 617b-618a; q
4,  a 8, rep i 636a-c 20 Aquinas: Surnma Theologica, part hi, q 19, A 3,
rep 3-4 819c-820c; part hi suppl, q 69, A 2, rep 3-4 886c-887d; qq 82-85
968aCROSS-REFERENCES For: Honor or fame in relation to virtue, duty, and
happiness,  see  Duty  4-4b; Happiness 2b(4); Virtue and Vice 4d(2), 6d.
The  sense  in  which pride is a vice and humility a virtue, see Sin 4c;
Virtue  and  Vice 8f. Fame as a mode of immortality, see Immortality 6b.
Mutual  respect  or  honor as a condition of friendship, see Love 2b(3);
Virtue  and  Vice 6e. The poHtical significance of honor, see Government
2a;  Justice  ge;  State 9c. The rhetorical uses of praise or honor, see
Rhetoric  4a.  Other discussions of heroism and the heroic, j^d- Courage
5; Temperance 6a; and for the conception of the tragic or epic hero, see
Poetry 7b. Various estimations of the role of heroes, leaders, and great
men  in  history,  see  History  4a (4). The theological significance of
glory,  see  God  4h;  Happiness  7c(2),  7d; Immortality 5f. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in Great Books ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas. L Chaucer. The House of Fame . The Legend of Good Women F. Bacon.
"Of  Praise,"  "Of  Vainglory,"  "Of  Honor  and  Reputation," in Essays
Hobbes.  The  Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, part I, ch 8 Hume. A
Treatise  of  Human  Nature, bk ii, part i A. Smith. The Theory of Moral
Sentiments,  part  I,  sect III, CH 2-3 II. Theophrastus. The Characters
Benedict of Nursia. The Rule

[805b]
992a;  Q  90,  a  2,  ans  1013d-1014d; q 96 1049d1066a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, i
[19]
106a;  vii  (i  (;I  ll.Sa b; x xiv 120b 128b csp XIV (i 6()| 126d 127c;
xviii  (52I-XIX  (18) I34a135b; xxiii 141b 142c; xxvin (i 129) 148d150a;
XXIX
[
I  ^6  1  45)  151c  d;  xxx xxxiil5Id156a csp xxx [97 1^2) 152d 153a 29
(Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii, 228b d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v,
prop  ^6,  schol 461bc 32 Mil. ion : On Time 12a b / At a Solemn Sfusic{
13a-b  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [809-845) I93a-b csp [83^ 8^5] 193b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  643 290b-291a; 793, 326b Boethius. The Consolation of
Philosophy,  bk  ii Beowulf Song of Roland Chretien de Troves. Arthurian
Romances  Volsung Saga Francis of Assisi, The Rules Jacobus de Voragine.
The  Golden  Legend  Njalssaga  Lull.  The Book of the Ordre of Chyvalry
Froissart.  Chronicles  Diaz de Gamez. The Unconquered Knight Malory. Le
morte  d'Arthur  Ariosto.  Orlando  Furioso Castiglione. The Book of the
Courtier Elyot. The Governour

[806a]
748  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  P.  Sidney. The Countess of Pemlrro\e''s Arcadia
Tasso.  Jerusalem  Delivered  Spenser. The Faerie Qiieene, bk vi Aleman.
The  Rogue {The Life of Guzman de Alfarache) Brooke. An Inquisition upon
Fame  and Honour Beaumont and Fletcher. The Maid's Tragedy Calderon. The
Physician  of His Own Honour Carew. a Rapture CORNEILLE. Le Cid . Horace
Racine.  Andromaque  MoLiERE.  he  bourgeois gentilhomme {The Cit Turned
Gentleman)  Dryden.  Allfor  Love  Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  ofMen,
Manners, Opinions, Times Mandeville. An Enquiry into the Origin ofHonor,
and  the  Usefulness  of  Christianity in War Saint-Simon. Memoirs HuRD.
Letters  on  Chivalry  and Romance Voltaire. "Honor," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  Millar.  Observations Concerning the Distinction of Ran^s in
Society Sheridan. The Rivals, act 4, sc i

[806b]
Schiller.  Don  Carlos  .  Wallenstein  W.  Scott.  Ivanhoe TocQUEViLLE.
Dcmocracy  in  America, part ii, bk III, CH 18 ViGNY. Military Servitude
and  Grandeur  Ware. The Law of Honor Stendhal. The Red and the Blac/^ .
The  Charterhouse  of  Parma T. Carlyle. On Heroes, Hero- Worship andthe
Heroic  in History Emerson. Representative Men Galton. Hereditary Genius
Meredith. The Egoist HowELLs. The Rise of Silas Lapham Nietzsche. Beyond
Good and Evil, ch ix Frazer. The Golden Bough, part vii, ch 3 T. Veblen.
The  Theory  of the Leisure Class Rostand. UAiglon T. Hardy. The Dynasts
Farnell.  GreeJ{ Hero Cults and Ideas of Immortality T. S. Eliot. Murder
in  the Cathedral Raglan. The Hero Cassirer. The Myth of the State, part
hi (15-17)

[807a]
Chapteri^G:  HYPOTHESIS  INTRODUCTION  A  COMPARISON  of their Greek and
Latin  roots  shows that the EngHsh words "hypothesis" and "supposition"
are  synonymous. To hypothesize or to suppose is to place under— to make
one  thing  the  basis  of  another  in the process of thought. The word
"hypothesis"  is  today  often  popularly  misappHed  to mean a guess or
hunch.  The  sleuth  in a detective story speaks of having an hypothesis
about  who  committed  the crime. The popular notion of what it means to
suppose  something,  or  to  entertain  a  supposition,  more accurately
reflects the meaning of hypothesis in logic, mathematics, and scientific
or  philosophical  method.  A  supposition is generally understood to be
something  taken  for  granted,  something  assumed  for  the purpose of
drawing implications or making inferences. What is supposed is not known
to  be  true;  it  may be true or false. When we make a supposition, our
first  concern is to see what follows from it, and only then to consider
its  truth  in  the  light  of  its consequences. We cannot reverse this
order, when we employ suppositions, and ask first about their truth. The
word  "if"  expresses  the  essence of supposing. The word "then" or the
phrase   "it   follows   that"   introduces  the  consequences  for  the
consideration  of  which we make the supposition. W^e are not interested
in  the  "if" for its own sake, but for the sake of what it may lead to.
In  any statement of the "if . . . then . . ." sort, it is the if-clause
which  formulates  the  supposition or the hypothesis; the other part of
the   statement,   the   then-clause,  formulates  the  consequences  or
implications.  The whole complex statement, which makes an //the logical
basis  for  a  then,  is  not  an  hypothesis.  Rather  it  is  what  is
traditionally called in logic a hypothetical proposition. 749

[807b]
There  is one use of the word "hypothesis" in mathematics which seems at
odds  with  the foregoing summary. In Euclid's Elements, for example, an
hypothesis  is  that  which  is  given,  not as the basis from which the
conclusion  is  drawn  or  proved,  but  as  a  condition of solving the
geometric problem under consideration. Let us take Proposition 6 of Book
I.  It reads: "//"in a triangle two angles be equal to one another, then
the  sides  which  subtend  the  equal  angles will aJso be equal to one
another."  In  the  demonstration of this theorem, a triangle having two
equal angles is regarded as given or granted. That figure or geometrical
condition is a fact obtained by hypothesis. It is the fact stated in the
hypothesis, or the if-clause, of the theorem. If the geometrical reality
of  that fact itself is questioned, the answer would have to be obtained
by  a prior proof that such a figure, conforming to the definition of an
isosceles   triangle,  can  be  constructed  by  the  use  of  no  other
instruments  than a straight edge and a compass. The construction is not
made,  however,  as part of the proof of Theorem 6, any more than is the
demonstration of an antecedent theorem, which may have to be used in the
proof of Theorem 6. In the proof of Theorem 6, the first line, beginning
with  the  word "let," declares that the construe tibility of the figure
is  to be taken for granted as a matter of hypothesis. The whole problem
of  Theorem  6  is  to  prove  that the then-clause follows from the if-
clause.   Euclid   appears  to  accomplish  this  by  introducing  other
propositions—drawn from his axioms, definitions, postulates, or theorems
previously  demonstrated—which  establish this connection and so certify
the  conclusion  as following from the hypothesis. Two points about this
procedure should be noted. First, the conclusion does not follow from

[808a]
750  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the hypothesis directly, for if that were so, the
"if-then" proposition would be self-evident and would need no proof. The
mind  which sees immediately that the sides opposite to the equal angles
in  an  isosceles  triangle  are  necessarily  equal  does  not need any
demonstration  of  the  connection between equal angles and equal sides.
The Euclidean demonstration consists in making this connection, which is
not immediately evident, mediately evident; that is, evident through the
mediation  of  other  propositions. It is not the hypothesis alone which
proves  the  conclusion,  but  the  hypothesis  in  the company of other
propositions  which  serve  to  take  the  mind  step  by  step from the
hypothesis  granted  to  the  conclusion impHed. Second, the proposition
with  the  truth  of  which  the  reasoning  seems  to  end  is  not the
proposition  to  be  proved.  The  Q.E.D.  at  the  end  of  a  EucUdean
demonstration  does  not  apply  to  the last proposition in the line of
proof,  but  to  the  theorem  itself, for that is the proposition to be
proved.  The  last proposition in the reasoning is merely the consequent
which,  according  to  the  theorem,  is  proposed as following from the
hypothesis.  When  he  is able to verify the proposed connection between
the  hypothesis  and its conclusion or consequent, Euclid says Q.E.D. to
the theorem as a whole the whole if-then statement. The process of proof
seems  to  be  the  same when the theorem is stated categorically rather
than  hypothetically.  For example, Theorem 6 might have been stated, as
other  Euclidean  theorems  are,  in  the  following manner: *'The sides
subtended  by equal angles in a triangle are also equal to one another."
This  variation  in  mode  of statement raises a question, not about the
meaning  of "by hypothesis" in Euclidean proof, but about the difference
between   hypothetical  and  categorical  propositions,  which  we  will
consider  later. The Euclidean use of a given (that is, a constructible)
figure  as  an  hypothesis  does  not  seem  to  be a method of making a
supposition in order to discover its impUcations. Nor does it seem to be
a  way  of  testing  the  truth  of  an  hypothesis  by reference to its
consequences. Both of these aspects of hypothetical reasoning do appear,
however, in Plato's dialogues.

[808b]
In  the  Meno,  for example, Socrates proposes, at a certain turn in the
conversation  about virtue and knowledge, that he and Meno entertain the
hypothesis that virtue is knowledge. Socrates immediately inquires about
the  consequences. "If virtue is knowledge," he asks, "will it be taught
V Since Meno already understands that knowledge is teachable, he answers
the  question  affirmatively.  The utility of adI vancing the hypothesis
that  virtue  is  knowledge  gradually  appears in the next phase of the
dialogue,  wherein it is discovered that virtue is not teachable at all,
or at least not in the way in which the arts and sciences are teachable.
The  discovery  throws  some  doubt  on the truth of the hypothesis that
virtue  is  knowledge;  at least it does not seem to be knowledge in the
same sense as science or art. This mode of reasoning exemplifies the use
of  an  hypothesis  to  test its truth in terms of its consequences. The
underlying  logical  principle  is  that  the denial of the consequences
requires  a  denial of the antecedent hypothesis, just as an affirmation
of  the  antecedent  would  require  an  affirmation  of the consequent.
Nothing  follows  logically  from a denial of the hypothesis, or from an
affirmation  of  its  consequences.  This  example  from  the  Meno also
illustrates   the   difference  between  Euclid's  and  Plato's  use  of
hypotheses.  Socrates  is  not  here  trying  to prove that //"virtue is
knowledge,  then  virtue is teachable. The validity of the foregoing if-
then statement is already understood in terms of the fact that knowledge
is teachable. With the ifthen statement accepted as valid, Socrates uses
it  for  the  purpose of ascertaining whether or in what sense virtue is
knowledge.  It  is  not  the  hypothetical or if-then statement which is
proved,  but  the  hypothesis— the antecedent in that statement—which is
tested. The same general method of employing hypotheses and testing them
is  found in the empirical sciences. In medical practice, the physician,
according  to  Hippocrates, "must be able to form a judgment from having
made  himself  acquainted  with  all  the symptoms, and estimating their
powers  in  comparison  with  one  another";  he  should then "cultivate
prognosis," since "he will manage the cure best who has foreseen what is
to happen from the present state of matters."

[809a]
Chapter   36:  HYPOTHESIS  751  The  preliminary'  diagnosis  states  an
hypothesis (what the disease may be) and the prognosis foresees a set of
consequences  (what  is  Hkcly  to  happen if the diagnosis is correct).
Observation  of  the  course  of the symptoms and the patient's changing
condition   will   either   confirm   or  in-  \alidate  the  prognosis.
Confirmation  leaves the diagnosis a lucky guess, but fails to prove it.
If the disease does not run the predicted course, however, the diagnosis
on which the prognosis was based can be dismissed as a false hypothesis.
When  an hypothesis takes the form of a prediction of what should happen
if  the  hypothesis  is  true,  the failure of the consequences to occur
refutes   the   hypothesis.  Though  discussions  of  scientific  method
frequently  speak  of  "prediction  and  verification," it would seem as
though  prediction  can  only  lead  to  the refutation of an hypothesis
rather  than  to  its verification. An hypothesis is overthrown when its
prediction fails, but it is not verified when its prediction comes true.
To  think  that  it can be verified in this way is to commit the logical
fallacy  of  arguing  from the truth of a conclusion to the truth of its
premises.  How,  then, do empirical scientists prove an hypothesis to be
true  ?  What do they mean by prediction and verification in relation to
the  use  of hypothesis.? There seem to be two possible ways in which an
hypothesis  can be proved by empirical or experimental research. One way
can  be used when we know that the consequences implied follow only from
the  truth  of  the  hypothesis.  Should  the  consequences  implied  be
impossible  unless  the supposed condition exists, then the confirmation
of  the prediction verifies the hypothesis. The other possible method of
verification  has  come  to  be  called  "the method of multiple working
hypotheses." The validity of this method depends on our knowing that the
several   hypotheses   being   entertained   exhaust  all  the  relevant
possibilities.  Each  hypothesis  gencrates  a  prediction;  and if upon
investigation  the  observed  facts  negate every prediction except one,
then  that  one  remaining hypothesis is verified. If negative instances
have  eUminated  the  false hypotheses, the hypothesis remaining must be
true, on the condition, of course, that it is the only possibility which
is left.

[809b]
Both of these methods seem to Ix* valid only if a prerequisite condition
is  fulfilled.  To verify one of a series of multiple hypotheses through
the  elimination  of  the  others,  the  scientist  must  knf)w that the
hypotheses  enumerated  are  truly  exhaustive. In the verification of a
single  hypothesis  by the confirmation of its predictirm, the scientist
must  know  that  the  observeti  consequences  can follow from no other
supposition.  Since  such  knowledge  is  often unavailable, probability
rather  than  complete  proof  results from the testing of hypotheses by
observation  or experiment. In his Treatise on the Vacuum, Pascal offers
a  summary  of  the  logical  situation  by distinguishing the true, the
false,  and the doubtful or probable hypothesis. "Sometimes its negation
brings  a  conclusion  of  obvious absurdity, and then the hypothesis is
true  and  invariable.  Or  else  one  deduces an obvious error from its
affirmation,  and  then the hypothesis is held to be false. And when one
has  not  been  able  to  find any mistake either in its negation or its
affirmation,  then  the  hypothesis  remains doubtful, so that, in order
that  the  hypothesis mav be demonstrable, it is not enough that all the
phenomena  result  from  it, but rather it is necessary, if there ensues
something  contrary to a single one of the expected phenomena, that this
suffice  to  establish  its falsity." Both the use of hypotheses and the
method  of verifying them vary from science to science, according as the
character  of the science happens to be purely empirical {e.g., the work
of  Hippocrates,  Darwin,  Freud),  or  experimental  {e.g., the work of
Harvey   and   Faraday),   or  a  combination  of  experimentation  with
mathematical reasoning {e.g., the work of Galileo, Newton, Fourier). Not
all  scientific work is directed or controlled by hypotheses, but in the
absence of well-formulated hypotheses, the research can hardly be better
than  exploration.  A well-constructed experiment, especially what Bacon
calls  an  experimentum crucis, derives its demonstrative character from
the  hypothetical  reasoning  which formulates the problem to be solved.
The  value  of  such  a  crucial experiment appears in Bacon's reasoning
about the rise and fall of the tides. "If it be found," he writes, "that
during the ebb the surface of the

[810a]
752  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  waters at sea is more curved and round, from the
waters  rising in the middle, and sinking at the sides or coast, and if,
during  a flood, it be more even and level, from the waters returning to
their  former  position,  then assuredly, by this decisive instance, the
raising  of  them  by a magnetic force can be admitted; if otherwise, it
must  be  entirely  rejected." In the field of mathematical physics, and
particularly  in  astronomy,  the meaning of hypothesis is both enlarged
and  altered.  So  far  we  have  considered hypotheses which are single
propositions implying certain consequences. But in mathematical physics,
a  whole theory—a complex system of propositions—comes to be regarded as
a  single hypothesis. In his preface to the work of Copernicus, Osiander
says  that the task of the astronomer is "to use painstaking and skilled
observation   in   gathering  together  the  history  of  the  celestial
movements;  and  then—since he cannot by any line of reasoning reach the
true causes of these movements— to think up or construct whatever causes
or  hypotheses he pleases, such that, by the assumption of these causes,
those  same movements can be calculated from the principles of geometry,
for  the  past and for the future too." The elaborate system constructed
by  Copernicus  and  the  system constructed by Ptolemy which Copernicus
hopes  to  replace  are sometimes called "the Copernican hypothesis" and
"the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis"  ;  and  soinetimes  these two theories are
referred   to  as  "the  hehocentric  hypothesis"  and  "the  geocentric
hypothesis."  A  whole theory, regarded as an hypothesis, must be tested
in a different way from a single proposition whose implication generates
a prediction. As rival hypotheses, one theory may be superior to another
in  internal  consistency  or  in  mathematical simplicity and elegance.
Kepler  is  thus  able to argue against Ptolemy by appealing to criteria
which  Ptolemy  accepts,  pointing  out  that Ptolemy himself wishes "to
construct  hypotheses  which  are  as simple as possible, if that can be
done.   And   so   if   anyone   constructs   simpler   hypotheses  than
he—understanding simplicity geometrically— he, on the contrary, will not
defend  his composite hypotheses." But even if the Copernican hypothesis
is superior on the grounds of being geometrically

[810b]
simpler,  it  must  meet  another  test.  As indicated in the chapter on
Astronomy,  mathematical  theories about physical phenomena must be more
than ideal constructions of possible universes. They must try to account
for  this  one real world and are therefore subject to the test of their
applicability  to  reality. However elegant it may be mathematically, an
hypothesis  —when  considered  from  the  point  of  view of physics— is
satisfactory  only  if  it accounts for the phenomena it was invented to
explain.  In the words of Simplicius, it must "save the appearances." An
hypothesis can therefore be tested for its application to reality by the
way  in  which  it  fits  the  observed  facts. "In those sciences where
mathematical  demonstrations  are applied to natural phenomena," Galileo
writes,  "the  principles"  which  are  "the  foundations  of the entire
superstructure" must be "established by wellchosen experiments." By such
means   Galileo   chooses   between  the  hypothesis  that  the  uniform
acceleration  of  a  freely falling body is proportional to the units of
space  traversed and the hypothesis that it is proportional to the units
of  time  elapsed.  To  borrow  Plato's  expression  in the Timaeus, the
mathematical  consistency  ofa  theory  makes  it  "a likely story." The
theoretical  integrity  of  the  hypothesis  makes it credible. But when
competing   credible   hypotheses   exist,   each  saving  the  relevant
appearances  equally well, which is to be believed? The fact that one of
them,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Copernican-Ptolemaic  controversy, is
mathematically  superior  cannot decide the question, since the question
is,  Which  is  true  of  reaUty  ? Sometimes a single fact, such as the
phenomenon  of the Foucault pendulum, may exercise a decisive influence,
if  one  of the two competing theories finds that fact congenial and the
other leaves it inexplicable. Sometimes, as appears in the discussion of
the Copernican hypothesis in the chapter on Astronomy, of two hypotheses
which  are  equally satisfactory so far as purely astronomical phenomena
are  concerned,  one  may  have  the additional virtue of covering other
fields of phenomena which that hypothesis was not originally designed to
explain. As interpreted by Kepler and as developed in Newton's theory of
universal gravitation,

[811a]
Chapter  36: HYPOTHESIS the Copcrnican hypothesis brings the terrestrial
phenomena  of  the tides and of faUing bodies under the same set of laws
which  apphes  to  llie  celestial  motions. The hypothesis then has the
amazing quality of consilience—a bringing together under one formulation
of  plicnomena  not  previously  thought to be related. This seems to be
what  Huygens  has  in  mind w hen he considers the degree of probabiUty
that  is  attainable  through  experimental research." We have "scarcely
less  than  complete  proof,"  he  writes,  when "things which have been
demonstrated  by  the  principles  assumed,  correspond perfectly to the
phenomena  which  experiment has brought under observation; and further,
principally,  when one can imagine and foresee new phenomena which ought
.to  follow  from  the  hypotheses which one employs, and when one finds
that  therein  the  fact  corresponds to our prevision." Then, in common
parlance,  we  say that it is no longer a theory, but has become a fact.
Yet the question remains whether the empirical tests which eliminate the
less  satisfactory  hypothesis  can  ever  make  the more satisfactory I
hypothesis  more  than a likely story. In the Mathematical Principles of
Natural  Philosophy,  Newton says, "I have not been able to discover the
cause  of  those  properties  of  gravity from phenomena, and I frame no
hypotheses;  for  whatever  is  not  deduced from the phenomena is to be
called  an hypothesis; and hvpotheses, whether metaphysical or physical,
whether of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental
philosophy."  The context of this passage, and of a similar statement at
the  end  of  the Optics, as well as the association in Newton's mind of
hypotheses  with occult qualities, substantial forms, and hidden causes,
seems  to  indicate  a  special  meanj  ing  of  "hypothesis."  New  ton
criticizes  the  vortices in the physics of Descartes on the ground that
it  is unnecessary to appeal to occult or unobservable entities in order
to  explain  natural  phenomena.  The  I  Cartesian  vortices,  like the
substantial  forms  of  Aristotle, are, for Newton, hypotheses in a very
special  sense.  They  are  hypothetical entities. They are not inferred
from the phenomena. Although treated as if they were realities under-

[811b]
753  lying  ilic  phenomena,  they  are,  as Gilbert says of ihc primttm
mobile,  a  "fiction,  something not comprehensible by any reasoning and
evidenced  by  no  visible star, but purely a product of imagination and
mathematical  hy}X)ihcsis."  There  is  almost  a  play on words in this
identification of hypotheses with imaginary entities to which reality is
attributed;  for  in their Greek and Latin roots, the words "hypothesis"
and  "hypostasis,"  "supposition"  and "substance," are closely related.
The  first  word  in  each of these pairs refers to a proposition wiiich
underlies reasoning, the second to a reality NNhich underlies observable
qualities or phenomena. To make hypotheses, in the sense in which Newton
excludes  them  from  experimental  philosophy,  is to hypostatize or to
reify, that is, to make a thing out of, or to give reality to, a fiction
or construction of the mind. It has seemed to some critics that, no less
than the Cartesian vortices, the ether in Newton's theory of light is an
hypothesis  in  precisely  this  sense—an  imaginary  entity.  For  many
centuries,  the  atoms  and  molecules  postulated  to  explain chemical
combinations  and  changes  were  attacked  as  fictions and defended as
useful  hypotheses.  On  the  one hand, there is an issue concerning the
theoretic  usefulness  of  such  constructions; on the other, a question
concerning  their  counterparts in reality. It is sometimes thought that
fictions are useful for purposes of explanation even when their unreahty
is  admitted.  Rousseau,  for  example, explicitly denies any historical
reality  to  the  idea  of  man living in a state of nature prior to the
formation of society by the social contract. In this matter, he says, we
can lay "facts aside, as they do not affect the question." These related
notions—  the  state  of  nature  and  the  social  contract—are "rather
calculated  to  explain  the  nature  of things, than to ascertain their
actual  origin;  just hke the hypotheses which our physicists daily form
respecting  the  formation of the world." Similarly Lavoisier posits the
existence  of "caloric" for its explanatory value. "It is difficult," he
writes,  "to  comprehend  these phenomena, without admitting them as the
eflects  of a real and material substance, or very subtile lluid, which,
insinuating  itself between the particles of bodies, separates them from
each

[812a]
754  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  other;  and, even allowing the existence of this
fluid  to  be hypothetical, we shall see in the sequel, that it explains
the  phenomena  of  nature  in  a  very  satisfactory manner." One other
meaning of hypothesis remains to be considered. It is the sense in which
postulates   or   assumptions  are  distinguished  from  axioms  in  the
foundations  of  a science. In Euclid's geometry, as in Descartes', both
sorts  of  principles  appear.  The  axioms  or common notions are those
propositions  which  are  immediately seen to be true without proof. The
postulates  or  assumptions are hypotheses in the sense that their truth
is  taken for granted without proof. Both sorts of propositions serve as
principles  or starting points for the demonstration of theorems, or the
conclusions of the science. Both are principles of demonstration in that
they are used to demonstrate other propositions without themselves being
demonstrated.  But  axioms  are  traditionally regarded as intrinsically
indemonstrable,  whereas hypotheses postulates or assumptions—may not be
indemonstrable.  They  are  simply  asserted  without demonstration. The
possibility  of  demonstrating an hypothesis gives it the character of a
provisional  assumption. In the Discourse on Method, Descartes refers to
certain  matters assumed in his Dioptrics and Meteors, and expresses his
concern  lest  the  reader  should  take  "offence  because  I call them
hypotheses  and  do not appear to care about their proof." He goes on to
say:  "I  have not named them hypotheses with any other object than that
it  may  be  known that while I consider myself able to deduce them from
the  primary  truths which I explained above, yet I particularly desired
not to do so, in order that certain persons may not for this reason take
occasion  to build up some extravagant philosophical system on what they
take to be my principles." The distinction between axioms and postulates
or  hypotheses  raises two issues. The first concerns the genuineness of
the  distinction  itself.  Axioms,  self-evident  propositions,  or what
William  James  calls  "necessary  truths," have been denied entirely or
dismissed as tautologies. The only principles of science must then be

[812b]
hypotheses—assumptions  voluntarily  made or conventionally agreed upon.
This  issue  is  more  fully  discussed in the chapter on Principle. The
other issue presupposes the reality of the distinction, but is concerned
with different applications of it in the analysis of science. Aristotle,
for  example,  defines  scientific knowledge in terms of three elements,
one  of which consists of the primary premises upon which demonstrations
rest. The principles of a particular science may be axioms in the strict
sense  of being self-evident truths and hence absolutely indemonstrable;
or  they may be provisional assumptions which, though not proved in this
science,  can  nevertheless  be  proved  by a higher science, as in "the
application  of  geometrical  demonstrations to theorems in mechanics or
optics,  or  of  arithmetical demonstrations to those of harmonics." The
latter are not axioms because they are demonstrable; yet in a particular
science  they  may  play  the  role  of axioms insofar as they are used,
without being demonstrated, to demonstrate other propositions. Reasoning
which  rests  either  on  axioms or on demonstrable principles Aristotle
calls  scientific,  but  reasoning  which  rests  only  on hypotheses he
regards  as  dialectical. Reasoning results in scientific demonstration,
according  to  Aristotle,  "when  the  premises from which the reasoning
starts  are true and primary, or are such that our knowledge of them has
originally  come  through  premises  which  are  primary  and  true." In
contrast, reasoning is dialectical "if it reasons from opinions that are
generally  accepted,"  and,  Aristotle  explains,  "those  opinions  are
'generally  accepted'  which are accepted by everyone or by the majority
or  by  the  philosophers i.e., by all, or by a majority, or by the most
notable  and  illustrious  of  them."  In  another  place,  he  adds one
important  qualification.  In  defining a dialectical proposition as one
that  is  "held  by  all  men or by most men or by the philosophers," he
adds:  "provided  it  be  not contrary to the general opinion; for a man
would  assent  :o  the  view  of  the  philosophers, only if it were not
contrary  to  the  opinions  ofmost  men."  For  Aristotle,  dialectical
reasoning  or argument moves entirely within the sphere of opinion. Even
an  opinion generally accepted, not only by the philosophers but also by
most

[813a]
men,   remains   an   opinion.  The  best  opinions  are  probabilities—
propositions  which arc not selfevident and which cannot be proved. They
are  not  merely /^ror/i/o;?^/ assumptions. Resting on assumptions which
cannot  ever  be  more  than  probable,  the  conclusions of dialectical
reasoning are also never more than probable. Since they lack the certain
foundation which axioms give, they cannot have the certitude of science.
Plato,  on the other hand, seems to think that the mathematical sciences
are  hypothetical  in  their foundation, and that only in the science of
dialectic,  which  he  considers the highest science, does the mind rise
from  mere  hypotheses  to  the  ultimate  principles of knowledge, "The
students  of  geometry,  arithmetic, and the kindred sciences," Socrates
says  in the Republic^ "assume the odd and the even, and the figures and
the  three  kinds  of  angle  and  the like in their several branches of
science;  these  are  their  hypotheses,  which  they  and everybody are
supposed  to know, and therefore they do not deign to give an account of
them  either  to  themselves  or  others."  There  is  a  higher sort of
knowledge,  he  goes  on,  "which reason herself attains by the power of
dialectic,  using  the  hypotheses  not as first principles, but only as
hypotheses that is to say, as steps and points of departure into a world
which  is  above  hypotheses,  in order that she may soar beyond them to
first  principles."  The  issue  between Plato and Aristotle may be only
verbal—a   difference  in  the  use  of  such  words  as  "science"  and
"dialectic."  Whether it is verbal or real is considered in the chapters
on Dialectic and Metaphysics. In any case, the issue throws light on the
difference  between  an  hypothesis  as a merely provisional assumption,
susceptible  to  proof  by  higher  principles,  and  an hypothesis as a
probability  taken  for  granted  for the purposes of argument, which is
itself  incapable  of  being  proved.  Finally we come to the meaning of
"hypothetical"  in  the  analysis  of  propositions  and syllogisms. The
distinction  between the categorical and the hypothetical proposition or
syllogism,  briefly  touched  on in Aristotle's Organon, is developed in
the  tradition  of  logic  which  begins  with that book. In his work on
Interpretation he distin-

[813b]
Chapter   36:   HYPOTHESIS  755  guishes  between  simple  and  compound
propositions.  The  compound  proposition  consists  of  several  simple
propjsi lions in s<imc logical relation to one another. In the tradition
of  logical  analysis, three basic types of relation have been defmcd as
constituting three different kinds of com^x)und proposition. One type of
relation  is the conjunctive; it is signified by the word "and." Another
is  the  disjunctit'e\ it is signified by the words "either . . . or . .
." The third type is the hypothetical and is signified by the words "if.
.  .  then  .  .  ." To take an example we have already used, "virtue is
knowledge"  and  "virtue  is  teachable"  are  simple  propositions.  In
contrast,  the  statement,  "//"virtue  is  knowledge,  then  virtue  is
teachable,"  is  a  compound  proposition,  hypothetical in form. If the
proposition were stated in the sentence, ''either virtue is knowledge or
it  is not teachable," it would be disjunctive in form; if stated in the
sentence  "virtue  is  knowledge  and  virtue is teachable," it would be
conjunctive  in  form.  In  each  of  these  three  cases,  the compound
proposition consists of the two simple propositions with which we began,
though  in  each  case  they  appear  to be differently related. Whereas
Aristotle  divides  propositions  into simple and compound, Kant divides
all   judgments   into   the  categorical,  the  hypothetical,  and  the
disjunctive.  In  the  categorical  judgment,  he says, "we consider two
concepts";  in  the  hypothetical, "two judgements"; in the disjunctive,
"several  judgements in their relation to one another." As an example of
the  hypothetical  proposition,  he  offers  the  statement, "If perfect
justice  exists,  the obstinately wicked are punished." As an example of
the disjunctive judgment, "we may say . . .
[that]
the world exists either by blind chance, or by internal necessity, or by
an  external  cause." Each of these three alternatives, Kant points out,
"occupies  a part of the sphere of all possible knowledge with regard to
the existence of the world, while all together occupy the whole sphere."
The  hypothetical  judgment does no more than state "the relation of two
propositions  .  .  .  Whether  both these propositions are true remains
unsettled.  It  is only the consequence," Kant says, "which is laid down
by this judgement."

[814a]
756  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  In  the Prior Analytics, Aristotle distinguishes
between  the  categorical  and the hypothetical syllogism. The following
reasoning  is  categorical  in  form: "Knowledge is teachable, virtue is
knowledge;  therefore,  virtue is teachable." The following reasoning is
hypothetical  in  form:"//"virtue  is  knowledge,  it  is teachable; but
virtue  is  knowledge;  therefore  it  is  teachable";  or "//"virtue is
knowledge, it is teachable; but virtue is not teachable; therefore it is
not  knowledge." The basic issue with respect to the distinction between
categorical and hypothetical syllogisms is whether the latter are always
reducible  to the former. One thing seems to be clear. The rules for the
hypothetical  syllogism  formally parallel the rules for the categorical
syllogism. In hypothetical reasoning, the consequent must be affirmed if
the  antecedent  is  affirmed;  the  antecedent  must  be  denied if the
consequent  is  denied. In categorical reasoning, the affirmation of the
premises  requires an affirmation of the conclusion, and a denial of the
conclusion  requires  a  denial  of  the  premises.  With respect to the
distinction  between the categorical and hypothetical proposition, there
is  also  an issue whether propositions stated in one form can always be
converted  into  propositions  having  the  other  form of statement. In
modern  mathematical  logic,  for example, general propositions, such as
"All  men  are mortal," are sometimes expressed in hypothetical form: 1.
The  use  of  hypotheses  in  the  process  of dialectic 2. Hypothetical
reasoning   and   hypothetical   constructions   in  philosophy  3.  The
foundations  of  mathematics:  postulates,  assumptions  4.  The role of
hypotheses  in  science 4^. Theories, provisional assumptions, fictions,
reifications tions potheses 4fd. The task of verification: the plurality
of hypotheses and the categorical

[814b]
"If  anything  is  a man, it is mortal." Logicians like Bertrand Russell
think  that  the  hypothetical  form is more exact because it explicitly
refrains  from  suggesting  that men exist; it merely states that if the
class  'man'  should have any existent members, they will also belong to
the  —  class  'mortal.'  fl Apart from the question whether a universal
proposition  should  or  should  not  be  interpreted  as  asserting the
existence of anything, there seems to be a formal difference between the
categorical and hypothetical proposition. This is manifest only when the
hypothetical  is  truly  a  compound  proposition,  not  when  it is the
statement of a simple proposition in hypothetical form, as, for example,
the  simple  proposition "All men are mortal," is stated in hypothetical
form  by  "If  anything  is  a man, it is mortal." Because it is truly a
comyjound  proposition,  and  not merely the hypothetical statement of a
general  proposition,  the  proposition,  "If  virtue is knowledge, then
virtue  is  teachable,"  cannot  be  restated  in  the  form of a simple
categorical   proposition.   A   simple   proposition,   whether  stated
categorically  or  hypothetically,  may  be  the  conclusion of either a
categorical  or a hypothetical syllogism. But the hypothetical statement
which  is  really  a compound proposition can never be the conclusion of
any  sort  of  syllogism,  though  it  may  be  one  of  the premises in
hypothetical  reasoning.  OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 757 758 4^. The purpose
of  hypotheses: saving the appearances; the formulation of predic759 4r.
Consistency,  simplicity, and beauty as standards in the construction of
hy5.  Hypothetical  propositions and syllogisms: the distinction between
the hypothetical '60

[815a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homi-r: IliaJ, hk ii [265 28^] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the vohmie in the set; the number 12d indicates that the pas
sage is in section d of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is printed
in  one cokimn, the letters a and b refer to the upperandlower halves of
the  page.  For example, in 53 ]ames: Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage
begins  in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half of page
119.  When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer
to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of the lefthand sideof the page, the
letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right hand side of
the  page.  F'or  example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the  lower half of the left-hand sideof page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half  of the right-hand sideof page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. 1, The use of hypotheses in the
process  of  dialectic  7  Plato:  Charmides, 9d-10a / Protagoras, 49a /
Meno,  183b-190a,c  / Phaedo, 242b-243c / Republic, bk iv, 350d-351b; bk
vi,  383d-388a  esp  386d-388a;  bk  vii, 397a-398c / Timaeus, 462 b-c /
Parmenides, 491a-511d / Sophist, 570a-d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk
i, ch i [24^21- ^16] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 6
[75*18-28]
103a-b  /  Topics  143a-223a,c  esp  bki,  ch  1-3  143a-144b,  ch io-ii
147b-148c,  '^'  ch  14  149a-d,  bk  vtii  211a-223a,c  " 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  7 112b-113d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 227a-230c esp
227d-228b   /   Science  of  Right,  ^57a-h  /  Judgement,  603  b-c  2.
Hypothetical  reasoning  and  hypothetical constructions in philosophy 7
Plato:   Meno,  183b-190a,c  /  Phaedo,  242b243c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,
386d-388a;  bk  vii,  397a-398c  /  Parmenides,  491a-511d  8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[72*19-21]
98d; bk II, CH 6 125d-126b / Heavens, bk i, ch 12
[281^3-25]
373a-b  / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 3 [1005^5-17] 524c-d 19 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 14, A 6, ANs 680c-681a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
258d-259a

[815b]
Chapter   36:  HYPO'I'HKSIS  757  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23a-c  /
Discourse,  part  ii-iii,  44c-50b passim; part vi, 66a-b / Meditations,
72b,d; i-ii, 75a-78a / Objections and Replies, 123d-124c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch i, sect i 25a-c / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect
10  123b-d;  ch  xiii,  sect  19-20 152c-d; ch xxiii, sect 1-2 204a-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div  107 499c-500b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  329a-331d passim, esp 329d-330b; 333d-334a; 348a,c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 7a-d; 176d-177b; 186d187a; 194b-200c; 227a-230c; 232c 233d
/  Science of Right, 457a-b / Judgement. 603 b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,   intro,   156d158a  53  James:  Psychology,  84a-119b  passim;
221a238b;  820b-827a;  880b-886a  esp  884b  886a  ,  The foundations of
mathematics:  postulates,  assumptions 7 Plato: Meno, 183b-c / Republic,
bk  vi, 386d388a; bk vii, 397c-d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i,
ch i
[7i''i -16] 97a-b;' ch 2
[72*19-24] 98d; ch
10 104d-105d; ch 12
[77*36-^15] 106c-d; bk
ii, ch 9 [93^21-25] 128a-b / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[185*1-3]
259c-d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 4
[302*^27-31] 394a / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 3

[816a]
(3. The foundations of mathematics: postulates, assumptions.^
[1061^29-^4]
589c; BK XIII, CH 2
[1077^11]-
CH  3  [1078*31]  609a-d  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 8 [1151*15-19]
402a  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  i,  postulates-common  NOTIONS  2a  11
Archimedes:  Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, assumptions 404b / Spirals, 484b
/  Quadrature  of  the  Parabola, 527a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, u, 2d-3b /
Meditations^  73a  /  Geometry,  bk  ii,  304a-305a;  316a-b  33 Pascal:
Pensees,  1-5 171a-173a / Vacuum, 365b-366a / Geometrical Demonstration,
430b439b  passim;  442a-443b  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b 34 HuYGENs:
Light,  pref,  551b-552a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii,
SECT 1-7 358c-360c passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 17d-18d; 24c-25b; 46a-c;
IlOa;  211c-218d  esp  217a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  302d-303b; 312c-d;
330d-331a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical Elements ofEthics, 376C'd / Judgement,
551a-553c  43  Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445b-c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  175  b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazot',  bkv, 120d121b 53 James: Psychology, 869a-870a; 874a-878a 4.
The  role  of hypotheses in science 7 Plato: Meno, 183b-c / Republic, bk
vi,  386d388a  /  Timaeus,  447a-d 8 Aristotle : Meteorology, bk i, ch 7
[344^5-9]  450b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, ch 6 [io7i^i2]-ch 7 [1072*22]
601b-602b;  ch 8 603b-605a 10 Hippocrates: Prognostics, par i 19a-b; par
25  26a,c  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, a I, REP 2 175d-178a; part
i-ii,  q  14,  a  6,  ans  680c-681a  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph
105-106  128b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xii, 23a-c / Discourse, p\RT VI,
66a-b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 368b-370a 34 Ne-wto^: Principles, bk hi, rule i
270a; rule IV 271b; GENERAL scHOL, 371b-372a / Optics, bk III, 543a-b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, SECT 16 317a-c; ch xii, sect
12-13  362a-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  118a-119a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  7a-d  /Judgement,  603b-c  45  Lavoisier: Elements ofChemistry,
pref,  2a-b;  6d-7a;  part  i, 23b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 184a 45
Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 467a-b; 607a,c; 851a-c

[816b]
758 THE GREAT IDEAS 4 to 4a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c / Descent
of  Man,  590a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiii, 563a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  324b;  862a-866a;  882a884b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of
Dreams,  351c  /  Narcissism, 400d-401a / Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
661c-662b  4a. Theories, provisional assumptions, fictions, reifications
7  Plato:  Meno,  183b-c  /  Republic, bk vi, 386d388a; bk vii, 397c-d /
Timaeus,  447d-450c  /  Laws,  BK  VII,  730a-c  8  Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 10
[76^22-77*4] 105c-d / Heavens, bk
i, ch 12
[281^3-25] 373a-b; bk ii, ch 5 379b-c / Metaphysics, bk vi, ch
I
[i025*'i-i3] 547b; bk xi,
ch  7 [1064*4-9] 592b; bk xii, ch 6 [1071^12]- ch 7 [1072*22] 601b-602b;
ch  8  603b-605a  11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of Planes, bk i, postulates
502a-b  /  Floating  Bodies, bk i, POSTULATE I 538a; postulate 2 541b 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk hi, 83a; 86b-87a; bk IX, 270b-273a; 291a-292a; bk
xiii,  429a-b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i,
513b-514b;  bk  hi, 628b-629a; bk iv, 675b-678a; bk v, 740a-b; 784b-785b
16  Kepler:  Epito7ne, bk iv, 863b-872b; 890b892a; 929a-b; 932a-933a; bk
v,   964b;   966a967a;  984b-985b;  991a-994b  /  Harmonies  the  World,
1023b-1080b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 32, a I, rep 2
175d-178a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 258d-259a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi,
108b-110b  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 179c-d; third day,
200a-d;  203d-205b;  FOURTH DAY, 240d-241c 28 Harvey: Circulation of the
Blood,  316a-318b  passim,  esp  316a-b  / On Animal Generation, 383d 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 66 114d115c; BK II, APH 36, 165d-166b;
aph  46,  178c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23a-c  33 Pascal: Pensees,
'j2,lS2h/  Vacuum,  367a-370a  34  Newton: Principles, bk ii, hypothesis
259a;  BK  III,  hypothesis  I  285a; hypothesis ii 331b; GENERAL scHOL,
371b-372a  /  Optics,  BK  I,  379a;  bk  hi,  516a-544a  esp 520a'522b,
525b-530b   34  Huygens  :  Light,  ch  i,  557b-560b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv, ch hi, SECT i6 317a-c; ch xii, sect 13 362c-d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi, 118a-119a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 227d-228b /
Science  of  Right, 457a-b / Judgement, 603 b-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445  b-c  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 9a10b 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity, 273a-277a; 758a-759c; 777d-778c; 830b-832c;
850b, d855a,c esp 850b,d-851c

[817a]
b  4t^ to 4^ Chapter 36: HYPOTHESIS 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 42a 53
jAMEs:Pi>'«rAo/o^>',  xiiib-xiva;95a;231b  [In  \\ 54 Freud: Narcissism,
400d  40  Id / Instincts, 412a-b / General Introduction, 483d-485a / New
IrUroductory  Lectures,  81  8c  -81  9b  Ah. The purpose of hypotheses:
saving  the  appearances;  the formulation of predictions 7 Plato: Meno,
183b-c / Republic, bk vi, 386d388a; bk vh, 397a-398c / Timaeus, 447a-d 8
Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 5 379b-c; BK III, CH 7 [306*1-18] 397b-c /
Meteorology, BK I, CH 7 [344*5-9] 450b 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine,
par i lab / Prognostics, par i 19a-b; par 25 26a,c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest,
bk  hi, 83a; bk ix, 270b273a; bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions
of  the  Heavenly  Spheres, 505a-506a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 852a-b;
888b-890b; 911a-b; 929a; bk v, 964b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
4  27d-28a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 32, a I, rep 2
175d-178a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 119a-b 28 Harvey: Circulation of
the  Blood, 316a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 18, 149d; APH 36,
165d-166a  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part vi, 66a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  viii  [66-84]  233b234a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general
schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics,  bk  i,  379a  34  Huygens:  Light,  pref,
551b-552a;  ch  i,  553a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi,
SECT  16  317a-c;  ch  xii, sect 13 362c-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  105  433b-c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div«26 460b-c;
SECT  ix, div 82 487b-c; sect xi, div 107, 499d-500a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy, 272b-273b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329d-330a; 333d-334a 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 228b-c / Science of Right, 457a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  part  i, 9d10a; PAJR.T II, 62a-63a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  850b,  d851c  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 42a; 239c 53
James: Psychology, 357b; 367b
[fn
5]; 655a; 862a-863a; 883a-884b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 483d-484a
/   Group  Psychology,  686c-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  840a4c.
Consistency,  simplicity, and beauty as standards in the construction of
hypotheses  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  hi,  93a;  bk  xiii,  429a-b 16
Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly

[817b]
759  Spheres, 505a 506a; 507a 508a; bk iv, 675b678a csp 677b 678a: bk v.
740a b: 784b 785b 16 Kkim.kr: Epitome, hk iv, 888b 890a; bk \, 984 b 985
b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 227d 228d / Judgement, 551a 553c 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of Chemistry, part ii, 62a-63a 53 James: Psychology, 655a 659a
csp  655a,  657b  658b  54  Freud: Narcissism, 400d-401a 4d. The task of
verification:  the  plurality of hypotheses 6 Herodotus: History, bk 11,
49a  -c  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  14 387d-389d; bk hi, ch 7
[306*6-18]  397b-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 14, 177a178d 11
Archimedes: Sand- Reckoner, 520a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[703-711]  89c-d  16 Ptoi^emy: Almagest, bk i, 9a-12b; bk hi, 86b93a; bk
iv,  120a-122b  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly Spheres,
505a-506a;  bk i, 514b-515b; bk hi, 653b-656b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
852a-b:  857b-860b:  907b-916a  /  Harmonies of the World, 1014b1016a 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a  I, REP 2 175d-178a 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences, third day, 203d-205b 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268d-273c
esp  a68d,  273c;  286b-304a,c esp 286b-c, 295d296a / Circulation of the
Blood, 311c-312c; 324c-d 30 3acon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36 164a168d
31  Descartes  :D/Vro«rid',  PART  VI, 61d-62c;66a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk viii [66-178] 233b236a 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 368b-370a / Weight of
Air,  404a-405b; 425a-429a 34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, prop 52, schol,
265a-b;  prop  53, schol 266a-267a; bk hi, general schol, 369a / Optics,
bk  i,  453a455a;  bk  hi,  525b-530b;  543a-b  34 Huygens: Light, pref,
551b-552a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, SECT 13 362c-d
36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 118b-il9a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d [fn 2]
43  Mill: Liberty, 283d- 284b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref,
2a-b  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  181b  45  Faraday:  Researches in
Electricity,  385b-c;  440b,d;  830b  832c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
42a-  b;  239c  53  James:  Psychology, 655a-659a esp 655a-b; 863a-865a;
882a-884b

[818a]
760  THE GREAT IDEAS (4. The role of hypotheses in science. 4d. The task
of  verification:  the  plurality  of hypotheses.) 54 Freud: Narcissism,
401a  /  General  Introduction,  502d-503c  / New Introductory Lectures,
815a-b;  818c-819b  5.  Hypothetical  propositions  and  syllogisms: the
distinction  between  the  hypothetical and the categorical 8 Aristotle:
Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch i [24^21- ^16] 39a-c; ch 23 [40^23-29] 57b-c;
[41^1-41]  CWSS-KEFEKENCES  I.  Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy,
part  hi,  43-47  Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part  iv,  ch  26 Spinoza.
Correspondence,  vi,  xiii  Kant. Introduction to Logic, x J. S. Mill. A
System of Logic, bk hi, ch 14 II. Arnauld. Logic or the Art of Thinking,
part  ii  Boyle. Reflections upon the Hypothesis ofAll^ali and Acidum T.
Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Powers ofMan, i, CH3 Brown. Lectures on
the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  vol  i,  pp  220-241 Herschel. a
Preliminary  Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, par 202, 208,
210,  216  Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  bk  hi, ch i Whewell. The
Philosophy ofthe Inductive Sciences, vol II, BK XIII . On the Philosophy
of Discovery, appendix h

[818b]
58a-b; ch 29 62d-63d; ch 44 68d-69b; bk ii, CH 11-14 81b-84b / Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, CH 6 125d-126b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
14, A 13, REP 2 86d-88c; q 19, a 8, rep 1,3 116a-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
39c-41c  esp  40d-41c;  51d-52a;  llOd-lllc esp 111b; 129c-d; 179c-180c;
193a'200c  esp  194b-d;  232c-233c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
265c267a  esp  266a-c  / Practical Reason, 297a298a For: The distinction
between axioms and postulates, assumptions, and hypotheses, see Judgment
8a;  Principle  2b(2),  3c-3c(3); Truth 4c, 7a. Other discussions of the
use  of  hypotheses  in  dialectic  and philosophy, see Dialectic 23(2);
Logic  4d;  Philosophy 3b-3c; and for the distinction between scientific
and  dialectical  reasoning, see Principle 3c(2); Reasoning 5b-5c. Other
discussions  of postulates in mathematics, see Logic 4a; Mathematics 3a;
and  for  other  treatments  of  hypothetical judgments and hypothetical
reasoning,   see   Judgment   6d;   Reasoning  2b.  The  employment  and
verification  of  hypotheses  in  empirical  science,  see Astronomy 2b;
Experience 5a-5c; Logic 4b; Mechanics 2b; Physics 4b-4d; Science 4e, =t.
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  Bernard.  Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine^ part I, ch 2
Tyndall.  Scientific  Use  ofthe  Imagination  Jevons. The Principles of
Science,  ch  23 Bradley. The Principles of Logic, bk i, ch 2 Bosanquet.
Logic, vol ii, ch 5 C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol ii, par 619-644,
669-693,  755-791;  VOL  yi,  par  7-34 Venn. Principles of Empirical or
Inductive  Logic,  CH  16  PoiNCARE. Science and Hypothesis, part iv, ch
9-10  Mach.  Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum  (Die  Hypothese) DuHEM. La theorie
physique, son objet—sa structure Pareto. The Mind and Society, vol i, ch
4-5 N. R. Campbell. Physics; the Elements, ch 6 . What Is Science?, gh 5
Bohr.  Atomic  Theory und the Description ofNature Northrop. Science and
First  Principles Einstein. On the Method of Theoretical Physics Fisher.
The Design of Experiments Dewey. Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, ch 7

[819a]
Chapter  Tfj:  IDEA INTRODUCTION f AS the topical analysis or outline in
each  jlV  chapter  indicates, the great ideas are not simple objects of
thought.  Each  of  the  great  ideas  seems  to have a complex interior
structure  —an  order  of  parts  involving related meanings and diverse
positions  which,  when  they  are opposed to one another, determine the
basic  issues  in  that  area  of  thought. The great ideas are also the
conceptions by \\hich we think about things. They are the terms in which
we  state  fundamental  problems;  they  are  the  notions  we employ in
defining  issues  and  discussing  them.  They  represent  the principal
content  of our thought. They are what we think as well as what we think
about.  If,  in  addition  to  its objects and content, we wish to think
about  thought  itself—its  acts  or  processes—we  shall  find  in  the
tradition  of  the  great books a number of related terms which indicate
the   scope   of  such  inquiry.  Some  of  them  are:  idea,  judgment,
understanding, and reasoning; perception, memory, and imagination; sense
and  mind. Here we are concerned with one of these— the idea Idea. It is
probably  the  most elementary of all these related terms, for according
to different conceptions of the nature and origin of ideas, the analysis
of  thought  and  knowledge will vary. Different positions will be taken
concerning  the  faculties  by which men know, the acts and processes of
thmking,  and  the  fimits of human understanding. Does the word "idea,"
when it is used in the technical discourse of metaphysics or psychology,
signify  that  which  is  known or understood ? Does it signify, not the
object of thought, but the thought itself? Or both? Certainly in popular
speech  the  word  is  used both ways, for men speak of understanding an
idea and note differences in their understanding of the same 761

[819b]
idea;  and  they  also say that ihey have diiTerent ideas about the same
thing, meaning that they understand the same thing differently. The word
"idea"  has many other oppositions of meaning in its tremendous range of
ambiguity. It is sometimes used exclusively for the eternal types in the
divine  mind  or  the  intelligible forms that exist apart from material
things which are their copies; sometimes for concepts in the human mind,
abstracted   from   sense-experience;   sometimes   for   the  seeds  of
understanding  which belong innately to the intellect and so do not need
to  be  derived  from  sense.  Sometimes  "idea"  means a sensation or a
perception  as  well  as  an  abstract thought, and then its connotation
extends  to  almost every type of mental content; sometimes it is denied
that  there  are any abstract or general ideas; and sometimes "idea" has
the  extremely  restricted  meaning of an image which is the memory of a
sense-impression.  Kant  vigorously protests against what he thinks is a
needless abuse of the term idea. "I beg those who really have philosophy
at heart," he writes, "to exert themselves to preserve to the expression
idea  its  original  signification."  There  is, he insists, "no want of
words  to  denominate  adequately  every  mode of representation without
encroaching  upon  terms  which  are  proper to others." Kant proposes a
"graduated  list"  of  such  terms.  He begins with perception^ which he
divides  into  sensation and cognition, according as it is subjective or
objective.  A  cognition,  he then goes on, "is either an intuition or a
conception,''  according  as  it  has  either  an immediate or a mediate
relation  to its object. Dividing conceptions into the empirical and the
pure,  Kant  finally  reaches  the term idea as one sub-division of pure
conceptions. If the pure conception "has its origin in the understanding

[820a]
762  THE GREAT IDEAS alone, and is not the conception of a pure sensuous
image,"  it is a notio or notion; and "a conception formed from notions,
which  transcends  the  possibiHty  of  experience,  is  an  idea,  or a
conception  of  reason."  According  to Kant, anyone "who has accustomed
himself  to these distinctions," will find it "quite intolerable to hear
the  representation  of  the  color  red  called  an idea." Tolerable or
intolerable,  the  word "idea" has been used quite persistently with the
very  meaning that Kant abominates, as well as with a variety of others.
The  reader  of the great books must be prepared for all these shifts in
meaning  and,  with  them,  shifts  in  doctrine; for according to these
differences  in  meaning,  there are different analyses of the nature or
being of ideas, different accounts of their origin or their coming to be
in  the  human mind, and different classifications of ideas. These three
questions what ideas are, how ideas are obtained, and of what sorts they
are—are  so  connected  that  the  answer  given to one of them tends to
circumscribe  the answers which can be given to the other two. The unity
of  each  chapter  in  this  guide  to  the  great books depends on some
continuity  of  meaning  in  its  central  term,  some  common thread of
meaning,  however  thin  or tenuous, which unites and makes intelligible
the  discussions  of various authors about the same thing. Without this,
they  would not move in the same universe of discourse at all. Nor could
they even disagree with one another, if the words they used were utterly
equivocal, as for example the word "pen" is equivocal when it designates
a  wri  ting  instrument  and  an  enclosure for pigs. The extraordinary
ambiguity  of the word "idea" as it is used in the great books puts this
principle  to  the test. Are Plato and Hume talking about the same thing
at all, when the one discusses ideas as the only inteUigible reality and
the  other  treats  ideas  as the images derived through memory from the
original  impressions  of  sense-experience?  Is there any common ground
between  Aristotle  and  Berkeley—  between  the identification of human
ideas  with  abstract  or  general  conceptions, quite distinct from the
perceptions or images of sense, and the

[820b]
identification  of  ideas  with particular perceptions, accompanied by a
denial of abstract or general notions ? Do writers like Locke or William
James,  for  whom ideas of sensation and abstract ideas (or percepts and
concepts)  belong  to  the one faculty of understanding or to the single
stream   of  consciousness,  communicate  with  writers  like  Plotinus,
Descartes, and Spinoza, for whom ideas belong to the intellect or to the
thinking  being, separate from matter and from sensations which are only
bodily  reactions?  Or with writers like Aristotle and Aquinas, for whom
there  is  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  faculties  of  sense and
intellect?  Can  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  in  turn explain the origin of
concepts  or  intelligible species by reference to the intellect's power
of abstracting them from experience or sensible species, and still carry
on  discussion  with  Plato,  Augustine,  and  Descartes, who regard the
intellect  as  in  some  way  innately  endowed  with  ideas,  with  the
principles  or  seeds of understanding ? The foregoing is by no means an
exhaustive  inventory.  It fails, for example, to ask about the sense in
which  the  theologians  speak  of  ideas  in the mind of God and of the
illumination  of  the  angelic  or the human intellect by ideas divinely
infused.  (What  is  the common thread of meaning between such discourse
and  that  concerned with the formation of abstract concepts or with the
revival  of  sense-impressions in images?) It fails also to question the
meaning  of  idea  in  Kant's  tripartite  analysis  of the faculties of
intuition,  judgment, and reasoning; or in Hegel's ultimate synthesis of
all  nature  and  history  in the dialectical life of the Absolute Idea.
(What do these meanings of "idea" have in common with the sense in which
Freud  distinguishes  between  conscious  and  unconscious  ideas ?) The
inventory  is  also  incomplete  in  that  it does not indicate the many
divergent  routes  taken  by authors who seem to share a common starting
point.  Even  those  who,  on  certain  points,  seem  to  talk the same
language,  appear  to have no basis for communication on other points in
the theory of ideas. But the questions which have been asked suffice for
the  purpose at hand. However great the ambiguity of "idea," it does not
reach that Hmit of equivoca-

[821a]
tion  which  would destroy the universe of discourse. There is a slender
thread  of  meaning  w  Inch  ties all the elements of the tradition to-
<;cther—not  in  a  unity  of truth or agreement, hut in an intelligible
joining  of issues. This unity can be seen in two ways. It appears first
in  the  fact  that  any  consideration  of  ideas—whether as objects or
contents of the mind—involves a theory of knowledge. This much is common
to all meanings of "idea." Those, hke Plato and Berkeley, for whom ideas
constitute  a realm of intelligible or sensible being, make knowledge of
reality  consist  in  the apprehension or understanding of ideas. Those,
like  Aristotle  and  James,  for  whom  ideas  have  no being except as
perceptions  or  thoughts,  make them the instruments whereby reality is
known.  On  either  view,  knowledge  involves  a relationship between a
knower  and a known, or between a knowing faculty and a knowable entity;
but  on  one  view ideas are the reaUty which is known, and on the other
they  are  the representations by which is known a reality that does not
include ideas among its constituents. These two views do not exhaust the
possibilities. Ideas are sometimes regarded both as objects of knowledge
and as representations of reality. Some writers (as, for example, Plato)
distinguish  two orders of reaHty— the sensible and the intelligible—and
two  modes  of  apprehension—sensing and understanding; and they use the
word  "idea"  for  both the intelligible object and the understanding of
it.  Locke, begging the reader's pardon for his frequent use of the word
"idea,"  says  that  it  is  the  term  "which  serves best to stand for
whatsoever  is  the  object of the understanding when a man thinks." But
Locke  also  distinguishes  between knowledge of real existences through
ideas  "that  the  mind  has  of  things as they are in themselves," and
knowledge  of  the  relations  among our own ideas, which the mind "gets
from their comparison with one another." For Hume, too, ideas as well as
impressions  are  involved  in  our  knowledge  of  matters of fact, but
relations  between  ideas  may  also be objects of knowledge, as in "the
sciences  of  geometry,  algebra,  and  arithmetic."  This double use of
"idea" is sometimes accompanied, as in Aquinas, by an explicit ac-

[821b]
Chapter  37:  IDEA 763 knowledgement and ordering of the two senses. For
Acjuinas, concepts are primarily the means of knowledge, not the objects
of  knowledge.  A  concept,  Aquinas  writes,  "is  not what is actually
understood,  but that by which the intellect understands"— that by which
something  else  is  known.  Secondarily,  however, concepts become that
which  we know when we reflexively turn our attention to the contents of
our  own  mind.  Using  the  phrase  "intelligible  species"  to signify
concepts,  Acjuinas  explains  that  "since  the intellect reflects upon
itself,  by  such  reflection  it  understands  not  only its own act of
intelligence  but  also  the  species  by which it understands. Thus the
intelligible  species  is that which is understood secondarily; but that
which is primarily understood is the object, of which the species is the
It  is  possible,  therefore,  to have ideas about things or ideas about
ideas.  In  the  vocabulary  of  this  analysis by Aquinas, the ideas or
concepts  whereby  real  things  are understood arc sometimes called the
"first  intentions"  of  the mind. The ideas whereby we understand these
ideas  or first intentions are called the mind's "second intentions." An
idea is always a mental intention, an awareness or representation, never
an  independent  reality  for  the mind to know. Locke's differentiation
between ideas of sensation and ideas of reflection seems to parallel the
mediaeval  distinction  between first and second intentions; but whereas
second  intentions  are  ideas  engaged  in a reflexive understanding of
ideas  as objects to be understood, Locke's ideas of reflection comprise
"the  perception  ofthe  operations  of our own mind within us, as it is
employed  about the ideas it has got." A closer parallel, perhaps, is to
be  found  in Locke's distinction between our knowledge of reality or of
real  existences and our knowledge of the relations existing between our
own  The  second  way  of  seeing  a connection among meanings of "idea"
depends  on recognizing what is common to contrary views. The word "pen"
is  utterly  equivocal,  as  we  have  noted,  when  it  names a writing
instrument and an animal enclosure. Hence men

[822a]
cannot  contradict  one  another no matter what opposite things they may
say  about  pens in one sense and pens in the other. The two meanings of
"pen"  are  not  even connected by being opposed to one another. But all
the  meanings  of "idea" do seem to be connected by opposition at least,
so  that  writers  who  use  the  word  in its different senses and have
different  theories  of  idea  cannot  avoid facing the issues raised by
their  conflicting  analyses.  The  root  of this opposition lies in the
positive  and negative views of the relation of ideas to sensations— or,
more  generally,  to  sense and the sensible. Though there are different
analyses  of  sensation,  one  or  both of two points seems to be agreed
upon:  that  sensations  are  particular perceptions and that sensations
result from the impingement of physical stimuli upon the sense organs of
a  living body. Berkeley insists upon the first point while emphatically
denying  the second. Ideas or sensations are always particulars; but, he
says,  "the  various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however
blended  or  combined together (that is, whatever objects they compose),
cannot  exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them," and their cause
is neither physical matter nor the perceiving mind, but "some other will
or  spirit  that  produces them." Others, like Lucretius and Hobbes, who
regard sensations as particular perceptions, do not use the word "idea,"
as Berkeley does, for perceptions of external origin, but restrict it to
inner  productions  of  the  mind  itself  in  its  acts  of  memory  or
imagination.  The  various  theories of idea thus range from those which
identify  an idea with a sensation or perception or with the derivatives
of  sensation, to those which deny the identity or even any relationship
between  ideas  and sensations or images of sense. The riRST position is
taken  by writers who conceive mind or understanding, in men or animals,
as  the  only  faculty  of  knowledge.  It performs all the functions of
knowing  and  thinking.  It  is  sensitive  as  well  as  reflective. It
perceives  and  remembers  as  well as imagines and reasons. Within this
group  of  WTiters  there are differences. Berkeley, for example, thinks
"the ob-

[822b]
764  THE  GREAT  IDEAS I jects of human knowledge" include "either ideas
actually  imprinted  on  the  senses;  or  else such as are perceived by
attending  to  the  passions and operations of the mind; or lastly ideas
formed  by  the  help  of  memory  and  imagination—either  compounding,
dividing,  or  barely  representing  those  originally  perceived in the
aforesaid  ways."  Hume, on the other hand, divides "all the perceptions
of  the  mind  into  two  classes or species, which are distinguished by
their  different  degrees  of  force  or vivacity. The less forcible and
lively  are  commonly  denominated  Thoughts or Ideas. The other species
want  a name in our language and in most others . . . Let us, therefore,
use  a  little  freedom  and call them Impressions.'' By this term, Hume
explains, "I mean all our more lively perceptions, when we hear, or see,
or  feel, or love, or hate, or desire, or will." Another use of terms is
represented  by  Locke, who distinguishes between ideas of sensation and
reflection,  simple and complex ideas, particular and general ideas, and
uses  the  word "idea" both for the original elements of senseexperience
and for all the derivatives produced by the mind's activity in reworking
these   given   materials,   whether  by  acts  of  memory,  imaginative
construction,  or abstraction. Still another variation is to be found in
William James. Despite the authority of Locke, he thinks that the word "
'idea' has not domesticated itself in the language so as to cover bodily
sensations."  Accordingly, he restricts the word "idea" to concepts, and
never  uses  it for sensations or perceptions. Nevertheless, like Locke,
he  does  not  think that the developm^ent of concept from percept needs
the  activity  of  a special faculty. Both concept and percept belong to
the  single  "stream  of thought" and are "states of consciousness." The
second  position  is  taken  by  writers  who  in  one  way  or  another
distinguish  between  sense  and  intellect  and  regard  them  as quite
separate  faculties  of  knowing.  The  one  is  supposed to perform the
functions  of  perception,  imagination,  and  mxmory;  the  other,  the
functions  of  thought—conception,  judgment,  and  reasoning, or if not
these,  then  acts of intellectual vision or intuition. Here, too, there
are differences within the group.

[823a]
Chapif.r  Just  as the extreme version of the first position is taken by
those  who identify ideas with perceptions, so here the opposite extreme
consists  in  the  denial  of  any  connection between ideas and all the
elements of sense-experience. The ideas in the divine mind, or the ideas
infused   by  God  into  the  angelic  intellects,  have  no  origin  in
experience,  nor  any  need  for the perceptions, memories, or images of
sense.  They  are  not  abstract  ideas,  that is, they are not concepts
abstracted   from  sense-materials.  "Our  intellect,"  Aquinas  writes,
"abstracts  the intelligible species from the individuating principles"—
the  material conditions of sense and imagination. "But the intelligible
species  in  the divine intellect," he continues, "is immaterial, not by
abstraction,  but of itself." The divine ideas, Aquinas quotes Augustine
as saying, "are certain original forms or permanent and immutable models
of  things  which  are  contained in the divine intelligence." Following
Augustine's  statement  that "each thing was created by God according to
the  idea  proper  to  it,"  Aquinas  restricts  the  word "idea" to the
"exemplars  existing  in  the  divine mind" and to the species of things
with  which God informs the angelic intellects. He uses the word "con- '
cept" where others speak of "ideas" in the human mind. Descartes, on the
other  hand,  endows  the  human mind with ideas—not concepts abstracted
from  and dependent on sense, but inj tuitive apprehensions which, since
they  cannot  I  be drawn in any way from sense-experience, 1 must be an
innate  property  of  the human mind. I He does not, however, always use
the  word ' "idea" in this strict sense. Some ideas, he says, I' "appear
to  be  innate, some adventitious, and , others to be formed or invented
by myself." ;l The ideas called "adventitious" are those which j seem to
come  from  the  outside, as when "I hear some sound, or see the sun, or
feel heat." Those I which we form or invent ourselves are "constructions
of  the  imagination."  Only innate ideas, in Descartes' view, are truly
ideas  in the j sense of being the elements of certain knowledge and the
sources   of   intellectual  intuition.  "By  intuition,"  he  says,  "I
understand,  not  the  fluctuating  testimony  of  the  senses,  nor the
misleading  judgment  that proceeds from the blundering constructions of
the imagination,"

[823b]
37:  IDFA  765  Inn  "the  undoubting  conception  f)f  nn unclouded and
attentive  mind" which "springs from the light of reason alone." As mind
and  bo(1y  are separate substances for Descartes— mind Ix-ing conceived
by  him  as  a res cogitans or thinking substance, quite separate from a
res  rxtensa or the extended matter of a bfxlily substance— so ideas and
sensations are independent in origin and function. Like infused ideas in
the  angelic intellect, innate ideas in the human mind are not abstract,
for they are not abstracted. But unlike the angelic intellect, the human
mind, even when it employs innate ideas, is discursive or cogitative. It
is  never conceived as entirely free from the activities of judgment and
reasoning,  even  when its power is also supposed to be intuitive — that
is,  able  to apprehend intelligible objects without analysis or without
recourse  to  the representations of sense. The doctrine of innate ideas
does   not   always  go  as  far  as  this  in  separating  intellectual
knowledge—or  knowledge by means of ideas— from sense-experience. In the
theories of Plato and Augustine, for example, sense-experience serves to
awaken  the  understanding to apprehend the intelligible objects for the
intuition of which it is innately equipped. "To learn those things which
do  not  come  into  us as images by the senses," Augustine writes, "but
which  we know within ourselves without images ... is in reality only to
take  things that the memory already contains scattered and unarranged .
. . and by thinking bring them together." Moreover, the memory contains,
not  only  "images impressed upon it by the senses of the body, but also
the  notions  of  the  very  things  themselves,  which notions we never
received  by  any  avenue  of  the  body."  This  process of learning by
remembering  appears to be similar to the process which Plato also calls
"recollection" or "reminiscence." In the Meno Socrates demonstrates that
a  slaveboy,  who  thinks  he  knows  no  geometry, can be led simply by
questioning  to  discover  that  he knew all the while the solution of a
geometric  problem.  "There  have  always  been  true  thoughts in him,"
Socrates  tells  Meno,  thoughts  "which only needed to be awakened into
knowledge by putting questions to him." Hence "his soul must always have
possessed this knowledge."

[824a]
l^e  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Learning,  according  to this doctrine of innate
ideas,  must  therefore  be  described as an attempt "to recollect," not
"what  you do not know," but "rather what you do not remember." Learning
by  recollection  or  reminiscence seems to be a process in which latent
ideas (whether they are retained by the soul from a previous life or are
part  of  the  soul's  endowment  at  its creation) become active either
through  the  questioning  of a teacher or through being awakened by the
perceptions  of  the  bodily  senses.  Though such bodily stimulation of
thought   implies   a  functional  connection  between  body  and  soul,
nevertheless both Plato and Augustine hold that ideas are independent in
origin.  They are not derived from sense, though their appearance may be
occasioned by events in the world of sense. One other view still remains
to  be  considered. It denies that ideas are innate in the human mind at
the same time that it distinguishes between the intellect and the senses
as separate faculties of knowing. Having to explain whence the intellect
gets  its  ideas,  writers  like  Aristotle and Aquinas attribute to the
human intellect an abstractive power by which it draws "the intelligible
species"  from  sensory  images,  which  Aquinas  calls "phantasms." The
concepts by which "our intellect understands material things," we obtain
"by abstracting the form from the individual matter which is represented
by the phantasms." Through the universal concept thus abstracted, we are
able,  Aquinas  holds, "to consider the nature of the species apart from
its  individual  principles."  It should be added here that abstractions
are  not  vehicles  of  intuitive apprehension. Conception, which is the
first  act  of the mind, yields knowledge only when concepts are used in
subsequent  acts  of  judgment  and  reasoning.  Abstract  or  universal
concepts  are  as  different  from  the ideas which belong to intellects
separate  from  bodies—  the  divine  or  angelic intellects—as they are
different  from  the  particular  perceptions  or  images of sense. They
occupy  an  intermediate position between the two, just as, according to
Aquinas,  "the  human  intellect  holds  a middle place" between angelic
intelli-

[824b]
gence  and  corporeal sense. On the one hand, the human intellect is for
Aquinas  an  incorporeal  power; on the other hand, it functions only in
cooperation  with  the corporeal powers of sense and imagination. So the
concepts   which   the  human  intellect  forms,  being  universal,  are
immaterial;  but they are also dependent, in origin and function, on the
materials  of sense. Not only are universal concepts abstracted from the
phantasms, but for the intellect to understand physical things, "it must
of  necessity,"  Aquinas  writes,  "turn  to  the  phantasms in order to
perceive  the  universal nature existing in the individual." This theory
of  abstract ideas seems not far removed from the position of Locke, who
distinguishes  between  particular  and  general  ideas  (which he calls
"abstract")   or  that  of  William  James,  who  distinguishes  between
universal  concepts  and  sense-perceptions.  Yet  on  one  question the
difference   between   them   is  radical,  namely,  whether  particular
sensations  and universal ideas belong to the same faculty of mind or to
the  quite  distinct  faculties  of sense and intellect. This difference
seems  to  have  considerable  bearing on the way in which these writers
explain  the process of abstraction or generalization, with consequences
for  certain subtleties, acknowledged or ignored, in the analysis of the
grades   of  abstraction.  Nevertheless,  the  resemblance  between  the
positions of Locke and Aquinas, or those of William James and Aristotle,
each  affirming in his own way that the mind contains nothing not rooted
in the senses, serves to mediate between the more extreme positions. The
dispute  about  innate ideas and the controversy over abstract ideas are
issues in psychology inseparable from fundamental differences concerning
the  nature  and operation of the faculty or faculties of knowing. There
are other issues which concern the being or the truth of ideas. Here the
first  question  is  not  whether  ideas  are  objects of knowledge, but
whether the existence of ideas is real or mental —outside the mind or in
it. One aspect of this controversy is considered in the chapter on Form,
viz., the argument between Aristotle and Plato about the being of

[825a]
Chapter the Ideas or Forms apart from both matter and mind. It is in the
context  of this argument that the traditional epithet "reaHsm" gets one
of  its  meanings,  when  it signifies the view that ideas or universals
have  an  independent reahty of their own. The various opponents of this
view are not called "idealists." If they deny any existence to universal
ideas outside the mind, thev are usually called "conccptualists";if they
denv  the  presence  of  universals  even  in  the mind, they are called
"nominalists."  These doctrines are more fully discussed in the chapters
on  Same  and Other, Universal and Particular. The controversy about the
being  of  ideas  has  another phase that has already been noted in this
chapter;  and  it is in this connection that the epithet "idealism" gets
one  of  its  traditional  meanings. The doctrine is not that ideas have
real  existence  outside  the mind. On the contrary, it is that the only
realities  are  mental  either  minds  or  the ideas in them, Berkeley's
famous  proposition  esse  est  perdpi,  to  be is to be perceived—seems
intended  to  permit  only  one exception. The perceiving mind has being
without  being  perceived,  but  nothing else has. Everything else which
'exists  is  an  idea,  a  being  of  and in the mind. According to this
doctrine  (which  takes  different  forms  in Berkeley and in Hegel, for
example), the phrase "idea of is meaningless. Nothing exists of which an
idea  can  be  a  representation. There is no meaning to the distinction
between  thing  and idea. The real and the ideal are identical. Plato is
sometimes  called an "idealist" but not in this sense. He has never been
interpreted as completely denying reaUty to the changing material things
which  imitate  or  copy  the eternal ideas, the immutable archetypes or
Forms.  Apphed  to  Plato or to Plotinus, "ideaUsm" seems to signify the
superior   reality  of  ideal  (as  opposed  to  material  or  physical)
existence.  Just  as  "idealism" has these widely divergent meanings, so
does  "realism" when it designates, on the one hand, those who attribute
independent reahty to ideas and, on the other hand, those who affirm the
existence  of an order of real existences independent of the ideas which
represent  them  in the mind. Writers who distinguish between things and
ideas, or between the order of reality and the

[825b]
37: IDEA 767 mind's conception of it, face the problem of diHcrentiating
Ixrtwccn  these  two mcxicsof Iking. To say that ideas or concepts exist
only  in  the mind is not to say that they do not exist at all, but only
that  they do not exist in the same way as things outside the mind. Docs
an  entity  in  its  real  existence  apart from knowledge have the same
character  that  it  has when, as an object known, it somehow belongs to
the  knowing  mind?  Is there a kind of neutral essence which can assume
both  modes of existence— real existence, independent of mind, and ideal
existence, or existence in the mind, as an object conceived or known? Is
an  idea  or concept in the mind nothing but the real thing objectified,
or  transformed  into  an object of knowledge; or is the real thing, the
thing  in  itself,  utterly  different from the objects of experience or
knowledge—  neither  knowable nor capable of representation by concepts?
These   questions,   relevant   to   the   consideration   of  ideas  as
representations  of  reality,  are, of course, also relevant to problems
considered  in  the  chapters  on  Being, Experience, and Knowledge. The
issues  indicated are there Intimately connected with them are questions
about  the truth of ideas. Can ideas or concepts be true or false in the
sense  in  which  truth  and  falsity  are attributed to propositions or
judgments? Under what conditions is an idea true? In what does its truth
consist,  aixi  what are the signs or marks of its truth ? These matters
are  discussed  in  the chapter on Truth. Here it is sufficient to point
out  that  the  traditional  distinction between adequate and inadequate
ideas,  and  the  comparison  of  clear  and  distinct  with obscure and
confused  ideas,  are used to determine the criteria of truth. It may be
the  truth  of  a concept taken by itself or of the j udgmcnt into which
several  concepts  enter.  To  the  extent  that  ideas  are regarded as
representative,  their  truth  (or the truth of the judgments they form)
seems  to  consist  in some mode of agreement or correspondence with the
reahty they represent, or, as Spinoza says, its Within the conceptual or
mental  order itself, there is a further distinction between ideas which
do  not perform a representative function and those which do. The former
are treated as

[826a]
768  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  fantasies, fictions, or chimeras; the latter are
called,  by  contrast,  "real  ideas," or ideas having some reference to
reality.  The question of the reality of ideas takes precedence over the
question of their truth, at least for those who regard the division into
true  and  false as applicable only to representations. Yet the criteria
of  the  distinction between the real and the imaginary are difficult to
separate  from  the  criteria  of true and false. The separation is made
most readily by those who use "idea" to mean memory image. They can test
the  reality  of an idea by tracing it back to the impression from which
it  originated. Another sort of test is applied by those who measure the
reality  of  abstract  ideas  by their fidelity to the sense-perceptions
from  which  they  were abstracted. Still another criterion, proposed by
William  James, is that of freedom from contradiction. An idea has truth
and its object has reality if it "remains uncontradicted." The idea of a
winged  horse  illustrates the point. "If I merely dream of a horse with
wings," James writes, "my horse interferes with nothing else and has not
to  be  contradicted. . . . But if with this horse I make an inroad into
the  world  otherwise  known, and say, for example, 'That is my old mare
Maggie, having grown a pair of wings where she stands in her stall,' the
whole case is altered; for now the horse and place are identified with a
horse and place otherwise known, and what is known of the latter objects
is   incompatible   with   what  is  perceived  with  the  former."  The
consideration  of  ideas  or  concepts  belongs  to  logic as well as to
psychology  and  metaphysics. The logician sometimes deals with concepts
directly  and  with  the  judgments  into which they enter; sometimes he
deals  with  them  only  as  they  find  verbal  expression in terms and
propositions. The distinction between concepts and judgments (or between
terms  and  propositions) is discussed in the chapter on Judgment. There
also we see that the classification of judgments or propositions depends
in  part  on  the  acceptance or rejection of the notions of subject and
predicate  in  the  analysis  of  concepts  or  terms;  and, if they are
accepted, on the way in which

[826b]
terms are distinguished both as subjects and as predicates. This in turn
depends  upon  certain  traditional  divisions  which  are applicable to
terms,  if  not  always  to  concepts, such as the familiar distinctions
between concrete and abstract, and particular and universal, terms. When
the concept, which is sometimes called the "mental word," is regarded as
by  its  very  nature  abstract  and  universal,  these distinctions are
applicable  only  to  the  physical  words which are terms. Concrete and
particular  terms  are  then  treated  as  verbal  expressions of sense-
perceptions   or   images;  abstract  and  universal  terms,  as  verbal
expressions  of  ideas  or concepts. But when ideas are identified v/ith
sense-perceptions  or  images,  and  abstract  concepts  are denied, the
existence  of  general  names  in  ordinary  discourse  suffices for the
distinction  between  particular  and  universal  terms, even though the
latter  do  not  express  any  actual  content  of  the mind. Unlike the
foregoing,  other  divisions  of terms, as, for example, the distinction
between  the univocal and the analogical, or between species and genera,
do  not  occur  throughout  the  tradition  of  logic.  They  tend to be
characteristic  of the logic of Aristotle and its mediaeval development.
Of these two distinctions, that between univocal and analogical terms or
concepts  appears  explicitly,  so  far  as  this  set of great books is
concerned, only in the Summa Theologica. Nevertheless, Aquinas does have
some   background   for  his  special  theory  of  analogical  terms  in
Aristotle's  treatment  of  univocal  and  equivocal  names,  and in his
separation  of terms which predicate a sameness in species or genus from
those  which  predicate  a  sameness  by  analogy. The analysis of these
distinctions  is  undertaken  in the chapters on Same and Other and Sign
and  Symbol.  Other  writers, in dealing with universal terms, recognize
that they have different degrees of generality. They sometimes formulate
this  as  an  order  of  more and less inclusive classes. Sometimes they
refer  to the intension and extension, or connotation and denotation, of
terms.  The  more  general  terms have a less restricted connotation and
hence  represent  more extensive or inclusive classes. The more specific
terms  have  a  more  determinate  meaning  and  so also have a narrower
denotation and represent

[827a]
Chapter  37:  IDEA  inclusive  classes.  What  seems  lo be peculinr ic)
Aristotle's  analysis of species and <jenera is the setting of upper and
lower  limits  to liie hierarchy of universal terms, with a small number
of  irreducible  categories  (or  siimma genera) under which all species
fall,  and,  at  the  other extreme, with a finite numlx^r of lowest (or
/////m^f)  species  which  are incapable of subsuming other species. The
terms  which fall under the lowest species must either be particulars or
accidental  classes. Those which seem to be predicable of the categories
themselves,  such as being or one^ cannot be genera. These are the terms
which   Aristotle's   mediaeval   followers  call  "transcendental"  and
"analogical." Using the word "transcendental" in a different sense, Kant
enumerates  a set of concepts which bear some resemblance to Aristotle's
summa  genera,  but  which  he  treats as transcendental categories. The
difference  among  concepts  with respect to generahty is of interest to
the  psychologist  as  well  as  the logician, for it raises the problem
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  Doctrines  of idea 771 I a. Ideas, or relations
between  ideas, as objects of thought or knowledge: the ideas as eternal
forms  ic.  Ideas  as the data of sense-experience or their residues id.
Ideas as the pure concepts of reason: regulative principles le. Ideas in
the  order  of supra-human intelligence or spirit: the eternal exemplars
and archetypes; the modes of the divine mind 2. The origin or derivation
of   ideas  in  the  human  mind  2a.  The  infusion  of  ideas:  divine
illumination  2b.  The  innate  endowment  or  retention  of  ideas: the
activation  of  the  mind's  native  content  or  structure by sense, by
memory,  or  by experience 2C. The acquirement of ideas by perception or
intuition:  simple ideas or forms as direct objects of the understanding
2e.  The  genesis of ideas by the recollection of sense-impressions: the
images  of  sense  2/.  The  production of ideas by the reworking of the
materials of sense: the imagina-

[827b]
'69  of  whether  the  more  or the less general takes precedence in the
order  of  learning.  The  order  and relation of ideas is even more the
common ground of both logic and psychology. Both, for example, deal with
the |Xisition and sequence of terms or concepts in reasoning, though the
logician  aims to prescribe the forms which reasoning must take in order
lo  Ixr  valid,  whereas the psychologist tries to describe the steps by
which  thinking  actually  gcx:s  on.  Only  the  logician,  however, is
concerned  with  the  way  in  which terms are ordered to one another as
positive  and  negative,  or  as  contraries;  just as from Aristotle to
Freud,  only the psychologist deals with the association of ideas in the
stream  of  thought  by  relationships  of  contiguity  and  succession,
similarity  and difference. According as the logical connection of ideas
or  their  psychological association is made the primary fact, radically
divergent  interpretations  are given of the nature of mind, the life of
reason, and the process of PAGE

[828a]
770  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3.  The  division  of  ideas  according to their
objective  reference  first and second intentions 3c. Real and fantastic
or fictional ideas: negations and chimeras 4. The logic of ideas 4^. The
verbal  expression of ideas or concepts: terms (i) Concrete and abstract
terms   (2)   Particular   and  universal  terms  \c.  The  correlation,
opposition,  and  order  of terms 5. Ideas or concepts in the process of
thought  subjects  and  predicates 5c. The dialectical employment of the
ideas  of  reason or consciousness 6. The being and truth of ideas ideas
as  symbols,  or intentions of the mind (id. Clarity and distinctness in
ideas as criteria of their truth its origin

[828b]
PAGB  2g. The abstraction of ideas from sense-experience: the concept as
the first act of the mind; the grades of abstraction 775 ^a. Ideas about
things distinguished from ideas about ideas: the distinction between 3^.
Adequate and inadequate ideas: clear and distinct ideas as compared with
obscure and confused ideas 776 4^. The classification of terms: problems
in  the  use of different kinds of terms 777 (4) Univocal and analogical
terms  778  5^.  Concept and judgment: the division of terms as subjects
and  predicates;  kinds  of  5^.  The  position and sequence of terms in
reasoning  779 5J. The order of concepts in the stages of learning : the
more   and  the  less  general  5^.  The  association,  comparison,  and
discrimination  of  ideas:  the  stream  of  thought 6«. The distinction
between  real and intentional existence, between thing and idea: ^b. The
nature  and  being  of  ideas in relation to the nature and being of the
mind 780 6r. The agreement between an idea and its object: the criterion
of  adequacy  in  correspondence  781 (ye. The criterion of genesis: the
test  of  an  idea's truth or meaning by reference to 6/". The truth and
falsity of simple apprehensions, sensations, or conceptions: con- \

[829a]
REFERENCFS  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc  the volume and page numbers ot the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homkk: Iliad, bk ii (265 28 5) 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the set; tlu- number 12d indirntrs that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 Jam f: s : Psychology, 1 16a 1
19b,  the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the
lower  half  of  page  119. When the text is printed in two columns, the
letters  a  and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand
sideof  the  page,  the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of
the  right-hand  sideof  thepage.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium,
163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of
page  163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164.
Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as
part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included  in the reference; line
numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
1265-283]  12d.  Bible  References: The references are to book, chapter,
and  verse.  When  the  King James and Douay versions differ in title of
books  or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James version
is  cited  first  and  the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.. Old
Testament:   Nehemiah,   7:45—   (D)   //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols:  The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed intermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1.
Doctrines  of  idea la. Ideas, or relations between ideas, as objects of
thought  or  knowledge:  the  ideas  as eternal forms 7 Plato: Cratylus,
113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a126d / Symposium, 167a-d / Euthyphro, 193a-c
/  Phaedo,  224a-c;  228d-230c;  231c232a;  242b-243c / Republic, bk hi,
333b-334b;  BK  V,  368c-373c;  bk  vi,  383d-388a;  bk  vii, 392b-393b;
397a-398c/  Timaeus,  455c-458b  /  Parmenides  486a-511d  / Theaetetus,
534d-536a / Sophist, 571a-574c / Statesman, 595a-c / Philebus, 610d-613a
/ Seventh Letter, 809c810d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ix, ch i 136a-d
/  Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 1-2 228b-229d; tr ix, CH 6-9 249a-250b / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  21  279b-280a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
16-38 75b81a passim / City ofGod, bk viii, ch 6-7 268d269d; bk xii, ch 7
346c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, AA 1-2 440d-443c; a
4,  ans  444d-446b;  a  a  5-7  446c-450b;  q  85,  a i, ans and rep 1-2
451c453c; A 2, ANS 453d-455b; a 3, rep 1,4 455b457a; a 8, ans 460b-461b;
q  86,  a  4,  rep 2 463d-464d; q 87, a i, ans 465a-466c; q 88, a I, ANS
469a-471c; a 2, ans 471c-472c

[829b]
Chapter  37:  IDEA  771  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 43d-44c 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  71d-72a;  in, 82d83a; vi, 96d-97a / Objections
and  Replies,  121a-c;  DEF  ii-iii  130a-b;  axiom v-vi 131d132a; 137d;
157b-158a; 212c-213a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect 8 95c-d;
BK  II,  CH  VIII,  sect  8 134b-c; ch ix, sect I 138b-c; ch xxi, sect 5
179c-d;  bk  hi,  CH  V, SECT 12 266d-267a; sect 14 267b-c; bk IV, CH I,
SECT  i-cH  IV, SECT 12 307a-326d passim, esp CH II, SECT 1-7 309b-311a,
sect  15  312d-313a, ch hi, sect 31 323c-d; ch iv, sect 18 328d-329a; ch
vi,  sect 13 335c-d; sect 16 336d; CH vii, sect 1-7 337a-338c esp sect 2
337a;  ch  xi,  sect  13-14 357d-358c; ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; sect 8
377b-d  35  Berkeley : Human Knowledge 404a-444d passim, esp INTRO, SECT
21-25  411b-412a,c,  sect I 413a-b, SECT i8 416b-c, sect 23 417b-c, SECT
86-91  429c-431a,  sect  135-142  440a441c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  iv, div 20 458b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 16a-c esp 16b; 113b-115c esp
113c-d;  173b-174a esp 173b-d / Practical Reason, 352c-353a / Judgement,
551a-552c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part ii, par 140, 53a b 53
James: Psychology, 300a-301a; 307a

[830a]
772  (1.  Doctrines  of idea.) lb. Ideas or conceptions as that by which
the  mind thinks or knows 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16^4-8] 25a
/  Soul,  BK III, CH 4 661b-662c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
12,  a  2  51c-52c;  aa  9-10  58b-59d; q 13, a i, ans 62c-63c; a 5, ans
66b-67d; q 14, a i, ans and REP 3 75d-76c; a 2, ans and rep 2-3 76d-77d;
a  4, ANS 78b-79a; a 5 esp rep 2-3 79a-80a; A 6, rep i 80a-81c; a 8, ans
82c-83b; a 12, ans 85d-86d; q 16, a 2 95c-96b; q 17, a 3, ans 102d-103c;
q 27, a i, ans and rep 2-3 153b154b; A 2, ANS and rep 2 154c-155b; q 32,
aa  2-3  178a-180b;  Q 34, a i 185b-187b; qq 55-58 288d-306b; q 82, a 3,
ans 433c-434c; q 84 440b-451b; q 85, a 2 453d-455b; a 4 457a-d; A 8, rep
3  460b-461b; q 86, a i, ans 461c462a; a 2, ans and rep 2-4 462a-463a; q
87,  A I 465a-466c; q 88, a i, rep 2 469a-471c; q 89, A 2, ans and rep 2
475a-d;  a  6,  ans and rep 2 478b-d 31 Descartes: Meditations, 71d-72a;
iii,  82d83a  /  Objections  and  Replies, 108b-109d; 121a-c; DEF ii-iii
130a-b;  axiom  v-vi  131d132a;  137d;  157b-158a; 212c-213a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, def 3 373b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch iv,
sect 3 324b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15b-c; 22a,c; 30b-c; 31a-d; 38a-39c;
41c-42a;  53b-54b;  58c-59b;  85d-93c;  109d-113b esp 112d-113b; 115b-c;
130b-c; 197a-b 53 James: Psychology, 300a-314b esp 300a-301b, 302b-303a,
307a,  313a-314a  \c.  Ideas  as  the  data of sense-experience or their
residues  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk iv [722-817] 53d-54d 18
Augustine:  City  ofGod, bk viii, ch 7 269c-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  49a;  52c; 54b-c; PART IV, 261a; 262a-b 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  137d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 48, schol 391 b-c; PROP
49,  SCHOL,  392a-c  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, SECT 15
98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect 1-8 121a123a; sect 17 125c-d; ch i, sect
20-ch  iv,  sect  i  126d-129c;  ch  iv,  sect  6-ch v 131a-b; ch vii-ix
131c-141a  passim,  esp  ch ix, sect i7 138b-139b, sect 15 141a; ch xii,
sect  1-2  147b-d  passim;  sect 8 148c-d; ch xiii, sect 2 149a; ch xiv,
sect  31 161d-162a; ch xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; SECT 15 177d; ch xxiii, sect
r  204a-b;  sect  3  204c-d;  sect  7  205d-206a; SECT 9 206b-c; sect 15
208c-d;  sect  29-30  211d-212b;  sect 32-37 212c-214b passim; ch xxxii,
SECT  14-16  245c-246b;  bk  hi,  ch  i, sect 5 252b-c; ch iv, sect 7-15
260d-263b esp SECT 11-15 261d-263b; ch vi, sect 46-47

[830b]
b  THE  GREAT  IDEAS \b to \e 281d-282b; ch xi, sect 21-23 304d-305b; bk
IV,  ch  ii, sect 11-13 311c-312b; ch iii, sect 23 320a-c; ch iv, sect 4
324c  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect i 413a-b; sect 18 416b-c; sect
29-33  418c419a;  sect  36  419c-d;  sect 88-91 430a-431a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  it  455b457b;  SECT  vii,  div  49  471c-d; div 61
477c478a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 234b- 236b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
45b-46a  esp  45d-46a; 48b-c; 54b-55a; 101b-102a esp 102a: 115b-c/ Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 282 b-c 54 Freud: Unconscious, 442b-443a /
Ego  andld^  700a-701a;  701d  \d. Ideas as the pure concepts of reason:
regulative  principles  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16a; 37b-39c; 108a209d
esp  108a-109c,  113b-115c,  117b-119a, 129c-131c, 158a-159d, 166c-171a,
173b-174a,  187a-c, 193b-d, 200d-202a, 203b-d, 209b-d; 237b; 239a-240b /
Practical  Reason,  310d311d;  329a-d;  343a;  349b-355d esp 349b-350c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b / Judgement, 461a-462d; 464c-467a;
489b-c;   504d505a;   506a-511a  esp  509d-5i0a;  528c-530c;  542b-544c;
570b-572c;  581a-582c;  596c-598b;  604ale. Ideas in the order of supra-
human  intelligence or spirit: the eternal exemplars and archetypes; the
modes  of the divine mind 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [181-200]
63b-c  17  Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-2 lOa-d; TR VI, CH 2-3 2
Id-  23a; ch 9, 26a / Third Ennead, tr ix, ch i, 136a-c / Fourth Ennead,
TR  IV,  ch  13  164d-165b  /  Fifth  Ennead  208a251d passim, esp tr hi
215d-226c,  tr v-vii 228b-239b, tr viii, ch 7 242d-243c, tr ix 246c-251d
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch 21 279b280a; tr vii, ch 2-17 322b-331a 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 9, 3a; bk XII, par 38 108d-109a / City
of  God,  bk  viii,  CH  3-4 266a-267c; bk xi, ch 10, 328c-d; bk xii, ch
17-18  353a-354d  /  Christian Doctrine, BK II, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 14, preamble 75c-d; a 4, ans 78b-79a; a 5
79a80a;  A 6 esp rep 3 80a-81c; a 8, ans 82c-83b; A II, rep 1-2 84c-85c;
a  14,  ans  and  rep  2 88d-89b; q 15 91b-94a; q 16, a i, ans and rep 2
94b-95c; q 18, a 4 107d-108c; qq 22-24 127c143c passim; q 34, a 3, rep 4
188b-189a;  q  44,  A  3 240b-241a; q 47, a i, rep 2 256a-257b; qq 55-56
288d-294d;  q 58 300b-306b passim; q 74, A 3, rep 5 375a-377a,c; q 84, a
2,  ans  and  rep 3 442b-443c; a 3, rep i 443d-444d; aa 4-5 444d-447c; q
85,  a  4,  ans 457a-d; q 87, a I, ANS and rep 2-3 465a-466c; q 89, a 3,
ans

[831a]
\ffo  Ic  Chapter  VJ:  IDRA and REP 1,3 475d-476c: q 105. a ^, ans 540c
541b;  o 106, A I, ANS and rkp i 545d 546d: o 107 549b 552b: Q roS, a i,
ans  and  rm2  552c-553c;  q  115,  a 2, ans 587c-588c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  o 6r, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; part hi. q 9, a 3, ans
765b766b  21  Danth:  Ditine  Cotnedy,  paradise,  xiii (5287] 126a-b 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 2^ 108c; APH 124 133c-d; BK II, APH 15
149a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 137d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i, prop 17, schol 362c363c passim; part ii, prop ^, demonst 374a-b; prop
4-5  374c-d;  prop 9 376a-c; prop 19-20 382b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  ii  [146-151]  114b;  BK  V  [469-505]  185b  186a  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  SECT 3 268d; ch xi, sect 2:5 305a-b 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 29-3^ 418c-419a esp sect ^53 419a; sect
70-71  426d427a;  sect  75-76  427d-428a;  sect  81 428c-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,   113c-118a;   173b-174a  esp  173b-c  /  Judgement,  551a-552c;
575b-577a;  580c-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 169d170b 1/.
Idea  as  the  unity  of determinate existence and concept: the Absolute
Idea  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a; INTRO, par 1-2 9a-10a;
par  31-32  19c-20b; part III, par 279, 93b-c; par 345 111b; par 352-353
112b-c;  par  360 113d-114a,c; additions, 2 115d; 19 119c-d / Philosophy
of  History,  INTRO, 156c-162a esp 156d-157b, 158c, 166b-162a; 163a-165b
esp  165a-b; 166b-c; 169d-171b; 176b c; 182d 2. The origin or derivation
of   ideas  in  the  human  mind  2a.  The  infusion  of  ideas:  divine
illumination  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 25 25c; BK VII, par
8,  45d;  par 16 48c-49a; par 23 50b-c; BK XIII, par 19 115c-d / City of
God,  BK viii, cH 7 269c-d; ch 9 270d-271a; bk x, ch 2 299d-300a; bk xi,
ch  24-25 335c-336d; CH 27, 337d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
84,  a  ^ 444d-446b; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; a 2, rep 2 475a-d; a 4,
ans 476c-477a; a 7, ans 478d-479c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi,
q  9,  a  3 765b-766b; a 4, rep 2-3 766b 767b; part hi suppl, q 92, A I,
ans  1025c-1032b 31 Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99a-b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  2633  418a-419a;  sect 57 423d-424a; sect 67 426a-b 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 113b-c

[831b]
773  2b.  The  innate endowment or retention of ideas: the activation of
the  mind's  native  content  or  structure  by  sense, by memory, or by
experience  7  PiAfo:  Phacdrus, 124a 126c esp 126a c / Meno, 179d 183a:
188d  189a  /  Phaedn,  228a230d  /  Theaetetus, 515d 517b 8 ARisTfJTLR:
Posterior  Analytics, bk i, cm i 97a d: BK n, ch 19 (99''2o-^^| 136a-b /
Metaphysics,  HK  I.  CH  9  [992'*24  99^*1  1  1  511a c 12 Fpictetus:
Discnurses,  bk  i, ch 22 127c 128c; BK II, CH II 150a 151b 17 Plotincs:
First  Hnncad, tr ii, ch 4, 8b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 25, 155b; tr
in  .  ch  5  160d 161b / Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2, 216b 18 Au(;ustine:
Confessions,  bk x, par 15-19 75a76b: par 26-38 78a 81a / City ofGod, bk
viii,  ch  6,  269b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 55, a 2
289d-290d:  a  3, rep i 291a d; q 57, a i, rep 3 295a-d: q 84, a t, 443d
444d; a 4, ans 444d446b: A 6, ans 447c-449a: q 89, a i, rep ^ 473b 475a;
q  117,  a  i,  ans and rep 4 595d597c 28 Harvey: On Aniinal Generation,
333d  335a  esp  334c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  Ib-c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  iv, 5c-d; 6d; viii, 13c-d / Discourse, part iv, 53b;
part  v,  54c  /  Meditations, II 77d-81d: iii, 83b: 88c-d; vi, 96d 97a;
99a-c  /  Objections and Replies, 120c-d: 140c: 215b-c: 224b,d 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, 90d-91b; bk i, ch I, sect I 95b,d-96a: sect 15 98d
99a;  sect  23-24  101b-102b:  ch  ii, sect 12 107b-d; ch hi 112c-121a,c
passim, esp sect 21 118b119a: bk ii, ch I, SECT i 121a-b: sect 6 122b-c;
SECT  9 123a: sect 17 125c-d: ch ix, sect 6 139a; ch xi, sect 16 147a 35
Hume:  Human Understanding, sect ii, div 17, 457b,d [fn i] 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 14a-b, 22a.c, 23a-34c, 41c-42b, 48d-51d. 53b 55a,
58d-59a,  61a  62c,  66d  93c: 113b 115a / Practical Reason, 352c-353a /
Judgement, 551a 589c 53 James: Psychology, 851a 890a esp 851b 852a, 856a
b,  859a  860b.  867a  868b,  879b. 889a 54 Freud: General Introduction,
512b-513b  esp 512b: 526c-d; 532b: 599a b / Group Psychology, 688d 689a:
689b  [fn  i]  /  Ego  and Id, 707c-708b esp 708b 2c. The acquirement of
ideas  by  perception  or  intuition:  simple  ideas  or forms as direct
objects  of the understanding 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-c / Republic, bk vi,
383d  388a; bk vh. 392b 393c / Timaeus, 457c458a / Parmenides, 487d-488a
/  Theaetetus, 535bd 18 Augustine: City of God, bk vhi, ch 6, 269b c; bk
xh, ch 7 346c-d

[832a]
774  THE  GREAT IDEAS (2. The origin or derivation of ideas in the human
mind.  2c.  The  acquirement of ideas by perception or intuition: simple
ideas  orforms  as  direct  objects  of the understanding.) 19 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 84, a I, ANs and REP I 440d-442a; a 2, ans
442b443e; a 4, ans and rep 1-2 444d-446b; aa 5-7 446c-450b 31 Descartes:
Rules,  iii,  4a-b / Meditations, vi, 99a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop  14-23  380c383c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, SECT 15
98d-99a; ch iii, sect 21 118b-119a; BK II, CH i-ix 121a-141b passim, esp
ch  i,  SECT  1-8 121a-123a, sect 17 125c-d, ch i, sect 20-CH IV, SECT I
126d-129c, ch iv, sect 6-CH V 131a-b, ch ix, sect 1-7 138b-139b, SECT 15
141a;  ch  xi,  sect 17-cH xii, sect 2 147a-d; ch xii, sect 8 148c-d; ch
xiii,  sect 2 149a; cm xiv, sect 2 155b-c; sect 31 161d162a; ch xv, sect
9  164b-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  i  165c-d; CH XVII, sect 22-cH xviii, sect i
173d-174a;  ch  xviii,  sect  6  174c-d; ch xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; sect 15
177d;  ch  xxi,  sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect i 204a-b; sect 3 204c-d;
SECT  5  205a-b;  sect  7 205d-206a; sect 9 206b-c; sect 15 208c-d; sect
29-30  211d-212b; sect 32-37 212c-214b passim; ch XXV, SECT 9 216d; sect
ii  217a;  ch xxx, SECT 2 238b-c; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch XXXII, sect
14-16 245c-246b; bk hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c; ch iv 260a-263c passim, esp
sect  11-15  261d-263b;  ch  v,  sect  2  263d264a;  ch  vi,  sect 46-47
281d-282b;  ch  xi,  SECT  21-23  304d-305b;  bk  iv,  ch  ii, sect ii13
311c-312b;  ch  hi, sect 23 320a-c; ch iv, sect 4 324c; ch xviii, sect 3
381b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect i 413a-b; sect 18 416b-c; sect
25-33 417d419a passim; SECT36419c-d; sect 88-91 430a431a passim 35 Hume:
Human       Understanding,      sect      ii      455b457b;sECTVii,DiV49
471c-d;Div6i477c-478a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 318b-319a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  14a-b;  23a-33d  esp  25b-c,  27c, 28d-29d, 32a-c; 34a-c;
41c-42a;  45b-46a;  53b-55a;  66d-72c  esp  69c-72c;  85d-93c;  99a107b;
131a-c; 186d-187a /Judgement, 465a-c; 528c-530c; 570c-572b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, Ic-d 53 James: Psychology, 502a-505b esp
502a  2d.  Reflection  as a source of ideas: the mind's consideration of
its  own  acts  or content 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 4 [429^26-430^9]
662b-c  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i 105a-106c; ch 17 122d-124a;
ch 20 126c-127b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 12-31 74b79d

[832b]
2d to If 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 9, REP 2 58b-59a;
q  28, a 4, rep 2 160c-161d; Q 85, A 2 453d-455b; q 87, a 3 467b-468a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  96d-97a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  i,  sect 1-8 121a-123a; sect 17 125c-d; sect 24 127b-c; CH III,
SECT  i,  128d;  ch vi-vii 131b133b; ch IX, sect 1-2 138b-c; ch xi, sect
14,  146d;  CH  xii,  sect  1-2  147b-d; sect 8 148c-d; ch XIV, sect 2-6
155b-156c;  sect 31 161d162a; ch xvii, sect 22 173d-174a; ch xviii, SECT
6  174c-d;  ch  xx,  sect  1-2  176b-c;  sect  15  177d;  CH XXI, sect 4
178d-179c;  sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect i 204a-b; sect 5 205a-b; sect
15  208c-d;  sect  29-30  211d212b; SECT 32-37 212c-214b passim; ch xxv,
SECT  9  216d;  SECT  11  217a; bk hi, ch i, SECT 5 252b-c; ch v, sect 2
263d-264a;  bk  IV, CH III, SECT 23 320a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  i  413a-b  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect ii, div 14 456b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  55a-56c;  99a107b;  121a-123b  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 138 48c-d; additions, 89 129d-130a 53
James:  Psychology,  121a-b;  122b-126a  passim,  esp  122b-124b 2e. The
genesis of ideas by the recollection of sense-impressions: the images of
sense  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  8-18 73b76a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  49a-d;  part  iv,  258b-c;  262a-b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  26 156a157a 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 19a-20d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 17-18 380d382b; prop 40, schol 2 388a-b;
prop  49,  scHOL,  391d-392c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
SECT  21  118b-119a;  bk ii, ch x 141b-143d I passim, esp sect 2 141b-c,
sect   7   142c-d;  bk  IV,  CH  II,  SECT  14  312b-d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  ii  455b457b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d; div 61
477c478a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341d-342a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason,
54b-55a   53   James:   Psychology,   480a-501b  esp  480a-b  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351c-352d esp 351d-352a; 363c-364b; 367b-c;
384c-385c  esp  385 b-c / Unconscious, 442d-443a / General Introduction,
518c-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  700a-701d  2/.  The production of ideas by the
reworking  of  the  materials  of sense: the imaginative construction of
concepts  or  the  formation  of complex from simple ideas 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv [722-748] 53d-54a

[833a]
2^  to  3a  Chapter  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 14 74d-75a 19
Aquinas:  Surnma Theologica, part i, q 12, a 9, REP 2 58b 59a 23 HoBBEs:
l^et'iathan, part i, 50d 31 Descartes: Meditations, i, 76a-b; iii, 83b /
Objections and Replies, 210d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, hk v
[95
128] 177b178a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, SECT 5 122a-b;
sect 24 127b-c; ch ii, sect i2 127d-128b; ch vii, sect 10 133a-b; ch xi,
SECT  6-7  145a-b;  ch  xii-xxviii 147b 233d passim, esp ch xiii, sect i
148d-149a, sect 4-6 149b-d, SECT 27 154c-d, ch xiv, sect 2731 160d-162a,
ch  xv,  sect 2-3 162c-d, sect 9 164b-d, ch xvt, sect 1-2 165c-d, sect 5
166b-c,  SECT  8  167c,  ch xvii, sect 3 168b, sect 5 168d-169a, sect 22
173d-174a,  ch  xxi,  sect  75  200b-d,  CH  xxii, sect 2 201a-b, sect 9
202c-203a,  ch  xxv,  sect  9  216d,  sect  ii  217a, CH xxviii, sect 14
231d-232a,  sect 18 232d-233b; ch xxx, sect 3-5 238c-239b; CH XXXI, SECT
3-14  240a-243c  passim; ch xxxii, SECT 12 245b-c; sect 17-18 246b-247a;
SECT  22-25  247c-248a  passim;  bk  hi, ch ii, SECT 3 253c; ch iv, sect
12-14  262b-263a; ch IV, SECT 17-CH V, sect 16 263c-268b; ch \t, sect II
271b-d;  sect  26-51  2  74d-283a passim; ch XI, sect 15 303b-c; sect 18
304a-b; bk IV, CH IV, sect 5-8 324d-325c; sect 11-12 326b-d 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, intro, sect 10 406d-407b; sect i 413a-b; sect 28 418b-c
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect ii, div 13-14 455d-456b; sect iii,
div  18  457c-d; SECT v, DIV 39, 466c-d; div 40, 467b; sect VII, div 49,
471d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338a;  341d-342a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
5d-6b;  31c-d;  45d-46a;  65d-108a,c  esp  66d-91d, 101b-107b; 193a195a;
211d-216c  /Judgement,  493c-495a,c  53  James:  Psychology,  104a-106b;
149b-153b  esp  150a,  153a-b;  179b-181a  esp  181b  [fn  i]; 362a363b;
480a-481a   54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  270c-271a  2^.  The
abstraction  of ideas from senseexperience: the concept as the first act
of the mind; the grades of abstraction 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk ii, ch 19
[99^20-100^4] 136a-d
/ Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[193^22-194*11]
270a-c / Metaphysics, bk i, CH I [980*28-981^13] 499a-500a; bk iv, ch 4
[1006*12-^12] 525b-d; bk
vi, ch i
[1025^281026*6] 547d-548a; bk
vii, ch 10 [1035^351036*12] 559b-c; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i*29-''i2]
589c-d;  bk xiii, ch 2 [io77^i]-cH 3 [1078^5] 608d-610a / Soul, bk i, ch
i
[403*2-16]
632a-b; bk hi, ch 4
[429^^10-23] 661d-662a;
CH  7 [431*14-^19] 663d-664b; ch 8 664b-d / Memory arid Reminiscence, ch
i
[449^30450*25] 690c-691a

[833b]
37:  IDEA  75  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, a i, RF.p 2
3b-4a;  q  m,  a 13, ans 61c 62b; q 14, a II, ri:p r 84c 85c; q 40, a ^,
ans 215c 216d: Q 54, A 4, ANS and REi' 2 287b 288a; 5s. a 2 289d 290d; q
57,  a i, rep ^ 295a d; (.> 7s. a 2, Ri I' i, 379c 380c; a ^, rep 2 380c
381b;  a 5, ANS 382a 383b; q 76, a 2, rip 4 388c 391a; Q 79, AA ^-4 416a
418c;  a 5, rip 2 418c 419b; Q 84, A 2. ANS 442b 443c; a 6 44 7c 449a; q
85,  AA  i-:^451c 457a; AA5 6 457d 459c; a 8 460b461b; Q S(>, A I, REP ^
473b-475a;  a 4, ans and REP I 476c-477a; a 7, ans 478d 479c; q 117, A I
595d-597c;  part i-ii, q 29, a 6, ans and REP 1,3 748b- 749a 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part hi, q 9, A 4 766b 767b; part hi suppl, q 92, a i,
ans  1025c  1032b  28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 305a / On Animal
Generation,  332a  335c  31  Descartes: Rules, xiv, 29b 30d / Discnurse,
PART  IV,  53b  /  Objections and Replies, 215b-c; 216d 217d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part ii, prop 40, schol 2 388a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  i,  ch  i, SECT 15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch xi, SECT9-11 145b146a; ch xii,
sect  i,  147b-c;  ch  xxxii,  sect  6-8  244b-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 6-9
255c256c;  CH VI, sect 32-33 277c-278c; bk iv, ch VII, sect 9 338d-339b;
ch  ix,  sect i 349a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro 405a412a, c esp
sect  6-19  405d-410c; sect 5 414a-b; sect 97-100 431d-432c; sect 118120
436b-d;  sect 143 441c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122
505c-d;  div  124-125  506a  507a  esp div 125, 507b [fn i] 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  341b-342b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-24a; 45d-46a; 115b-c;
193a-195a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  296c-297b  passim  53  James:
Psychology,  305a-312a  passim; 329a331b esp 331b 54 Freud: Unconscious,
442b-443d  2h.  The  derivation  of  transcendental ideas from the three
syllogisms  of  reason  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 109d-120c esp llOd-lllc 3.
The  division  of ideas according to their objective reference 3^. Ideas
about  things  distinguished  from  ideas  about  ideas: the distinction
between  first  and second intentions 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  12,  a  9, REP 2 58b-59a; q 14, a 6, rep i 80a-81c; a 13, REP 2-3
86d-88c; q 15, a 2, ans and rep 2 92a-93b; q 29, a i, rep 3 162a-163b; o
^o,  A  4, ANS 170c-171b; q 66, a 2, ans and rhp 2 345d-347b; q 84, a i,
rep i 440d-442a; q 85, a 2 453d-455b

[834a]
11(>  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3.  The  division  of ideas according to their
objective  reference,  ^a.  Ideas  about  things distinguishedfrom ideas
about  ideas:  the  distinction  betweenfirstandsecond  intentions.)  23
HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv, 270a 24 Rabelais: Gargantiia and Pantagruel,
bk  ii,  79c;  BK  III, 150a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ii
252d-254c  passim;  ch iv, sect 2 260b; ch v, SECT 12 266d-267a; sect 14
267b-c;  ch  vi,  sect 19, 273b; sect 48-50 282b-d; ch xi, SECT 10 302b;
sect 24 305b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15d-16c esp 16c; 55a-56c; 99a-101b;
121a-123b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 156d158a 53 James:
Psychology,  300b  3^. Adequate and inadequate ideas: clear and distinct
ideas  as compared with obscure and confused ideas 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk  i,  ch i 259a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 6, ANS
and rep 3 55b-56a; q 13 62b-75b; q 14, a 6 80a-81c; a 12, rep 2 85d-86d;
Q  55,  a  3  291a-d;  q  85, a 3 455b-457a; a 4, rep 3 457a-d; a 8, ans
460b-461b; q 89, a i, ans 473b-475a; a 2, ans and rep 2 475a-d; a 3, ans
and  rep  2,4  475d-476c; a 4, ans and rep 2 476c-477a; q 94, a i, rep 3
501d-503a;  Q  117,  A  I, REP 4 595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  10,  A 2, REP 3 768b-769c; part hi suppl, q 92, a I, REP 2
1025c-1032b  28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-333d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  14-17 107d-108a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
51b-52a  /  Meditations,  73d-74a;  iii,  82a-d;  85b-86b;  vi,  99a-c /
Objections  and  Replies, postulate vVI 131 b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  def  4  373b;  prop  34-36  385d-386b;  prop  38  386c-d; prop 4043
387a-389b;  part  iii,  def 1-3 395d-396a; PROP I 396a-c; prop 3 398b-c;
part  iv,  appendix,  II  447b;  PART V, prop 3-4 453a-d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  91d-92c;  bk  i, ch iii, sect 19 117c-d; bk ii, ch xiii,
sect  1720  152a-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  3-4  165d-166b;  ch  XVII, sect 7-8
i69b-170a;  sect  12-21  170d173d passim, esp sect 15 171b-172a; ch xxv,
SECT  8  216b-c;  ch  xxviii, sect 19 233b-c; ch XXIX 233d-238a; ch xxxi
239b-243c  passim;  CH  XXXII, sect 18, 246d-247a; bk hi, ch vi, SECT 37
279b; sect 40 280a-b; sect 43-51 280c-283a; ch x, sect 2-4 291d-292c; ch
xi,  sect  24  305b-d;  bk  iv,  ch ii, sect 15 312d313a; ch hi, sect 26
321b-c;  ch  xii, sect 14 362d-363a 35 Berkeley: Human K?Jou>ledge, sect
30 418c; SECT ^^ 419a; sect 36 419c-d

[834b]
3b  to  Aa  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 48-49 470d-471d;
sect xn, div 125 506d507a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c; 30b-31a; 125b
[fn
i]; 193a-b /Judgement, 603c-d 53 James: Psychology, 311b-312b
[fn i];
484a  480  bnega5c.  Real  and  fantastic  or fictional ideas: tions and
chimeras  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk iv [722-748] 53d-54a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 9, REP 2 58b-59a; q 17, a 2,
rep  2 102a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50d; 57b-c; part IV, 258b-d;
261a;  262a-c  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  60  112c113a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  i, 76a-77c; iii, 83b / Objections and Replies,
210d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 1-6 133b-134a;
ch  xvii, sect 12-21 170d173d esp sect 15 171b-172a; ch xxx 238a239b; BK
III,  CH i, sect 4 252a; bk iv, ch iv, SECT 1-12 323d-326d passim; ch v,
sect  7-8  330b-d  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 29-30 418c; sect
33-34  419a-c; sect 36 419c-d; SECT 82-84 428d-429c; sect 86-91 429c431a
42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 62d-63a; 174d-175b; 193a-c 53 James: Psychology,
300b; 639a-644a esp 640a641b, 642b
[fn 2], 643b
[fn
i];  646b-655a;  659a-660b  54  Freud:  Interpretation ofDreams, 158a-d;
270c271a / General Introduction, 597b-598a 4. The logic of ideas 4a. The
verbal  expression  of  ideas  or  concepts:  terms  7  Plato:  Cratylus
85a-114a,c  /  Phaedrus, 138c140c / Sophist, 575d-577b / Seventh Letter,
809c-810d  8 Aristotle : Categories 5a-21d / Prior Analytics, BK I, CH I
[24^16-18]  39c; ch 35 66c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par t^^
120c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 34, a I, ANS 185b-187b; q
85,  a  2,  rep  3  453d-455b;  Q  107,  a  i,  ans 549b-550b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  54c-58a;  part  iv,  270a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  57d-58a;  60b-c;  61b-c;  62c-d / Novum Organum, bk i, APH 14
107d-108a;  aph  59 112b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, xiii, 26b-c / Objections
and Replies, 137a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 49, schol, 392a-c 33
Pascal: Pensees, ^gz 239b-240a

[835a]
Ab  to  43(3)  CnAPTKR  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii. cii x\n
200d-204a  passim, esp skct ;?-i<) 201b 203r; CH XXXII, SECT 7-8 244c-d;
bk  hi  251b.d 306d passim, csp ch i-viii 251b,d-285a, < m xi 300a-306d;
bk  iv,  ch v, sect 4 329b-d; cii VI, SECT 1-3 331b-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  ii-i2  407b-408b;  sect  15 409a-b; sect 18-19
410a-c  38  Rousseau:  Imyuulity,  340a-342c  45  Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  prhf,  lb  c  49 Darwin: Origin of Spceies, 40c -d 53 James:
Psychology,  127b-128a;  153b  154a; 158a-159b;" 181b 183a; 332b 334a 54
Freud:  Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 662a-b 4b, The classification of
terms:  problems  in  the use of different kinds of terms 4^(1) Concrete
and  abstract  terms  8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch ^4 66b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q ^5, a 3, REP I 16a-d; q 13, a i,
rep  2  62c-63c;  a  9,  ANS  71b-72c; q 32, a 2 178a-179b; q 39, aa 4-5
205c'208c;  q 54, a i, rep 2 285a-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 57a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  viii  284b-285a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 341 b-c 53 James: Psychology, 305a-308b esp 308b-309b
[fn
1-3];  689a  54 Freud: General Introduction, 516b-c 4^(2) Particular and
universal terms 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[1^*20-^9]
5b-c; CH 5
[2^11-3^23] 6a-8a /
Interpretation, ch 7
[17*37-40] 26d
/ Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 10
[1035^28-32] 559b; ch
ii  [1037*5-9]  560c  17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch 12 251a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a  9  71b-72c; q 29, a i
162a-163b; a 4, ans and REP 4 165c-167a; q 30, a 4 170c-171b; q 33, a 3,
rep  I  182c-183c; q 36, a i, ans 191a-192a; Q 40, A 3, ans 215c-216d; q
55,  a  3,  rep  3  29Ia-d; q 57, a 2, rep 3 295d-297a; o 76, A 2, rep 3
388c-391a; q 85, a 2, rep 2 453d455b; A 3, rep 1,4 455b-457a; q 86, a 2,
rep  4 462a-463a; part i-ii, q 30, a 4, rep 2 751c752b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q  7,  a  13,  REP 3 755c-756c; q 10, a 3, rep 2
769d771b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 55b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  40, schol i 387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
i,  sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii, ch xi, sect8-ii 145b146a; ch xvi, sect i
165c-d;  bk  hi,  ch i, sect 3 251d-252a; ch hi 254d-260a; ch vi, sect I
268b-c;  sect  32-33  277c-278c;  bk iv, ch III, sect 31 323c-d; ch vii,
sect 9 338d339b

[835b]
^7:  II)I:A  777  35 Hkrkf.i.ry: Human Knowledge, intro, sect II 12 407b
408b;  sf.ct  rs  r6  409a  d;  sp.cr  18n)  410a  c; srcr 122 437b c 38
Koi'ssf.m':  Inequality,  341b 342b 53 J A M 1: s : Psychology, 307a 3 1
2a  4^(3) Specific and generic terms: htfimae species and summa genera 8
ARisrori.F: Categories, en ^ 9 5d 16d / Prior Anah'tics, \\k i, ch 27
[4^*25-44)
60c-d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 19-22 111c 115b / Topics, bk I, CH
9 147a-b; cii 15 [h)7'Vii1 151a; BK IV, CH i
[i2o''36-!2i»9j 168d 169a;
ch 2 [i22''^-i9] 170a-b; ch 4 |i24*'i5 22) 173c; CH 4
[i25''5] CH
5
[125^19] 173d 174d; ch 6
fiiS"! v^9l 177d 178a; bk v, ch ^ [i^2*io-23] 182d 183a; cii 4
[i ^2*^:55 -n3»ii] 184a; bk vr,
ch  5  196b-d; bk vii, ch i [i52*^8-:^9| 207b / Sophistical Refutations,
ch 22 245a-246c / Physics, BK I, CH 2 [i85''2o-^4] 260a-b; bk mi, CH I
[200^:52-20
*:5] 278b; bk iv, ch ^ [210' 1 17-19] 289a; bk vii, ch 4 330d-333a esp
[249*8-^26] 332a-333a / Heavens, bk iv, ch 4
[312*12-17] 403d / Generation and Corruption^
bk I, CH 3 413c-416c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch I
[995^27-31] 514b; CH
3 517a-518a; bk v, CH 3
[1014^3-13]
534d; ch 7
[1017*24-^]
537d-538a; ch 8 538b-c; ch 13-15 541b-543a; CH 19-21 543d-544b; ch 25
[102^^22-25]
545c; CH 28
[1024*^10-16] 546c; bk vn, ch 3
[1029*11-26] 551c-d; CH 12-1^ 561b 563a; bk
VIII,  CH  6  569d-570d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [1045^2733]  570b; bk xi, ch i
[1059^21-1060*1] 587d588a; bk xiv, ch i [1088*23-^4] 620c-d; ch 2
[1089*6-1090*3] 621b-622c / Soul, bk
i, cm i
[402*23-25] 631b-c; CH 5 [410*12-2^] 640a-b
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 3
[642*^
20-643*28]  166a-d  18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi, ch ^4,
670c-671a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, REP I 16d-17c;
A  5  17c-18b;  a  6,  rep  2  18c19a; Q 5, A 3, REP I 25a-d; a 6, rep i
27c-28b;  Q  II, A I, REP I 46d-47d; q 12, a 9, rep 2 58b59a; q 13, a 7,
ans  68d-70d;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4 93b-94a; q 28, a i, ans and rep 1-2
157c158d;  A  2 158d-160a; q 29, a 2, rep 4 163b164b; Q 30, A 4, ANS and
rep 3 170c-171b; q 50, A 2, REP I 270a-272a; q 66, a 2, rep 2 345d-347b;
q  76,  a  3,  rep  4  391a-393a;  a 6, REP 1-2 396a-d; q 77, a 4, rep i
403a-d;  q 85, A 3, ANS and REP 4 455b-457a; a 4, ans 457a-d; a 5, rep 3
457d-458d;  q  88,  a  2.  REP  4  471c-472c; part i-h, q 18, a 7, rep 3
698c-699c;  q  35,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  779c780c  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  parti-h, q 49, a I lb-2b; Q 61, A I, REP I 54d-55c; part hi
SUPPL, Q 92, A I, ANS 1025c 1032b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c 30
Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 28 158d159a

[836a]
{4b.  The classification of terms:problems in the use of different kinds
of  terms.  4^(3)  Specific and generic terms: infimae species and summa
genera.)  35  Locke: Human Understandings bk hi, ch hi, SECT 8-9 256a-c;
ch iv, sect 16 263b-c; ch VI, SECT 11-12 271b-272b; sect 32-33 277c278c;
SECT  36-41  279a-280b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b 42 Kant: Fure
Reason,  42b-43b;  193a-200c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 30d-31b; 64a;
207a-208aesp207d;210b-211b;  238b-c;  241d242a / Descent of Man, 332b-c;
347a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  345a-b;  870b-871a  4ib{4) Univocal and
analogical  terms  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i 5a-b / Topics, bk I, ch
15 [107^3-18] 151a-b; bk vi, ch 10 [148* 23-25] 202b;
[148^38-^4] 202c; bk viii, ch 3
[158^8-159^2] 215b-c / Sophistical Refutations,
CH I
[165^6-12]
227b-c; ch 33
[182^13-21]
251d / Physics, bk i, ch 2 [i85*2o]-ch 3
[187*
10] 260a-262a; bk vii, ch 4 [249*3-24] 331d332b / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch
2  [1003*33-^15]  522b-c;  bk vii, ch 4 [1030*32-^3] 553a-b; bk XI, CH 3
[1060^34-1061*10]  589a-b;  bk  xii,  ch 4-5 599d-601a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3, a 6, rep I 18c-19a; q 13, aa 5-6 66b-68c; a 10
72c-73c;  q  16,  a 6, ans 98b-d; q 29, a 4, rep 4 165c-167a; q 32, a i,
rep  2 175d-178a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, A I, REP
I  54d-55c;  part  hi,  q  60,  a  i, ans and rep 3 847b-848a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60b-c /
Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 43 109d-110a; aph 59-60 112b-113a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,   part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2  387b-388b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch iv, sect 5, 131a; ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c; ch
XXIX,  SECT  6-12  234d-236c;  bk  hi, ch vi, sect 28 276a-b; sect 47-51
282a-283a;  ch ix 285a-291c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div
62-63  478b-d  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 307b-308b 42 Kant: Judgement,
547b-548c;  602b-603a  53  James:  Psychology, 549b-550a; 689a'b 4c. The
correlation, opposition, and order of terms 7 Plato: Protagoras, 49a-50b
/   Phaedo,  226d227a;  242d-245c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-353d  esp
351b-352b;   bk   vii,  392b-393b  /  Sophist,  573b-574a  8  Aristotle:
Categories,  ch 5 [3^24-31] 8a; ch 6 [5^11-6*18] lOa-c; ch 7 lla-13d; ch
8 [lo^ii25] ISd; ch 10-15 16d-21d / Prior Analytics, BK I, ch 46 70b-71d
/ Topics, bk ii, ch 7-8

[836b]
778 THE GREAT IDEAS 4Z'(4) to 5a 158b-160a; bk iv, ch 3
[123^1-124*10] 171d172c; CH
4
[124*35-^34]
173a-d;
[i25*5-*'i4]
173d-174c; bk v, ch 6 187a-188c; bk vi, ch 8 200b-201a; ch 9
[147*23-148*9]
201b-202a;  CH  12 [149^4-23] 203d-204a / Physics, bk hi, CH I [201*4-8]
278c / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[1004*9-17]
523a-b;
[1004^27-1005*2]
523d524a; bk v, ch 10 539a-c; ch 15 542a-543a; BK IX, CH I
[1046*29-36] 571b; CH 2
[1046^
7-15] 571c-d; BK X, CH 3
[io54^23]-ch
10
[1059*15] 581c-586d; bk xi, ch 3 [1061*18-28]
589b-c;  bk  xii,  ch 10 [1075^20-24] 606c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  13, a 7 68d-70d; q 16, aa 3-4 96b-97c; q 17, a i, ANS lOOd-
lOld;  a  4,  ans  103c-104b;  q  28  157c161d  passim;  q  32, a 2, ans
178a-179b;  q  33,  A 4, rep 1-3 183c-185a; qq 40-41 213a-224a passim; q
48,  a  i, ans and rep i 259b-260c; A 3, REP 3 261b-262a; q 49, a 3, ans
and  rep  I 266d-268a,c; q 103, a 3, rep 2 530a-c; a 8, REP 3 533d-534b;
part i-ii, q 18, a 8, rep i 699d-700b; q 29, a 2, rep i 745c-746b; q 35,
A 4, ANS and rep 2 774d-775d; q 36, a i, ans 780c-781b; q 46, a i, rep 2
813b-814a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 64, A 3, rep 3
68b-69b;  q  67, a 3, ans 83b-84d; Q 71, A 6, REP I llOb-lllb; Q 72, A 6
116b117a; PART ii-ii, Q 21, A 3, REP 2-3 479c-480b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  57b-c;  58a-c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i,
12d-13b  53 James: Psychology, 869a-872b; 878a-879b 5. Ideas or concepts
in  the  process  of  thought  5a. Concept and judgment: the division of
terms  as  subjects  and  predicates; kinds of subjects and predicates 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 2-3 5b-d; ch 5
[2*11-3^24]
6a-8a / Interpretation 25a-36d / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 27 [43*25-44]
60c-d  / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 4 lOOa-lOlb; ch 19 [81^23-30] Hid
/  Topics,  BK  I, ch 4-9 144b147b / Physics, bk i, ch 3 [186*22-187*10]
261b262a;  ch  6  [189*28-33] 264d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
28-29 26a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, ans lOd-lld;
q  3, a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; q 13, a 12 74c-75b; q 16, a 2 95c-96b; q 58, a
2  301b-d;  A  4  302d-303c;  q  76, a 3, ans 391a393a; q 85, a 2, rep 3
453d-455b;  aa  5-6  457d-459c; a 8, ans 460b-461b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  iv, 270a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 22a-b / Meditations, III, 83a
/  Objections  and  Replies,  def ix 130d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39a-44c;
51d-52b;  59c66d  esp63d-64a;  180c-182h  / Judgement, 480d482b; 562a-d;
572b-575b  53  ]AMES -.Psychology, 144a-b; 178a-179a;313a-b; 638b; 861b;
870b-873a

[837a]
5b  to  6a Chaptkr 5b. The position and sequence of terms in reasoning 8
Aristotle: Prior Ann lytin, hk i, en ^ (2s''^i26*2] 40d-41a; en 5 (26^^4
-y'^ij 42a; en 6
[28*10-16] 43b-c
23  HoBBEs: I^iathari, pari i, 58a c 30 Bacon: Advancement of lu-arning,
59c 60a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, en xvH, SECT 4, 373a-375a;
sect  S,  377c-d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 318b 319a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  llOd  111c;  118a c 53 James: Psychology, 667b-668a; 672b 673b;
868b  879b esp 869b-873a, 878a-879b; 889b 5c. The dialectical employment
of  the  ideas  of  reason 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp lab; 7a 8b;
15c-16c;   20a;   53b-54b;   59c-d;  93c-99a;  101b107b:  108a-209d  esp
108a-112d,  120c  121a,  129c-130b,  133d,  173b-174a,  175c  d, 185b-c,
190a-209d; 217d-218a; 219a-223d; 227a-235a esp 229b-c, 231c-232a / Fund.
Prin.  Afetaphysic  of  Morals, 260d-261c; 283d-284d / Practical Reason,
291a-292a;  296a-d;  309b;  310d-311d; 313b-314d; 320c-321b; 335c337a,c;
337a-355d  esp 337a-338c, 343b-c, 347d-348a, 348d-355d / Judgement, 461a
c;  540a-542a;  551a-552c; 562a-564c; 570b-572b; 606d-607c 5d. The order
of  concepts  in the stages of learning: the more and the less general 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i
[184^21-^14]
259b  9  Aristotle:  Parts ofAnimals, bk i, ch i [639* 12-^12] 161b-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 2 24b-25a; q 10, a i, ans and
rep  1,5  40d-41d;  Q 14, A 6, ANS 80a-81c; q 33, a 3, rep i 182c183c; Q
55,  A  3,  rep  2  291a-d;  q  85,  a  3  455b457a 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 332a-334d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 68d-69c / Novum
Organum,  pref 105a-106d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 167c-d 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, SECT 15 98d-99a; sect 20, lOOd;
sect  23  101b-102a;  ch  hi,  sect  13  116a-b;  bk  ii, ch i, sect 6-8
122b-123a;  sect  20-24 126d-127c; ch XI, sect 8-9 145b-c; bk hi, ch hi,
sect  7-9 255d-256c; bk iv, ch vii, sect 9 338d339b; SECT 11, 342c-d; ch
xii, sect 3 358d359c esp 359a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338a-342b passim,
esp 341b-342b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 193a- 200c esp 195d-197c / Practical
Reason,  294a-h  /  Judgement,  572a-b;  601d-602b 53 James: Psychology,
315a-319a esp 317b-319a; 327a-329a; 360a; 522b-525a esp 524a-b 54 Freud:
Instincts, 412a-h / Unconscious, A'\2h' 443a / Ego and Id, 700d-701a

[837b]
b  3>7:  IDl^A 779 5e. The as.^ociation, comparison, and tliscrimination
of  ideas:  the  stream of thought or consciousness 8 Aristoili : Memory
and Reminiscence, en 2
[4S«*'7 ^s\''v\m2df>9Sd
23  HouiiEs: Ixtiathan, I'Akr i, S2b-53b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  26  156a157a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, i'kop iH 381d 382b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch vii, sect 9 133a; en xi, sect 2
144a  c;  cm xiv, sect 1-16 155b 158a; en xxxiii 248b 251d; BK IV, en II
309b  313a  fwssim,  esp SKf/r i 7 309b 311a; en in, sect 2-4 313a c; ch
vi,  SEcr  i^  335c d; en vii, sect 17 337a-338c esp SECT 2 337a; en xi,
sect  i  ^  M  357d-358c; ch XVII, SECT 2-:^ 371d 372b; sect 4, 373a375a
passim;  sect  8 377b d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 26 418a; sect
^o  418c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect iu 457c458a; sect v, div
41-45  467d  469c  36  St  v.r'se:  Tristram  Shandy, 194a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  51c-d  / Judgement, 493c d; 528c-529b 53 James: Psychology, 15b
19b  esp  15b  17a, 19a b; 35b-37a ^csp 36b; 146a-187b; 291a295a passim,
esp  293a-294a; 315a 395a esp 315a-331b, 344b-348a, 360a-395a; 427b431a;
502a-507a  passim;  525a  526b; 664a665a; 677a-678b; 827a 835a esp 828b,
831b834a;  867a-873a  esp 867a-b; 878a 879a 54 Freud: Hysteria, 65d-67b;
74a-75a;  76c-d  / Interpretation of Dreams, 180a-181b; 347b350a passim;
352b-c;  373a  385c  esp  375b378b,  382a-384c  /  General Introduction,
486b489c  passim  6.  The  being  and truth of ideas 6a. The distinction
between real and intentional existence, between thing and idea: ideas as
symbols, or intentions of the mind 7 Plato: Parmenides, 489a8 Aristotle:
Interpretation, en i
[16*4-9] 25a/
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i, ch 36 [48*40-^)! 66d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 7
[1017*31-34]  538a: bk VI, CH 4 550a, c; bk ix, ch 3 [i047*3o-''2] 572c;
CH 10 577c-578a,c; bk xii, ch 7 [io72''i8-24] 602d-603a; en 9
[io74''35-io75*ii| 605c-d
/ Soul, BK III, en 2 [425^17-26] 657d-658a; en 3
[427*16-^6]
659c-d; en 4 661b 662c; en 8 664b- d / Memory and Reminiscence, en i
[45o'^25-45i*i9] 691a-692b
11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i, 403b 17 I'lotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8 132d133c 18 Ai'gustine: Confessions, bk x, par
16-26, 75b78a

[838a]
(6. The being and truth of ideas. 6a. The distinc' tion between real and
intentional  existence,  between  thing  and  idea: ideas as symbols, or
intentions  of  the mind.) 19 Aquinas: Summa TJieologica, part i, q 2, a
i,  REP 2 lOd-lld; Q 3, A 4, rep 2 16d-17c; q 5, A 2, ANS 24b-25a; q 11,
a  i esp rep 3 46d-47d; A 3, rep 2 4Qa-c; q 12,. a 2 51c-52c; q 13, a i,
ANS  62c-63c;  a 3, ans and rep 3 64d-65c; a 4 65c-66b; a 7, ans and rep
2,4-6  68d-70d;  a  9,  ans  and  rep  2 71b-72c; a ii, ans 73c74b; A 12
74c-75b; q 14, a i, ans and rep 3 75d-76c; a 2, ans and rep 2-3 76d-77d;
a  6,  REP  I  80a-81c;  a 8, ans 82c-83b; a 9, ans 83b-d; a 13, rep 2-3
86d-88c; q 15, a i, ans and rep 1,3 91b-92a; a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 16, A
2  95c-96b;  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  17, a 3, ans 102d-103c; q 18, a 4
107d-108c;  q  19,  a  3,  rep  6  llOb-lllc;  q  27, a i, ans and rep 2
153b-154b;  a  2,  ans and rep 2 154c-155b; a 3, ANS 155c-15ea; a 4, ans
and  rep  2  156b-d; Q 28 157c-161d passim; q 29, a i, rep 3 162a163b; Q
30,  A I, REP 4 167a-168a; a 4 170c171b; Q 32, aa 2-3 178a-180b; q 34, a
i  185b187b; a 3, ANS 18Sb-189a; q 37, a i, ans 197c199a; q 50, a 2, ans
270a-272a; qq 55-58 288d-306b passim; q 66, a 2, rep 2 345d347b; Q 67, A
3,  ANS  351b-352a;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  5 375a-377a,c; q 76, a 3, rep 4
391a-393a; a 6, rep 2 396a-d; q 78, a 3, ans 410a-411d; a 4, ANS and REP
2  411d-413d; q 79, a 4, rep 4 417a-418c; q 82, a 3, ans 433c-434c; q 84
440b-451b; q 85, a 2 453d-455b; a 3, rep 1,4 455b-457a; a 4 457a-d; a 5,
rep  3 457d-458d; A 8, rep 3 460b-461b; q 86, a i, ans 461c462a; q 87, a
i  465a-466c;  q 88, a i, rep 2 469a-471c; a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; q 89, a
2,  ans  and  rep  2  475a-d;  a  3, ans and rep 1,3 475d-476c; a 5, ans
477a-478b; part i-ii, q 5, a 6, rep 2 641a-642a; q 6, a 6, ans and rep 2
649a-650a;  q  8,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  655b656a; q 12, a 3, rep 2-3
670d-671b;  q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c; q 22, a 2, ans and rep 3 721c722c;
Q  28,  a I, rep 3 740b-741a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
93,  A I, REP 2 215b,d-216c; part hi, q 2, a 5, REP 2 715a-716b; part hi
suppl,  q 82, a 3, ans and rep 2 971a-972d 23 KoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
53c;  part  hi,  172a-d; part iv, 262a-d; 270a-c 26 Shakespeare: Richard
II,  act  v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part i,
la-8c,  18d-22a,  PART II, 285a-288c 31 Descartes: Meditations, 71d-72a;
iii,  83b86a; v, 93a-94a / Objections and Replies, i08b109d; 121a-c; def
i-iv  130a-b;  axiom  v-vi  131d-132a;  157b-158a; 212c-213a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d  esp 371c-372c; part ii, prop 5-9
374c-376c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk h, ch vhi 133b-138b passim,
esp sect 8 134b-c; ch

[838b]
780 THE GREAT IDEAS 6a to 6b XXII, SECT 2 201a-b; ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c;
ch  xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch xxxii, sect 8 244d; SECT 14-18 245c-247a; bk
hi,  ch  hi,  sect  12-20  257b-260a;  ch iv, sect 2 260b; CH V, SECT 12
266d-267a;  ch vi 268b-283a passim; bk iv, ch ii, sect 14 312b-d; ch ix,
SECT  I  349a;  ch  xi, sect 4-9 355b-357a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  1-96  413a-431d esp sect 1-24 413a-417d, sect 2944 418c-421a, sect
48-49  422a-b, sect 82-84 428d-429c, sect 86-91 429c-431a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect v, div 44 468d-469c; sect xii, div i 17-123 504a506a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23a-33d;  85d-93c;  95a-d;  97a-b;  117b-118a;
200c-209d;  211c-212a  /  Practical  Reason, 295 b-d /Judgement, 528c-d;
551a-553c;  604a-b 44 Bosw Ei.h: Johnson, 134c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  pref,  6a-  7a / Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-c; 158a160b;
188d-189a;  part  i, 219d-220a; 236a-c; 257c-d; part iv, 354b; 364b-c 48
Melville: Moby Dicl{, 385b 50 Marx: Capital, llb-c 53 James: Psychology,
128a-b;  142a-b;  176a-184a  passim,  esp  176a-b, 178a-181a; 191b-192a;
299a-302a  esp 302b [fn i]; 307a-311a esp 311b312b [fn i]; 639a-645b esp
640a;  659a-b; 852a; 865b-866a; 868b; 878a-882a esp 880b-882a; 889a-890a
54 Freud: General Introduction, 467d; 597d-598a 6b. The nature and being
of  ideas  in  relation  to  the  nature  and being of the mind 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a-b / Republic, bk v, 369a-373c; bk
vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus, 457b-458a / Parmenides, 486a-491d / Sophist,
567a-569a  8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 4 661b-662c 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things, bk iv [722-817] 53d-54d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
16-38  75b81a / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c / Christian Doctrine,
bk  ii,  ch 38, 654c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 15, a I esp
rep I 91b-92a; q 16, a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q 29, A 2, rep 4 163b-164b; q 76,
a  2,  rep  3  388c-391a;  q  79,  a  3,  ans  416a-417a; q 84, a I, ans
440d-442a;  qq  85-89  451b-480c  passim;  Q no, A I, REP 3 564c-565d 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Leartiing,
43d-44c  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  162b;  212C'213a  31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, def 3 373b; prop ii, demonst 377b; prop 49,
schol,  392a-c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch i, sect 15
98d-99a; bk ii, ch viii 133b-138b passim; ch xxii, sect 2 201a-b; ch xxx
238a239b  passim, esp sect 2-3 238b-d; ch xxxi, SECT 2 239b-d; ch xxxii,
sect 14-16 245c246b; BK III, CH v 263d-268a; ch vi, sect 26-

[839a]
6c  to  6/ Chapter 37: IDEA 781 51 274ci 283a passim; bk iv, cm iv, sect
45  324c  d;  sucr  11-12  326b d; en xi, sect 4 9 355b357a 35 Bkrkeley:
Human  Knowledge AOAaAAAd csp SECT 2-4 413b 414a, sect 25-3 ^ 417d 419a,
SECT  48-49  422a b, sect 86-91 429c 431a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14c-15c;
34a  35b;  113c118a;  173b-174a;  179c  I82b / l-und. Pnn. Metaphysic of
Morals,   281c  282d;  285a  287d  /  Judgement,  461a-462d;  542b-544c;
551a552c; 604a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a / Philosophy
of History, intro, 165a-b 50 Marx: Capital, lib c 53 James : Psychology,
104a-115a  passim,  esp  105b106b,  110a  b,  113a-115a;  149b-154a  csp
151b153b;  325a-327a  csp  326a-b  [in i]; 394a b 54 Freud: Unconscious,
430d-432c  csp 431c432c; 442b-443a 6c, The agreement between an idea and
its  object:  the  criterion of adequacy in correspondence 31 Descartes:
Meditations, in, 83a; 84a-85a; VI, 99a-c / Objections and Replies, 108b-
109d;  121a-c;  def i-iii 130a-b; axiom v-vi 131d132a; 153a-c; 157b-158a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom 6 355d; part II, DEF 1-4 373a-b; prop
24-40  3S3c-388b;  PROP 43 388c-389b; part iv, prop i 424c425a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch viii 133b-138b passim, esp sect 2 133c,
sect  7 134b, SECT 15 135c; ch xxiii, sect8-ii 206a207a passim; sect 37,
214a-b;  ch  xxx-xxxi  238a-243c;  ch  xxxii,  sect  8  244d; sect 13-18
245c-247a  passim;  bk  hi, ch vi, sect 9 270d271a; sect 28-31 276a-277c
passim;  sect 37 279b; sect 40 280a-b; sect 46-47 281d-282b; CH XI, SECT
24  305b-d;  bk iv, ch iv, sect i12 323d-326d esp sect 3 324b-c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect v, div 44 468d-469c esp 469b-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  36b-37a;  77b-d;  85d-88a  esp  86b-87c;  91d-93c 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of Chemistry, pref, Ib-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\ 231a 53 James:
Psychology,   141a-H2a;   301b   302a;   307a-b;   480b-484a  54  Freud:
Unconscious, 430b-c 6d. Clarity and distinctness in ideas as criteria of
their truth 31 Descartes: Meditations, 73d-74a; iii, 82a-d; 85b-86d; iv,
89a-b;  v  93a-96a  csp  93a-94a;  VI,  99a-c  / Objections and Replies,
120a-c;  postulate  vi-vii  131c;  210b-c; 237c-238b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop 2440 383c-388b; part v, prop 4, corol and
scHOL  453b-d  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, 91d-92c; bk II, CH XIII,
SECT II 150d-151b; ch xxiii, sect 32, 212d; CH XXIX 233d-238a

[839b]
; 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sf.ct ^o 418c; sect n 419a; skct ^6 419c
d  35  Hume:  Human Underitanding, mv 125 506d 507a 6e. The criterion of
genesis:  the  lest  of  an  idea's truth or meaning by refereace to its
origin 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [690-700] 9c; BK IV [469 521
1 50b 51a 23 HobBEs: leviathan, part i, 49a; 54b c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  learning,  16a; 43d44c; 57d 58b 31 Descartes: Meditations, vr, 99a-c
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, cm xxx, SECT 2 238b c; bk iv, ch
iv,  sect  4 324c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 29-30 418c; sect ^3
419a; sect ^6 419c d; sect 8284 428d 429c; sect 86-91 429c 431a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect ii 455b457b; SECT vii, div 49 471c-d 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist Manifesto , 4 2 7a b 428b-d 6/. The truth and falsity
of simple apprehensions, sensations, or conceptions: contrasted with the
truth and falsity of judgments or assertions 7 Plato: Cratylus, 85a 86b;
107c-  108b  /  Republic,  BK  VII,  392b-393b  /  Sophist,  575d-577b 8
Aristotle: Categories, cii 4
[2*4-10]
6a / Interpretation, ch i
[16*9-18] 25a-b
/ Metaphysics, BK IV, cH 5
[ioio**i4-29] 530b-c; bk
V, CH 29 [1024^27-38] 546d-547a; bk vi, ch 4
[1027*^18-28]
550a,c; rk ix, ch 10 577c578a,c; bk xiii, ch 3
[1078*14-32] 609c d
/ Soul, BK II, ch 6 [418*6-18] 648d-649a; bk iii, ch 3
[427^6-15]
659d-660a;
[428*5-429*2]
660b  661a;  ch  6  662d-663c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk iv
[324-521]  48c-51a  csp  [469-521] 50b-51a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  q 17, aa 2-3 102a-103c; q 58, a 4, ans
302d-303c;  q  85,  a  i, rep i 451c-453c; a 6 458d-459c; q 89, a 5, ans
477a-478b;  o  94,  A  4  505a-506a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 57d 58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 14
107d-108a  31 Descartes: Rules, xii 18b-25a passim / Discourse, part IV,
52a  / Meditations, iii, 83a; iv 89a-93a / Objections and Replies, 123d-
125c;  157b 158a; 215d-216c; 229d-230d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
32-35 385c386b; PROP 49, schol, 392a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxxii  243c-248b;  bk  hi,  ch  vii, sect i 283a b; bk IV, CH V
329a-331b;  ch  vi, sect 16 336d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36b-37d; 64d 65c;
108a  d;  179c  180c; 193a-b; 211c-218d / Judgement, 570b-571c 53 James:
Psychology, 299a-314b passim: 638b; 640b; 668a-671a

[840a]
782 THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES

[840b]
; For: The theory of Ideas as eternal forms existing apart from mind and
matter,  see  Change  15a;  Eternity  4c;  Form la, 2a-2b; Universal and
Particular  2a.  The theory of ideas as universal conceptions abstracted
from  the materials of sense, see Form 3a-3b; Memory and Imagination 5b,
6c(i); Sense 5a; Universal and Particular 2b, 4C-4d; and for abstraction
in  relation  to  generalization  and  induction,  ^df^  Experience  2b;
Induction  la,  3.  The  theory  of  ideas as sense impressions or sense
images, see Memory and Imagination la, 5a; Sense id, 5a. The doctrine of
innate  ideas  and  the  related  theory  of  reminiscence and intuitive
knowledge,  see  Knowledge 6cr3); Memory and Imagination 3a; Mind 4d(2).
The  theory  of  the transcendental concepts or ideas as constitutive or
regulative  principles,  see  Form  ic, 3a; Knowledge 6b(4), 6c(4); Mind
4d(3);  Principle 2b(3); and for the dialectical employment of the ideas
of  pure  reason,  see Dialectic 2c(2). The theory of the Absolute Idea,
see  History  4a (3); Mind iof-iof(2). The theory of the divine ideas as
eternal  exemplars, or of the ideas infused into angelic intellects, see
Angel 3d; Form 2b; God 5f; Knowledge 7a-7b; Mind loe, log; Universal and
Particular 4b. The issue concerning the distinction of, and the relation
between,   sense  and  intellect,  see  Being  8a-8b;  Knowledge  6a(i),
6b-6b(4);  Memory and Imagination 5b, 6b, 6d; Mind i-ig(3); Sense la-ib,
4a,  5c.  Another discussion of the distinction between first and second
intentions,  and  of  the  related  distinction between first and second
impositions,  see  Sign  and Symbol 2a-2b. Other discussions of adequate
and  inadequate,  or  clear  and  distinct  ideas, see Knowledge 6d(3) ;
Opinion 3b; Truth la; and for other considerations of mental fictions or
chimeras,  see Being 7d(5); Memory and Imagination 5a. The consideration
of  the  expression of ideas in words or terms, see Language la, 7; Sign
AND  Symbol  if; for the distinction of concrete and abstract terms, see
Sign  and  Symbol  2e;  for  the distinction of particular and universal
terms,  see  Sign  and  Symbol  2d; Universal AND Particular 5c; for the
distinction  of  species  and genera, see Relation 5a (4) Same and Other
33(1);  Universal  and  Particular  5b;  and for the distinction between
univocal,  equivocal,  and  analogical  terms, see Relation id; Same and
Other  3b,  4c;  Sign  and Symbol 3d. The treatment of the definition of
terms  as  the expression or analysis of concepts, see Definition I, lb.
The  correlation and opposition of concepts or terms, see Opposition la-
ib; Relation ic, The role played by concepts in the acts of judgment and
reasoning,  or for terms in relation to propositions and syllogisms, see
Judgment  5b-5c;  Reasoning 2af i). Other discussions of the association
of  ideas,  see  Memory and Imagination 2c; Mind ig(i); Relation 4f. The
metaphysical  problem  of  the  being  of  ideas,  and for the theory of
intentional existence,

[841a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not incliulcd in Grenf Boo{<
ofihc Wcitcrn World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  Ihese  works  are (h\ ided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the last chapter of ilic Great
Ideas.  I.  Aquinas.  On  the Trinity ofBoethius, qq 5-6 — . Quaestiones
Dispiitatae, De Veritate, q 3 — . De Natura Verbi Intellectus Descartes.
The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  i,  9-10,  45-47 Spinoza. Of the
Improvement of the Understanding Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i,
part  i  Berkeley. Siris Kant. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par
39'  56 Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind . Science ofLogic, vol ii, sect
i,  ch  i  ; sect hi, CH i(c), 3 . Logic, CH 9 I J. S. Mill. A System of
Logic,  bk  iv,  ch  2 W. James. Some Problems of Philosophy, ch 4-6 II.
Cicero.  Academics  Philo  Judaeus.  On  the  Creation  of the World {De
Opificio   Mundi),   par   16   Porphyry.  Introduction  to  Aristotle's
Predicaments   BoETHius.  In  Isagogem  Porphyri  Commenta  Erigena.  De
Divisione  Naturae,  bk  in John of Salisbury. Metalogicon, bk ii, ch 17
Bonaventura.  On the Reduction of the Arts to Theology Duns Scotus. Opus
Oxoniense,  bk i, dist 35 (1) Cajetan. De Nominum Analogia . De Conceptu
Entis  SuAREZ.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxv  John of Saint Thomas.
Cursus  Philosophicus  Thomisticus,  Ars  Logica,  part  ii,  qq 3-5, 23
Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  i Malebranche. De la
recherche de la verite, bk hi (h), CH 1-8 . Dialogues on Metaphysics and
Religion,  iii  Leibnitz.  What Is ''Idea''? . Discourse on Metaphysics,
xxiv-xxix . Philosophical Worlds, ch 3 {Thoughts on Knowledge, Truth and
Ideas)

[841b]
Chapter   37:   IDMA   783   Leibnitz.   New   Essays  Concerning  Human
Understanding,  bk  i;  bk  II, ch 1-8, 12, 30-^^ Voltaire. "Idea," in A
Philosophical  Dictionary  T. Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of
Man,  J.  G.  FicHTE.  The  Science  of  Knowledge Coleridge. Biographia
Literaria, ch 5-8 Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol i, BK I,
hi;  vol  ii,  sup,  ch  14; vol hi, sup, ch 29 J. Mill. Analysis of the
Phenomena  of  the  Human  Mind,  CH  2-3, 6, 9 W. Hamilton. Lectures on
Metaphysics  and  Logic,  vol  i  (34-36);  VOL  II  (7-12) Whewell. The
Philosophy  of the Inductive Sciences, VOL I, BK I, CH 7 SiGWART. Logic,
PART I, CH I ; PART H, CH I ; PART HI, CH 1-2 LoTZE. Microcosmos, bk ii.
ch  3  .  Logic,  BK  I, CH I C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol v, par
588-410  Venn.  Principles  of Empirical or Inductive Logic, CH 7 RiBOT.
The  Evolution  of  General  Ideas  Royce. The World and the Individual,
series  1(7)  Croce.  Logic  as  the  Science of Pure Concept TiTCHENER.
Lectures   on  the  Experimental  Psychology  of  the  Thought-Processes
Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function,  part  i,  ch  i  Husserl. Logische
Untersuchungen  .  Ideas:  General  Introduction  to  Pure Phenomenology
Bradley. The Principles ofLogic, bk u, part it, ch i . Collected Essays,
vol  1(12)  .  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  ch  3  Dewey. Essays in
Experimental   Logic,  vii-\tii  .  The  Quest  for  Certainty,  ch  5-6
Whitehead.  Science  and  the Modern World, cm 10 . Process and Reality,
part i Maritain. Reflexions sur Vintelligence et sur la vie propre, ch i
.  An  Introduction  to  Logic,  ch  i  . The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 2
Blondel. La pensee

[842a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  mortality  of man defines by contrast the immortality
which  some  men  hope for, some men fear, some men scoff at, but no man
ever  fails  sooner  or later to consider. The life of man, like that of
other  animals,  moves  through a normal span of years between birth and
death.  Legend  tells  of  certain  heroes  upon  whom the immortal gods
bestowed  immortal  life,  gracing  them  with  an  aspect  of their own
divinity.  Jewish  and  Christian  faith  holds  that Adam, with all his
posterity,  would  never  have  suffered  disease  or  death  if  he had
refrained   from   sin.   But   according   to   the   theologians,  the
imperishability  of  the  bodily  fram^e of man in a state of grace is a
preternatural  condition.  Except,  then,  for  the  miraculous  or  the
supernatural,  death  follows  birth  and  life,  that which comes to be
passes  away, all things of flesh and blood perish. The proposition "All
men  are mortal" has been repeated during centuries of lessons in logic.
Its  truth  has  never  been seriously challenged even by those who have
criticized the syllogism which reaches the conclusion that since he is a
man, Socrates is mortal. But throughout the same period, the great books
of  poetry  and  religion, of philosophy and theology, have recorded the
qualifications  which  men  have placed upon this truth. Man dies in the
flesh  to  be  reborn  in  the  spirit. Man, composite of soul and body,
perishes as do all things which are subject to dissolution; but the soul
itself,  a  simple spiritual substance, is immortal, living on after its
union  with  the  body  is  dissolved.  The  immortal  soul is sometimes
conceived  as  having  many  incarnations, inhabiting now this body, now
that,  in  an endless pilgrimage through endless time; and sometimes, as
in  the  Christian faith, each soul has only one embodiment on earth. It
is specially created by God to inform the body of a human

[842b]
Chapter  1%: IMMORTALITY being. It is destined to be his immortal spirit
in  a  future  which belongs to eternity rather than to time. Except for
the   form   it   takes   in  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation,  or  the
transmigration  of souls, the idea of immortality is usually attended by
conceptions of an after-life in another world— the life of the shades in
the  Elysian Fields or in Hades, the life of the blessed in Heaven or of
the  damned in Hell. The afterlife is never merely a continuation of the
life  begun  on  earth.  The  other  world  is not just an abode for the
disembodied soul. It is a place of judgment, of rewards and punishments,
in  which  the soul realizes the good, or pays the penalty for the evil,
toward  which its earthly career inclined. The connection of immortality
with   rewards   and   punishments   appears   even  in  the  theory  of
reincarnation, for as the soul passes from one embodiment to another, it
enjoys  or  suffers  the  consequences befitting its previous existence.
Stated  as  a  speculative  problem,  the  question  of  immortality  is
traditionally  formulated  as a question about the soul or the spirit of
man:  whether it exists by itself either before or after its conjunction
with  a human body; and if so, in what manner it subsists. For those who
affirm  the  soul's  separate  existence,  there seems to be no question
about its everlasting endurance, either without beginning at all or from
the  moment  of  its  creation. But the manner of the soul's subsistence
leads to speculation concerning an after-hfe or an other-life in a world
of  spirits,  or  in  realms  as  far apart as Heaven and Hell. We shall
presently  consider to what extent such speculations have been submitted
to  argument  and  to  what  extent  they have been matters of religious
belief. But in both these modes 784

[843a]
CHAPitR 38: IMMOR r.MJ 1'^ of consideration, the theme of inimoriahiy is
never  merely  a matter of speculative interest, never merely a question
of  spiritual  substances  and their subsistence. It is always a problem
for  the  moralist.  Is  this  earthly  life and its brief temporal span
enough  for  the  aspirations  of the human spirit, and for its striving
toward  a  perfection  of knowledge, of love, and of repose? If external
sanctions  are  needed  to  support the voice of conscience, are earthly
rewards  and  punishments—  either  humanly  dispensed,  or capriciously
distributed by chance or fortune— sufficient sanction for the moral law?
Can  perfect  justice  be done unless there is a divine law and a divine
judge,  a  judge  who  can see beyond the acts of men into their hearts,
from  whose  judgment  no one escapes, and whose rewards and punishments
are  supernaturally established states of blessedness and misery for the
soul?  Whether  or  not  God,  freedom,  and  immortality  are,  as Kant
suggests,  the  three great objects of speculative thought, they do seem
to  form  the  basic triad of religious beliefs. In the religions of the
west, these beliefs take various forms, but the belief in immortality is
seldom  if  ever  found separate from belief in a supernatural order, in
gods or a God to whom man owes certain duties and before whom man stands
to  be  judged  as  a  responsible  moral  agent who was free to obey or
disobey  the  divine  commands.  But,  this  fact admitted, the question
remains  whether the principles of morality can be adequately stated, or
made  effective  in the regulation of human conduct, without a religious
foundation,  or  at  least  without reference to God and immortality. On
this  the  moralists  disagree.  The  argument  in  Plato's Gorgias, for
example, about whether it is better to do or suffer injustice, ends with
a  myth  which  tells of the soul standing naked before its divine judge
after  a  man's  death,  showing no marks of the evil the individual has
suffered  during  his life, but only of the evil he has done. The reader
who  thinks  the  myth  is necessary to complete the argument concerning
justice  and  punishment,  takes one position on the question. He adopts
the  view  that  without  the judgment of souls in an after-life justice
cannot be done. The preoccupation with immortality in a

[843b]
785  great  many  of  I^lato's dialogues is not always based u|>on moral
considerations, it appears as frecjuently in discussions of the relation
between  the  soul  and  the objects of its knowledge. If, to Ix: proper
objects  of  knowledge,  the Ideas must be eternal, the soul which knows
them  must  also  be  immortal.  But  when the discussion of immortality
involves  a  comparison  of  this  life and the life to come, it usually
turns  on considerations of goodness rather than of knowledge and truth.
For  Kant,  if  not  for  Plato,  immortality is almost entirely a moral
matter;  and  where  the  Platonic  myth  deals  with  just  rewards and
punishments in an after-life, the Kantian argument is concerned with the
achievement  of  moral  perfection. In his Critique of Practical Reason,
Kant  affirms  immortality,  along  with  the  existence  of God and the
freedom  of  the  will, as necessary practical postulates— indispensable
conditions  of  the moral life. "The perfect accordance of the will with
the  moral  law,"  Kant  writes,  "is holiness, a perfection of which no
rational  being  of  the  sensible world is capable at any moment of his
existence  ...  It  can only be found in a progress in infinitum towards
that  perfect  accordance ... It is necessary to assume such a practical
progress  as the real object of our will." The realization of happiness,
or  the  summum  bonum, Kant concludes, "is only possible practically on
the  supposition  of  the  immortality  of  the soul." The opposite view
appears to be taken in Aristotle's Ethics and Mill's Utilitarianism. The
summum  bonum  is a temporal happiness, a perfection attainable on earth
and  by  purely  natural  means.  In  those  passages in which Aristotle
defines  happiness in terms of contemplative activity, he also speaks of
it as a godlike life and therefore one which has a touch of immortality.
Man is able to lead such a life, he writes, only "in so far as something
divine  is  present in him." To lead the life of reason, which is divine
in  comparison  with any other mode of human life, we must, he says, "so
far  as  we can, make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live
in accordance with the best thing in us." But to be immortal in this way
seems  to  mean  the possession of a godlike quality in this life rather
than the promise of a life hereafter.

[844a]
786  THE GREAT IDEAS Aristotle demands only "a complete term of life" as
a  necessary  condition  for  "the complete happiness of man." He passes
lightly  over the question whether "the dead share in any good or evil."
So  far  as  he  considers a blessedness which the gods can add to human
happiness,  it  does not belong to an after-life, but consists rather in
the  good  fortune  which the gods grant to some men and which increases
and  secures  their  happiness beyond that which is attainable by virtue
alone.  The  moral issue concerning immortality is more explicitly faced
by  Mill  in  his  examination of the need for religious or supernatural
sanctions.  While he does not admit their indispensability, neither does
he deny their utility. "There is evidently no reason," he declares, "why
all  these  motives  for  observance should not attach themselves to the
utilitarian  morality, as completely and as powerfully as to any other."
Yet  he  himself  stresses  "the possibility of giving to the service of
humanity,  even  without  the  aid  of  belief in a Providence, both the
psychological  power  and  the social efficacy of a religion." Mill does
not  go as far as Lucretius in regarding the belief in immortality, with
the attendant possibility of everlasting torment for the soul, as itself
an  immoral  doctrine.  For Lucretius it is a nightmare which haunts the
waking  hours  of  men, filling them with false fears and putting future
pains in the way of present pleasures. He dedicates his poem to "driving
headlong  forth  that dread of Acheron, troubling as it does the life of
man  from  its  inmost  depths  and  overspreading  all  things with the
blackness  of  death,  allowing  no  pleasure to be pure and unalloyed."
Where  others  see  in  man's  fear  of  death  his  natural  desire for
immortality,  Lucretius  thinks  it  is  the  dread of immortality which
causes  man's  fear  of death. "We have nothing to fear after death," he
says, if death is the end. "He who exists not, cannot become miserable."
In  the  great  poems of antiquity we find the imagery and detail of the
pagan  conception  of the life hereafter. Both Odysseus and Aeneas visit
the  underworld. They see the shades of the departed heroes; all that is
visible to the bodily eye are shimmering wraiths. They talk with the

[844b]
departed,  listen to their memories, or hear them speak prophetically of
the  future.  From Anchises, his dead father, Aeneas learns his destiny;
and Odysseus hears in Hades what has befallen his companions at Troy and
his  family  at  home  during  his  years  of  wandering. Yet there is a
striking  difference  between  Virgil's poem and Homer's with respect to
the  after-life.  The  division  which  Virgil makes between Elysium and
Tartarus  corresponds  much  more  closely than anything in Homer—or for
that  matter  in  the  other  Greek  poets— to the Christian distinction
between  Heaven and Hell. Though Elysium and Tartarus both belong to the
underworld,  one  is  the  abode  of  the  blessed, the other a place of
torment for sinners. In the sixth book of the Aeneid, the Sibyl explains
the  topography  of  the  underworld  to Aeneas. There is a place "where
splits  the road in twain," she says: The right leads to the giant walls
of  Dis, Our way to Elysium; but the left wreaks doom On sinners, and to
guilty  Tartarus  sends.  Tartarus,  the  abode  of  the  condemned,  is
surrounded by "a fierce torrent of billowy fire," and is filled with the
noise of punishment. Elysium, on the other hand, is The happy region and
green  pleasaunces  Of  the blest woodlands, the abode of joy. An ampler
ether  with  purpureal  light  Clothes  here the plain; another sun than
ours, And other stars they know. Its inhabitants, in sharp contrast with
the  unfortunates  in  Tartarus,  seem  to  pass their time in peace and
pleasure.  Homer  makes  no such sharp division between the realm of the
blessed and the realm of the condemned. Plutarch speaks of "the isles of
the   blessed   celebrated  by  Homer,"  but  the  reference  cannot  be
substantiated.  In one passage in the Iliad Menelaus is promised that he
will  be  taken "to the Elysian plain, which is at the end of the world.
There  fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than
anywhere  else  in  the  world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor
hail, nor snow." But even this seems to describe a different life rather
than  an  after-life.  So  far  as  the  underworld  is described on the
occasion of Odysseus* descent "into the house

[845a]
of  Hades and dread Prospcrine," we arc told I that the Theban prophet 1
circsias  alone has his "reason still unshaken." All "the other |,'hosts
(flit about aimlessly." The shades of gcxxl men and bad ahke languish in
the  domain of darkness. Tityus, Tantalus, and Sisyphus arc subjected to
special  punishments for their grievous sins and transgressions, but all
the  shades—  even of those men whom the gods loved and honored —seem to
be in a state of misery. Though they are not all beset with torments and
agonies,  none  seems  to  be  overcome  with  joy  or  to  have reached
contentment.  Those  whom the gods love do not join the deities on Mount
Olympus.  When  they  enter  the somber realm of Pluto— the deity of the
underworld—  they,  like all the other shades whom Charon ferries across
the  river  Styx,  are  more remote from the gods than are mortal men on
earth.  The  only  exception perhaps is Heracles, whom Odysseus meets in
Hades,  or  rather  "his  phantom only, for he is feasting ever wath the
immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife." The general attitude of all
who  dwell  in  the  underworld  is  summed up by Achilles when he tells
Odysseus:  "Say  not  a  word in death's favor; I would rather be a paid
servant  in  a  poor  man's house and be above ground than king of kings
among  the  dead." And the mother of Odysseus describes the condition of
the  dead  "in  the  abode  of  darkness" as one in which "the sinews no
longer hold the flesh and bones together; these perish in the fierceness
of  consuming fire as soon as life has left the body, and the soul flits
away as though it were a dream." Among other ancient peoples such as the
Egyptians,  the  Babylonians,  and  the  Persians, Herodotus found other
views  of  immortality than those which prevailed in Greece. He reports,
for example, the doctrine of transmigration or reincarnation— a doctrine
which  also appears in the myth of Er at the end of Plato's Republic and
is  alluded  to  elsewhere  in  the Platonic dialogues. "The Egyptians,"
Herodotus writes, "were the first to broach the opinion that the soul of
man  is  immortal, and that, when the body dies, it enters into the form
of  an  animal  which  is born at the moment, thence passing on from one
animal  into  another,  until  it  has  circled through the forms of all
creatures

[845b]
Chapter  38: IMMORTALIl Y 787 which tenant the earth, the water, and the
air,  after  which it enters again into a human frame and is born anew."
Hertxlolus, however, seems more interested in the effect of such beliefs
on the practices of the living, especially their funeral riles and other
devotions,  than  he  is  with  the  truth  of  conflicting  theories of
immortality. "The doctrine of a future state," according to Gibbon, "was
scarcely  considered among the devout polytheists of C^reecc and Rome as
a  fundamental  article  of  faith."  Before  the  time  of Christ, "the
description  of  the infernal regions had been abandoned to the fancy of
painters  and  of  poets,  who  peopled  them  with so many phantoms and
monsters  who  dispensed  their  rewards  and punishments with so little
equity,  that a solemn truth, the most congenial to the human heart, was
oppressed  and disgraced by the absurd mixture of the wildest fictions."
Lacking  an acceptable or satisfying belief, yet inclined to believe in,
as  men are inclined to hope for, a better life, the pagan world. Gibbon
thinks,  could  not  long resist the appeal of Christian teaching. "When
the promise of eternal happiness was proposed to mankind on condition of
adopting  the  faith, and of observing the precepts of the Gospel, it is
no wonder," he declares, "that so advantageous an offer should have been
accepted by great numbers of every religion, of every rank, and of every
province  in  the  Roman empire." The arguments for personal immortality
which  Christian  theologians  draw from the nature of the human soul do
not  differ  essentially from the proofs offered by philosophers without
recourse  to  religious faith. This applies to arguments advanced before
Christianity  by  Plato  and  Plotinus  as well as to those developed by
philosophers  like  Descartes  and  Locke  who  belong  to the Christian
community. The exclusively theological aspects of the Christian doctrine
of  immortality are those matters which, since they are beyond the reach
of  reason, belong to faith alone. The doctrine that the individual soul
is  created and that it has a unique affiliation with one human body, is
not  capable  of  being  proved  or defended by reason against the quite
opposite theory that the soul has always existed and

[846a]
788  THE GREAT IDEAS inhabits any number of bodies in the course of many
reincarnations.  The  existence  of  Hell,  Purgator\-,  and  Heaven  as
supernatural states of the soul; the time, place, and manner of the Last
Judgment;  the  resurrection  of the body and the difference between the
bodies reunited with the souls of the blessed and the damned; the joy of
eternal  happiness  and the misery of eternal damnation— these dogmas of
Christian  orthodoxy  go far beyond all merely philosophical attempts to
prove  the  soul's  immortality  or  to consider its life apart from the
body.  The  great  theologians  undertake  to do more than expound these
articles of faith. Reason asks questions which the man of faith must try
to  answer, defending his faith, not by proof, but by overcoming doubts,
by  answering  objections,  by  making dogmas inteUigible. Yet the great
theologians  admit  an  irreducible core of mystery. The joy of the soul
united  to  God in the beatific vision surpasses temporal understanding.
The  mysteries  of  Hell  are  perhaps even greater. The depri\'ation of
God's love and exclusion from His presence constitute a spiritual misery
comparable to the beatitude of beholding God and being within the circle
of the divine light. One is an infinite anguish of frustration and loss;
the   other,  an  infinite  rest  of  peace  and  fulfillment.  But  the
theologians  also  teach  that  the  damned suffer the pains of sense in
Hell,  as  Vvcll  as the pains of deprivation. "That hell, which also is
called  a lake of fire and brimstone," Augustine says, "will be material
fire  and  will torment the bodies of the damned." When hellfire and the
expiatory  punishments  of  Purgatory  are  not  merely  symbols for the
imagination,  they  raise  extraordinarily  difficult questions, as both
Augustine  and  Aquinas admit. Dante asks us to read the descriptions he
gives  of  Hell,  Purgatory,  and  Paradise  in  the  Divine Comedy in a
strictly  literal  sense as well as in several symboHc meanings, such as
the  moral and the allegorical. But he explains in his own commentary on
the  poem  that  the literal meaning also involves symbolism, insofar as
the things that the words refer to when taken in their literal sense are
themselves the symbols of other things. In any case the poet may be more
successful than the theologian in making intelligible through symbol and
metaphor what

[846b]
\  in  its  Hteral significance is strictly unimaginable. The imagery of
darkness,  sultriness, noise, and heaviness, which grows more intense as
the  descent  proceeds  in  the.  Inferno,  does more than the anguished
outcries  of  the  damned to convey the reahty of Hell. The metaphors of
music  and  agility  express the harmony of Heaven, But it is especially
the  symbohsm  of light which captures the invisible in terms of vision,
except  perhaps  when  it reaches a climax in the blinding effulgence at
the  end  of  the  Paradiso. As Dante moves upward in the realm of love,
where courtesy prevails in every speech and charity suffuses every will,
he  sees the mystic rose of Heaven entirely through reflected light. The
saints, and especially those glorious spirits who instruct his progress,
become  pale  mirrors  of  the  ineffable  vision  which they themselves
behold.  Milton  too  pictures Heaven and Hell, but in Paradise Lost the
destiny  of  the  immortal soul remains a prophecy, a consequence of the
earthly  immortality  which Adam lost. Except for the Prologue, Hell and
Heaven  are  offstage  in  Goethe's  Faust,  though  they  are  the main
imphcations of the wager Faust makes with Mephistopheles, which puts his
immortal  soul  in  the  balance.  The  philosophical  issue  concerning
immortality cannot be separated from issues concerning the existence and
nature of man's soul. The various arguments for immortality seem to rest
not  merely on the reality of the distinction between soul and body, but
more precisely on the immateriality of the soul. Lucretius, for example,
does  not  deny the existence of soul, nor does he fail to differentiate
the  soul  from  the  body wherein it is located. The soul, according to
Lucretius, like everything else in the universe, consists of atoms. They
differ  from  those  of  the  body  by  their roundness, smoothness, and
mobility.  They are "much smaller than those of which our body and flesh
are  formed  ;  they  are also much fewer in number and are disseminated
merely  in scanty number through the frame." On this view of the soul as
material in nature and as constituted of many quite separable parts, the
soul  is  necessarily  as  perishable as the rest of the body. "When the
body has been

[847a]
Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  -Mattered  by the mastering might of time," I
Lucretius  writes, "and the frame has drooped with its forces dulled ...
it  naturally  follows  then  that  the  whole  nature  of  the  soul is
dissolved,  like smoke, into the high air; since we I see it is begotten
along  with the body and grows up along with it and . . . breaks down at
the  same  time worn out with age." It should be observed, however, that
it  is not the materiality of the soul, but rather its divisibility into
parts,  which  accounts  for  its  mortality.  The  atoms  after all are
material,  but  since  as  the  ultimate units of matter ihcy are simple
bodies  and  so are absolutely indivisible, they cannot perish. Only the
simple  is  imperishable.  The  ijnperishability of the simple {i.e., of
that  which  has  no  parts)  occurs  as  a  premise in one of the great
arguments  for  the  immortality  of  the soul. In Plato's Phaedo, which
formulates  this argument as immortality is discussed in the prison cell
where  Socrates  awaits  his execution, two assumptions seem to be made:
first,  that the soul is the principle of Ufe in animate bodies, for, as
Socrates  says,  "whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes bearing
life"; and second, that as an immaterial being, the soul must be simple,
for  only bodies are "composite" and "changing." From the first of these
assumptions,  the argument proceeds in terms of what it means for bodies
to  be  alive  or  dead. Socrates argues from examples. "If any one asks
you," he says, "what that is, of which the inherence makes the body hot,
you will reply not heat . . . but fire. ... Or if any one asks you why a
body  is diseased, you will not say from disease, but from fever." So if
any  one asks, "what is that of which the inherence will render the body
alive .'^" the answer is not Ufe but "the soul." As the principle of hfe
itself,  the  soul "will never receive the opposite of what she brings,"
namely, death. Therefore the soul is immortal. On the second assumption,
the  endless  duration  of  the  soul  follows from its simplicity as an
immaterial  and  immutable  being. "The compound or composite," Socrates
says,  "may be supposed to be naturally capable, as of being compounded,
so  also  of  being  dissolved; but that which is uncompounded, and that
only, m.ust be, if anything is, indissoluble." When the

[847b]
789  soul leaves the Ixxly, for which it has l)ccn both motor and pilot,
the  body  ceases  to  be  alive  and perishes in the manner of material
things;  the  soul lives on, freed from lemjK)rary bondage to the ImkIv,
its  prison house. It "departs to the invisible world— to the divine and
immortal  and  rational."  The  argument from simplicity, as repeated in
Moses  Mendelssohn's  Phddon,  is  criticized  by Kant. Admitting that a
truly  "simple  being  cannot  cease  to exist," Kant contends tliat the
l^nowable soul— which is for him the empirical ego or consciousness— may
have  intensive, though it lacks extensive, quantity. It would therefore
be capable of diminution in reality; and so it "can become less and less
through  an infinite series of smaller degrees." With regard to the soul
as  an  immaterial  and simple substance {i.e., the transcendental ego),
Kant is willing to affirm that immortality necessarily belongs to such a
nature.  But he denies that we can have any knowledge of the soul except
as  a  phenomenon of experience. There can be no vahd theoretic argument
for  immortality  precisely because there can be no scientific knowledge
of  the  nature  of  transcendental  objects— beings beyond all possible
experience. What Kant calls "the paralogisms of rational psychology" are
offered  to  show  the  dialectical  futility  of proofs or disproofs of
immortality,  in the same way that "the cosmological antinomies" attempt
to  expose  the untenability of arguments for or against the infinity of
time  and space, the infinite divisibility of matter, the existence of a
free  will  and  of  God.  Without  deciding  whether  Kant's  theory of
experience  and knowledge is true, this much we can learn from him about
the  issue  of  immortality.  Those philosophers who, like Descartes and
Locke,  think  they have grounds for affirming the existence of the soul
(or  mind  or  spirit) as an immaterial substance, also have grounds for
affirming  its  immortality. Those who, like Lucretius and Hobbes, think
they  have grounds for denying the existence of anything except material
particles,  also  have  grounds  for denying either the existence of the
soul  or its having a permanence not possessed by other material wholes.
And  those  who, like Hume, think there are no grounds for affirming the
existence of any kind of enduring substance, material or

[848a]
790  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  spiritual—even to the point of doubting personal
identity  from  moment  to  moment—can  admit no grounds for affirming a
substantial,  much less an immortal, soul. One other position remains to
be   considered.   Though   it  does  not  fall  outside  the  foregoing
alternatives,  Aristotle's  theory  represents an important variation on
one  of  them.  As against Hume or Kant, Aristotle holds that substances
exist  and are knowable. The sensible, material things of experience are
such  substances.  But, according to Aristotle, these substances are not
exclusively  material.  They  are composed of two principles, matter and
form,  neither of which is a substance capable of existing by itself. As
the exposition of this theory (in the chapters on Form and Matter) tries
to  make plain, form and matter exist only in union with one another. It
is  the  composite  substance resulting from their union which exists in
and of itself. The form which enters into the composition of a substance
can  be  called  its  "substantial form." In relation to the matter with
which  it  is  united,  the substantial form is the actualization of the
potentiality  in  matter  to exist as a substance of a certain kind. Not
all  substances are of the same kind. Some are alive; some inanimate and
inert. In the case of living substances, the substantial form, according
to  Aristotle,  confers  upon  matter  not only the act of existing as a
substance,  but also the act of being aUve. Because it thus differs from
the  form  of  an inanimate substance, Aristotle gives a special name to
the substantial form of a living thing. Because the word "soul" has long
been  used  to  designate  "the  principle  of  life  in living things,"
Aristotle  feels  justified  in using it as the name for the substantial
forms  of  plants  and  animals  as  well  as  men.  This theory and its
principal   opposite  (which  regards  the  human  soul  as  a  complete
substance,  not  a  substantial  form)  are  more fully discussed in the
chapter  on  Soul.  Here  we are concerned only with the consequences of
Aristotle's  theory  for  human  immortality.  If,  as he seems to hold,
substantial  forms exist only insofar as they exist in the substances of
which  they  are  the  forms,  then  when a composite substance perishes
through the decomposition of its matter and

[848b]
i  form,  the form perishes also. Souls— the substantial forms of living
things—would  seem to be no exception. "The soul," Aristotle writes, "is
inseparable from its body, or at any rate certain parts of it are (if it
has  parts)—for  the  actuality  of  some  of  them  is  nothing but the
actuahties of their bodily parts. Yet some may be separable because they
are  not  the  actualities  of  any  body  at  all." The exception which
Aristotle  seems to have in mind is that part of the human soul which is
the intellect. It differs from other powers of the soul, he suggests, as
the  eternal  from  the  perishable. "It alone," he says, "is capable of
existence  in  isolation  from all other psychic powers." He argues that
"in  so  far  as  the reahties it knows" —or at least some of them— "are
capable  of  being  separated  from their matter, so is it also with the
power of the mind." What is the significance, for the immortality of the
human   soul,   of   the  supposed  ability  of  the  intellect  to  act
independently of the body .? Aristotle answers in terms of the principle
that  "if there is any way of acting or being acted upon proper to soul,
soul  will  be  capable  of  separate  existence;  if there is none, its
separate  existence is impossible." If we consider nutrition, sensation,
and  emotion,  there  seems to be, he admits, "no case in which the soul
can  act  or be acted upon without involving the body." The one possible
exception  may be thinking, but Aristotle adds at once that "if this too
proves  to  be  a  form  of  imagination  or  to  be  impossible without
imagination,  it  too  requires a body as a condition of its existence."
Later,  when  he  is  discussing  the power of thought, Aristotle flatly
insists  that  "the soul never thinks without an image" and that "no one
can learn or understand anything in the absence of sense," for "when the
mind  is  actively aware of anything it is necessarily aware of it along
with  an image." According to his own principles it would seem to follow
that since thinking proves "to be impossible without imagination, it too
requires a body as a condition of its existence." Hence the intellect is
not separable from matter, nor is the human soul, of which the intellect
is  the  highest  power.  Nevertheless, Aristotle declares, in a passage
which  has  become famous, that mind as the active power of thinking "is
separable, im-

[849a]
Chapter 38: IMMORTALITY passible, unmixed"; and with this declaration of
the   intellect's   separability   from   matter,  he  seems  to  affirm
immortality,  at least for the intellectual part of the soul. "When mind
is set free from its present conditions," he writes, "it appears as just
what  it  is  and nothing more: this alone is immortal and eternal." The
passages  quoted  have  been subject to conflicting interpretations. The
Arabic  commentators  on  Aristotle,  notably  Averroes, find in them no
basis  for  the  immortality  of  the  individual human soul. The texts,
according  to their view, support the theory of a single acuwe intellect
which  exists  apart  from  the  minds of individual men—almost a divine
principle  in  the  universe  which,  acting  on  the  rational souls of
individual  men,  enables  them  to think and understand. Aquinas argues
against  them to the opposite conclusion. Against the Averroists Aquinas
contends  that  if  the  individual man, Socrates, can be said to think,
then  whatever  powers  are  required  for  thinking  must belong to his
individual  nature.  The  powers required for thinking are, according to
Aquinas, twofold: an active intellect, able to abstract the intelligible
forms  of  things  from their material representation in sensory images;
and  a possible or potential intellect, capable of receiving these forms
when  separated  from  matter  by  the act of abstraction. The theory of
knowledge  and  thought which this involves is discussed in the chapters
on Form, Idea, Mind, and Universal and Particular. Here we are concerned
only  with  the  point which Aquinas makes, that since thinking involves
universal  notions,  and  since  forms  can be universal only apart from
matter,  the  intellect  which  abstracts and receives abstractions must
itself  be  immaterial. The intellectual powers do not operate through a
bodily  organ, as the power of nutrition operates through the alimentary
system  or  the  power  of  vision  through the eye. The brain, in other
words,  is  not the organ of understanding or thought, but rather, along
with  the external sense-organs, it is the material organ of perception,
memory,  and  imagination. The argument for the immortality of the human
soul  then  proceeds  on  the  premise that that which can aa apart from
matter can also

[849b]
791  rr/>/  apart from mailer. "The intellectual principle which wc call
the  mind or the intellect has an operation per se apart from the IxxJy.
Now  only that which subsists can have an o|x*ration per st\ for nothing
can  operate but what is actual; wherefore a thing operates according as
it  is."  Hence  Aquinas concludes that "the human soul, which is called
the  intellect  or  mind,  is something incorporeal and subsistcnt." The
attribution  of  subsistence to the human sou! means that although it is
the  substantial  form of the human body, it is also capable of existing
in  and of itself as if it were a simple substance. Unlike angels, which
as  spiritual  substances  are  by their very nature separate forms, not
forms  of  matter,  human  souls  are  substantial forms which, having a
certain  degree of immateriality, are also to that degree separable from
matter.  But  the  reverse  is  also true. To the extent that the soul's
powers, such as sensation and imagination, require corporeal organs, the
soul  is  inseparable  from the body. Since, furthermore, Aquinas agrees
with  Aristotle  that  every  act  of  understanding or thought involves
imagination,  he  faces  the  difficulty  of explaining how the soul can
function  in any way when separated from the body after death. "To solve
this difficulty," he says, "we must consider that as nothing acts except
as it is actual, the mode of action in every agent follows from its mode
of  existence.  Now the soul has one mode of being when in the body, and
another  when  apart  from it. . , . The soul, therefore, when united to
the  body,  has  consistently  with  that  mode  of existence, a mode of
understanding  by  turning  to  corporeal images, which are in corporeal
organs;  but  when  it  is  separated  from  the  body, it has a mode of
understanding by turning to simply intelligible objects, as is proper to
other  separate  substances."  Nevertheless,  Aquinas  adds,  it  is not
natural  for  the soul to understand in the latter way, for it is not by
nature  a  separate substance. Therefore, "to be separated from the body
is  not  in  accordance  with  its  nature."  This  last  point has both
philosophical  and  theological significance. Philosophically, it may be
easier  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul if one starts, as the
Platonists  do, with the proposition that the soul is a purely spiritual
prin-

[850a]
ciple  or  substance  which  does  not  depend  upon the body. But then,
according  to  Aquinas,  you  prove  the  immortality of the soul at the
expense  of  destroying the unity of man, for if the soul is a substance
rather  than  a  form,  the  individual  man, composed of body and soul,
consists  of  two  distinct  substances.  Theologically, Christian faith
believes in the resurrection of the body after the Last Judgment and the
end  of  the  world,  as  well  as  in  the  soul's  separate  existence
immediately  after  death.  From  the point of view of a theologian like
Aquinas,  a  philosophical proof of immortality must corroborate both of
these  dogmas.  In his judgment a proof which rests upon the proposition
that  the  soul  has  a  nature akin to that of an angel {i.e., a purely
spiritual  substance), makes the Christian dogma of the resurrected body
unintelligible  or  even abhorrent. If the immortal soul were a complete
and  separate  substance, it would have no need for its body in the life
hereafter.  It has that need only if its nature is that of a substantial
form,  partly  immersed  in  matter and partly separate therefrom. Then,
because  of  these  two  aspects of its nature, it can be said, not only
that  "the  human  soul retains its proper existence when separated from
the  body,"  but also that it has "an aptitude and a natural inclination
to  be  united  to the body." The incompleteness of the soul without the
body and, even more, the dependence of man's mind upon his bodily senses
and imagination raise, as we have seen, the difficult problem of how the
soul  exists  and  operates  when  separated  from the body by death and
before  it  is  reunited  to  a  resurrected body. It may even raise the
question   whether   the   reasoning  of  Aquinas  constitutes  a  valid
philosophical   argument  for  the  actual  existence  of  the  soul  in
separation  from  the  body,  or merely suggests the possibility of such
existence.  But  the  facts which create these difficulties are the very
facts  to  which Aquinas appeals in his Treatise on the Resurrection, in
order  to explain the basis in nature for the miraculous re-union of the
body  with  the  soul.  The arguments for and against immortality so far
considered  are  couched in the form of proofs or disproofs which aim at
certainty. All

[850b]
792  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I  except  one  are,  moreover,  theoretical  or
speculative  in  the  sense  that they proceed in terms of observations,
assumptions,  and  inferences about the nature of things—about atoms and
substances,  matter  and  form,  extension and thought, inert bodies and
living  organisms.  The  one  exception,  already  mentioned,  is Kant's
practical  argument  based  on  the moral necessity of an immortal life.
There  is  still  another  argument,  both  speculative and practical in
character, which does not aim at certainty nor take the form of a proof.
It   is   the  proposal  of  a  wager  concerning  the  equally  unknown
alternatives  of  oblivion  after  death  and eternal life. Supposing no
rational  evidence  to  favor  the  truth  of either alternative, Pascal
weighs  the probability of gain and loss which is consequent upon living
according  to  each  hypothesis.  The  probability,  he  thinks,  vastly
preponderates on the side of those who choose to forego the worldly life
because,  to take the chance of gaining the whole world during the short
term  of earthly life, they would risk the loss of eternal happiness for
their  immortal  souls.  Locke  engages in the same type of calculation.
"When  infinite happiness is put into one scale, against infinite misery
in  the other; if the worst that comes to the pious man, if he mistakes,
be  the  best that the wicked can attain to, if he be right, who," Locke
asks,  "can  without  madness  run  the  venture.? Who in his wits would
choose  to  come  within the possibility of infinite misery; which if he
miss,  there  is  yet  nothing to be got by that hazard? Whereas, on the
other side, the sober man ventures nothing against infinite happiness to
be  got,  if  his  expectation  comes to pass." If, wagering on immortal
life,  "the  good  man  be  right,  he  is  eternally happy"; but "if he
mistakes"—  if  death  ends all—"he is not miserable, he feels nothing."
All these theories, including Kant's postulate and the wager proposed by
Pascal  and  Locke,  are  clearly  concerned  with  arguing for personal
immortality or individual survival. Among those who deny the survival of
the    individual    human   spirit,   some—Hegel   and   Spinoza,   for
example—conceive an impersonal type of immortality.

[851a]
Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  For  Hegel  It  is  Spirit  itself  whicli is
imniorial.  "The successive phases of Spirit ihar animate the Nations in
a  necessitated gradation," he writes, "are themselves only steps in the
development of the one Universal Spirit, which through them elevates and
completes  itself  to a self-comprehending totality." In considering the
history  of  the  world,  he  regards everything as the manifestation of
Spirit; and because of this, even when we traverse the past, we have, he
says,  "only  to  do  with what is present; for philosophy, as occupying
itself  with  the True, has to do with the eternally present. Nothing in
the  past  is  lost  for  it,  for  the  Idea is ever present; Spirit is
immortal;  with  it  there  is no past, no future, but an essential now.
This  necessarily  implies  that  the present form of Spirit comprehends
within it all earlier steps. . . . The grades which Spirit seems to have
left  behind  it, it still possesses in the depths of its present." What
Spirit  is for Hegel, Nature is for Spinoza. Spinoza, however, conceives
a  kind of immortality for the individual man, which is achieved through
his  participation in the eternity of Nature. The body of the individual
man,  according to Spinoza, belongs to the infinite matter of Nature. It
is "a certain mode of extension actually existing." The individual human
mind  is  similarly  "a  part  of the infinite intellect of God." In one
sense,  both  the  body and the mind are temporal things which, like all
other  finite modes of God or Nature, have a fixed and limited duration.
Furthermore,  the  personal  memories and thoughts of the individual man
depend  on  the co-existence of his mind and body. "The mind can imagine
nothing,  nor  can  it recollect anything that is past," Spinoza wTites,
"except while the body exists." But Spinoza also maintains that "only in
so  far as it involves the actual existence of the body, can the mind be
said to possess duration, and its existence be limited by a fixed time."
Of  every individual thing—whether it is a finite mind or a finite body—
there  exists in the infinite and eternal essence of God a conception or
idea.  "To  conceive things under the form of eternity," Spinoza writes,
"is to conceive them in so far as they are conceived through the essence
of  God."  Because  he  holds  that  the  human  mind  can have adequate
knowledge of God, he holds that the mind can conceive "it-

[851b]
793  sell  and  its  inxlv  under the form of eternity." lie nee through
knownig  Gcxi,  or  the  eternal  truth  about temporal things, the mind
participates in eternity. Imagination and memory may beh^ng to time, but
not  the intellect, which is capable of knowing CJcxi. To explain why we
feel  "that  we  are  eternal," Spinoza |X)ints out that "the mind is no
less  sensible  of  those things which it conceives through intelligence
than  of  those  which  it  remembers."  Although  we  cannot imagine or
remember that "we existed before the body," we can l^notv intellectually
something  about  mind  and  body which belongs to eternity; because, in
addition  to  conceiving them as "existing with relation to a fixed time
and  place," we can conceive them as "contained in God" and as following
"from  the  necessity  of  the divine nature." Since it "pertains to the
nature of the mind to conceive the essence of the body under the form of
eternity,"  Spinoza  concludes that "the human mind cannot be absolutely
destroyed  with the body, but something of it remains which is eternal."
Such immortality is, in a way, enjoyed in this life, for it is a present
participation in eternity through the mind's knowledge of Ciod. There is
also  the  impersonal  immortality which men enjoy through contemplating
the perpetuation of the species, or more particularly the persistence of
an  image  of  themselves in their offspring. In the Symposium, Socrates
reports a conversation with Diotima in which she explains to him that in
procreation  "the  mortal  nature is seeking as far as is possible to be
everlasting  and immortal." Men hope that offspring "will preserve their
memory and give them the blessedness and immortahty which they desire in
the  future."  But if procreation through the pregnancy of the body is a
way  of  achieving  immortality,  artistic  creation  through  a kind of
pregnancy  in  the  soul, Diotima argues, is even more so. "Who, when he
thinks  of Homer and Hesiod and other great poets," she asks, "would not
rather  liave  their  children than ordinary ones? Who would not emulate
them  in  the  creation of children such as theirs, which have preserved
their  memory and given them everlasting glory?" One need think "only of
the ambition of men" and what they will do "for the sake of

[852a]
7^4  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the desire for immortality seems to express after
death."   3.   Belief  in  immortality  4.  The  moral  significance  of
immortality:  rewards  and  sanctions  5a.  The transmigration of souls:
reincarnation 5^. The judgment of souls ^d. The process of purification:
the  state  of  Purgatory  5/.  The  state  of  the  blessed : Heaven 6.
Doctrines  of  impersonal survival 6a. Immortahty through offspring: the
perpetuation  of the species 6c. Participation in the eternity of truth,
ideas, or love

[852b]
leaving  behind  them a name which shall be man's dread of disappearance
into  utter  notheternal,"  to  realize  how  deeply  "they  are stirred
ingness.  Yet,  facing  death,  Socrates  faces  the  by  the love of an
immortality of fame." Even alternatives with equanimity. "Either death,"
deeper,  according to Diotima, is their love of he declares, "is a state
of  nothingness  and utter the good, or more precisely, their desire for
unconsciousness,  or, as men say, there is a "the everlasting possession
of  the good" which change and migration of the soul from this leads all
men  necessarily  to "desire immortality world to another." Either it is
like  a  dreamless  together with the good." and undisturbed sleep or it
opens  a  new world Whether it is to be attained through the perto which
the  good  man  can  look forward with petuation of the species, through
survival  in hope. On either alternative we can be of good the memory of
mankind,  through  knowledge  cheer, he tells his friends, if we believe
that "no of God, or through the subsistence of the soul, evil can happen
to  a  good  man, either in life or OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGB 1. The desire
for  immortality: the fear of death 795 2. The knowledge of immortality:
arguments  for  and against personal survival 796 3^. The postulation of
immortality:   practical  grounds  for  belief  in  immortality  797  5.
Conceptions  of  the after-life 798 5^. The state of the soul apart from
the body 799 5^. The state of the damned: Hell 800 5|-. The resurrection
of the body 801 6b. Enduring fame : survival in the memory 802

[853a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use (he ruunhers m heavy type,
which  arc the vohimc and page numbers ot the passages referred to. I'or
example,  in  4 IIomik: lluiJ, hk ii (if)^ zH^] I2d. the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicalcs that the
passage  is  in  section  d  ot page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, m 53 James : Psychologw 1 16a 1 19b.
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the letters c and d to the upper and lower halvesofthe right hand
sideof  the  page.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b 164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk, cii, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters  or verses, the King James version is cited hrst
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1, The desire for immortality: the
fear  of  death  Old  Testament: 7/ Samuel, 22:5-7— (D) ^^ Kings, 22:5-7
/Job,  14;  30:23-24  /  Psalms, 6 esp 6:4-5; 13 esp 13:3; 16 esp 16:10;
18:4-6;  49:6-12;  55  esp  55:4-8; 89:47-48; 116:1-9— (D) Psalms, 6 esp
6:5-6;  12  esp  12:4;  15  esp  15:10;  17:5-7; 48:7-13; 54 esp 54:5-9;
88:4849;  114  /  Ecclesiastes,  8:8  /  Isaiah,  38:10-19—  (D) Isaias,
38:10-19  Apocrypha:  7/  Maccabees,  6:18-7:42  esp  7:9—  (D)  OT,  77
Machabees,  6:18-7:42  esp 7:9 New Testament: Matthew, 10:28; 19:16-30 /
Mark^,  10:17-31  / Luke, 10:25-37 / Acts, 7:54-60— (7)) Acts, 7:54-59 /
Romans,  2:5-8  esp  2:7  / 7 Corinthians, 15/77 Corinthians, i .()- 10;
4:9-18;  5:1-9 / 7 Thessalonians, 4:13-17— (D) 7 Thessalonians, ^:i2-i'j
/  I  Timothy,  6:1119  esp  6:12,  6:19  / 77 Timothy, 4:6-8 / Hebrews,
2:14-15 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii [309-328] 85b-c / Odyssey, BK V [203-224]
210a-b  5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus [1579-1779] 128c-130a,c 7 Plato:
Symposium,  165b-  16  7a  / Apology, 211b-212a,c / Pliaedo, 230d-235a /
Republic,  BK  I,  297a-b; bk hi, 324c-325b; bk vi, 374a-d / Laws, BK V,
687a-b

[853b]
Chapter 38: IMMORTALITY 795 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 7
[i 1 77*^261178*1] 432c
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk i [102-126] 2b-c; BK III [31-93]
30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c44a,c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 9,
115b-d;  BK  II,  CH I, 139b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 11-12
258a-c;  bk  hi, sect 3 260b; bk iv, sect 48 267d-268a; sect 50 268c; bk
viii,  sect 25 287b-c; sect 58 290d; bk ix, sect 3 291d292a 14 Plutarch:
Aristides,  265d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv, ch 16, 19a; TR VI, ch
6,  24a-b; tr vii, ch 3 26d-27a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 11
21d22a;  par  14  22d-23a;  bk  vi,  par  18-19 40d41b; BK IX, par 23-29
68a-69c  /  City of God, bk I, CH 22, 143b; bk ix, ch 14-15 293a294a; bk
xiii, ch 4 361d-362a; bk xix, ch 410 511a-516d; bk xxii, cm 2^ 608c-609a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, A 6, ANS 383e-384c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 85, A 6 182d-184a 22 Chaucer:
SecondNun  s  Talc  [i  =i,-jSS-Soi]467a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 33d 36b;
99b-100a; 211a-b; 267a-c; 402c-403c

[854a]
(  1  .  The  desirefor  immortality: thefear of death.) 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet, act hi, sc i [56-88] 47c-d / Measure for Measure, act hi, sc i
[i 16-136] 188a-b
29  Cervantes : D072 Quixote, part ii, 366d367a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  28a-c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part v, prop 23 458b-d; PROP 32
460b;  PROP  38-39  461d-462c  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x [770-844]
291a292b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  166,168-169 203a; 210 211b; 239 217a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  124a-129a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 86c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 186a; 219C'220d; 327d-328a; 376a-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 238c 42 Y^k^t: Judgement, 600c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson,
174b;  238b;  347a-c;  394a-c;  399d-400a; 573a-574a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 200c-d; 217c218b; BK XII, 560a-562d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk ii, 26a27d passim; bk vi, 148d-150d 53 James: Psychology,
224a-225a;  653a  54 Freud: War and Death, 763c-764b 2. The knowledge of
immortality:  arguments  for  and  against  personal  survival  7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Meno,  179d-183a  /  Apology, 211b-212a,c / Phaedo
220a-251d  /  Republic,  bk  x,  434d-436a  /  Laws,  bk  xii,  793c-d 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 3 [1070* 24-30] 599c / Soul, bk I, CH
I
[403*2-15]
632a-b; ch 2
[405^29-34] 634d; bk
ii, ch i
[413^3-9] 643a; ch 2 [413^24-29] 643d-644a;
bk  III,  CH 4 [429^19-^4] 661c-d; ch 5 662c-d; ch 7 [431*15] 663d; ch 8
[432*5-10] 664c 9 Aristotle: Geneiation ofAnimals, bk ii, ch 3
[736^15-737*12] 277b-d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[3231023] 34b-43b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 24, 203d 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  ii,  sect 14 258d; sect 17 259b-d; bk iv, sect 21 265b-c; bk v, sect
13 271b; bk vh, sect 50 283a; bk vih, sect 37 288c; bk x, sect 7 297b-c;
bk  xii, SECT 5 307d-308a; sect 14 308c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr i
139a-b; tr iv, ch 15 165c-d; tr vii 191c-200c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d;  bk  XIII,  ch  2  360b-361a  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 61, a 2, REP 3 315c-316a; q 75, a 2 379c-380c; a 6
383c-384c; q 76, a i 385d-388c; a 3, rep 1-2 391a-393a; part i-ii, q 22,
a  i,  rep 3 720d721c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 85, a 6
182d-184a

[854b]
796 THE GREAT IDEAS 2/0 3 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[1-108] 91b-92c; paradise, vii
[64-84] 115d116a; [121-148] 116b-c
23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 192c-193c; part IV, 250c-251b; 253b-254a;
269d-270d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 250a; 264b-269b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  27d-28c  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 51d-52a; PART V,
60b-c  /  Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 73a-c / Objections and Replies,
127c-d;  def x 130d; PROP IV 133c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 21-40
458a462d  esp  prop  21-23  458a-d,  prop 38 461d462a, PROP 40 462c-d 32
Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk x [782-844] 291b292b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 556,
271b  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 141 441a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and   Fall,  186a-187b  passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  120c-129c  esp
124d-128a;  203d-204c;  218d-223d  esp  219b-d: 234c-240b esp 234c-235c,
237d-238a  /  Practical  Reason, 291a-292a /Judgement, 600c-d; 610a-b 44
Bosw  ELI.:  Johnson, 57d-58a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 77d-78b;
97a-c  53  James:  Psychology,  224b-225a  3.  Belief  in  immortality 5
Euripides:  Helen  [1009-1016] 307d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 75b; bk
iv,  140c141a  7  Plato:  Apology, 211b-212a,c / Seventh Letter, 806a 12
AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  3  260b  13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[219-227] 89b 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 29a-b 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  15  200c  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vi, par 26 42d43a 22
Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,787-800]
467a   24   Rabelais:   Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  269a-b  26
Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act v, sc i
[17-21] 314d / 2nd Henry IV, act
ii, sc ii
[109-114] 477a
27  Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc iv [60-68] 36c / Cymbeline, act v, sc
iv
[152-194]
482d-483a  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 366d-367a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  69d  32  Milton:  On Time 12a-b / Lycidas [165-181] 31b 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 556 270b-272a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  6,  314c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLatvs, bk xxiv, 205c206c 40
Gib RON-: Decline and Fall, 186c-187b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 135a

[855a]
3^//o  4  Chapter 38: IM 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 242a d / Judgement, 604<J
606d  44  Bosw ELI.: Johnson, 256d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Uistorw i'aki
i,  255c256b 48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 27a 28a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
593c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, hk v, 200c d; 217c-218b; hk vii, 295b-c;
bk  xii,  560a 562d; BK XV, 615a-616a 52 DosTOEvsKv: Brothers Karamazov,
bk   ii,   33c34b;  40b-c;  bk  hi,  68b-c:  bk  xi,  312b-d  54  Freud:
Interpretation of Dreams, 296d
[In
2)  /  War  and  Death,  763c-  764c ^a. The postulation of immortality:
practical  grounds for belief in immortality 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead,
tr  vii,  cii  15  200c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 210d-212a; 267a-268a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241  205a-217b  passim; 556, 271b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ca\  xxi, sect 72 198a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  186a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c; 120b [fn i]; 127a128a;
234c-236a;  240b-243c  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-292a;  338c-352c  esp
344a-c,  348b-349b  /Judgement,  599d-600d;  603b-607c  esp  606d607c 44
BoswELh:   Johnson,  394c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  347a  53  James:
Psychology,   224a-225a;   653a   3i.  The  revelation  of  immortality:
immortality  as  an article of religious faith Old Testament: II Samuel,
14:14— (D) II Kings, 14:14 /Job, 14:14; 19:25-29; 21; 30:23-24 / Psalms,
16 esp 16:10; 37 esp 37:26-40; 49 esp 49:15; 116:1-9— (D) Psalms, 15 esp
15:10; 36 esp 36:26-40; 48:2-21 esp 48:16; 114 /Proverbs, 10:2; 11:4,19;
12:28;  13:14;  14:27;  18:21  /  Ecclesiastes,  12:7  /  Isaiah,  25:8;
38:10-19— (Z)) Isaias, 25:8; 38:10-19 / Ezel^iel, 37:1-14— (D) Ezechiel,
37:1-14  /  Daniel,  12:1-3  /  Hosea, 13:14— (^) O^^^^ 13:14 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  4:10—  (D)  OT,  Tobias,  4:11 / Wisdom ofSolomon, 2:23; 3:1-10;
5:15-16 {D) OT, BooJ{ of Wisdom, 2:23; 3:1-10; 5:1617 / Baruch, 2:iy—{D)
OT, Baruch, 2:17 / II Maccabees, 6:18-7:42 esp 6:23, 6:26, 7:9-10, 7:14,
7:36;  12:39-45  esp  i2:43-45-(D) OT, II Machabees, 6:18-7:42 esp 6:23,
6:26, 7:9-10, 7:14, 7:36; 12:39-46 esp 12:43-46 New Testament: Matthetu,
5:1-12;  10:28;  25  esp  25:31-46/  Mar\,  9:42-48; 10:28-30— (D) Mar\,
9:41-47; 10:28-30 / Luke, 10:25-37; 16:19-31 / John, 3:14-17; 4:9-14 esp
4:13-14;  4:35-36;  5:21-29; 6:34-59; 8:51; 10:25-30 esp 10:28; 11:1-44;
12:24-25; 17:2-3 / Acts, 13:48 / Romans, 2:5-8 esp 2:7; 6:1-11; 8:9-11 /
I  Corinthians, I'y / II Corinthians, 1:9-10; 4:918 / Galatians, 6:7-8 /
Ephesians, 2:1-10 /

[855b]
MOUTAIJTV  •97 / Ihessalonians, ^:iy-\%— {D) I ihcssahniani, 4:12 17 / /
I'imothy,  6:11-19  esp 6:12, 6:19 / // I'injothy, 1:10/ Hebrews, 2:9,14
'6  /  /  Pe/cr,  i:?  5  esp  1:4  /  I  John, 2:15 25 esp 2:ty, 2:25 /
Revelation   passim,   esp   21   {!))  Apocalypse  pnssim,  esp  21  18
At'GiTSTiNi:: Confessions, hk vi. par 18 19 40d41b; hk ix, par 11 64c d;
par 29 69b-c; HK XIII, par 50 5^ 124c 125a.c / 0/\ of God, HK XIII, CM 4
361d  362a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologua, i-vki i, () 75, A 6, RKi« I 383c
384c: q 97. a i 513c-514c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, pari i 11, g 85,
AA 56 181d 184a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paraoise, xxv
[4096J 144c-145b
22 C-mai:cer: Second Nuns I'ulc
[15,788-800)
467a  23 Hohhes: leviathan, part hi, 191b 193c; part IV, 250c 251b: 253b
254a 25 Mc)ntak;ne: Essays, 248c 250b; 267a 268a 30 Bacon: New Atlantis,
203a-c 31 Descartes: Meditations, 69b-d 32 Milton: Lycidas (165 181) 31b
33   Pascal:   Pensees,   556   270b-272a;  560  272b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  in,  SECT  6,  314c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
379c-380a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186c-187b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,   bk   ii,  26a-27d  passim  4.  The  moral  significance  of
immortality:  rewards  and  sanctions  Old  Testament:  Psalms,  49— (D)
Psalms,  48  /  Proverbs,  10:2; 11:4,19; 14:32; 21:16 Apocrypha: Tobit,
4:8-11 — (D) OT, Tobias, 4:9-12 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:12-6:20— (£)) OT,
Book  of  Wisdom,  1:12-6:21  /  //  Maccabees,  7  passim, esp 7:17-18,
7:^0-37-  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  7  passim,  esp y:iy-iS, 7:30-37 New
Testament:  Matthew, 5:1-12,22,29-^0; 18:7-9; 19:16-30; 25:31-46 / Mar{,
9:43-48;  10:17-31;  16:16—  (D)  Mark,  9:4^-47; 10:1731; 16:16 / Luke,
10:25-37;  '4:7"^'4;  i^:'9-3'  I 18:18-^0 / Romans, 2:1-11 / Galatians,
6:7-8  /  //  Thessalonians, 2:10-12— (D) // Thessalonians, 2:10-11 / //
Timothy,  4:8  /  Hebrews, 10:26-^ / // Peter, 2 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xi
[568-600]  248d  249a  5  Euripides:  Helen  [1009-1016)  307d  7 Plato:
Euthydemus,  74c  /  Phaedrus,  124a126c  /  Meno,  179d-180b / Apology,
211a212a,c  /  Phacdo,  230d-234c;  246d'250b  /  Gorgias,  292b  294d /
Republic,  hk  i, 297a-b; bk ii, 313b-314d; bk x, 436c-441a,c / Timaeus,
452d-453b  /  Laws,  bk ix, 757a; bk X, 768b-d; bk xii, 793c-d / Seventh
Letter,  806a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch io-ii 345c-347a; bk x, ch 7
[ii77''26-i 178*1] 432c

[856a]
d  (4.  Tbe moral significance of immortality: rewards and sanctions^ 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [31-93] 30b-31b; [830-1094] 40c-44a,c
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[637-678] 228a-229a;
[724-751] 230b-231a
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  29a-b  17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 13
88d89b;  TR  III,  cH  4 94c-95c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 24 154b-d 18
Augustine:   Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  26  42d43a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 97, A I 513c-514c; a 4 515d-516d; part i-ii, QQ
1-5 609a-643d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp hell, hi
[1-18]
4a-b,
[82-129]
5a-b, vii
[100-130]
lOc-d,   xi  15a-16b,  XXVII  [55-136]  40a-41b,  xxviii  [139142]  43a,
PURGATORY, HI
[118-145]
57a-c, v
[85-129] 59d-60c, IX 65d-67b, xvii
[82-139]
79b-d, xxx-xxxi 99b-102b, paradise, vii
[19-120] 115b-116b, XIX [22-148] 135b-136c
22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a / Summoner's Prologue 284b-285a /
Mont(s  Tale  434a-448b  / Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  206d-207a;  210d-212a; 248c-250b csp 250a; 264b-269b; 311a-b 26
Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i, sc iv [4263] I15a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet, act i, sc v
[9-22]
37a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  60b-c  /  Meditations, 69b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part v, prop 41, schol 463a-b 32 Milton: Comus [1-17]
33a-b  /  Paradise  Lost,  BK  X [782-844] 291b-292b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
184-241   205a-217b   passim  35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d-16a  /  Human
Understanding,  BK  II,  CH XXI, sect 62 194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c 35 Hume:
Hitman  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div 108-109 500b-501a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  xxiv,  205c206c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 366c-d /
Social  Contract,  BK  IV,  437d-438c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
336c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 187b-c; 198d-199a; 219C'd 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  233c-234c passim 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 264b
[fn
i]  /  Practical  Reason,  306b-307a;  344a-c  43  Mill: Liberty, 290c44
Bosw^i^i.:  Johnson,  256d;  363a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 341b-342b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 200c-d; bk vi, 273c-274« 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  33c34b;  40b-c;  bk xi, 312b-d; 345a-c 53
James: Psychology, 225a

[856b]
798  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4 to 5a 5. Conceptions of the after-life 4 Homer:
Iliad,  bk  xx [54-74] 142d-143a; bk xxiii [54-107] 161d-162b / Odyssey,
bk x [487574] 241a-242a,c; bk xi 243a-249d; bk xxiv
[1-202] 317a-319a
5 Euripides: Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Helen
[1009-1016] 307d
5  Aristophanes:  Frogs 564a-582a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 75b; bk
iv,  140c141a  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-126a  /  Apology, 211a212a,c /
Republic,  bk ii, 313b-314d; bk hi, 324c-325b; bk x, 437c-441a,c / Laws,
bk v, 687a; bk x, 767c-768c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 10
[1100^10-31]
345c-d;  ch ii 346c-347a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 13 188b189c
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk vii, sect 50 283a 13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[219-227]  89b;  [467-485] 96a-b / Aeneid, bk vi 211a-235a 18 Augustine:
City  of God, bk xix-xxh 507a618d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  QQ 69-99 885a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy 22 Chaucer: Second
Nun's Tale
[15,788-822]
467a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part hi, 191b-198a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
248c-250b;  264b-269b  29 Cervantes: Do;2 Quixote, part ii, 366d-367a 31
Descartes:  Meditations, hi, 88d-89a / Objections and Replies, 226d-227a
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x [782-844] 291b292b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  xxiv,  205c206c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a; 186c-d;
187b188a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233c-234d 44 BoswEi.1^: Johnson,
363a-b  48  Melville: Moby DicJ{, 134b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xh,
560a-562d;  BK  XV,  615a-616a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi,
341C'345c passim 5a. The transmigration of souls: reincarnation 4 Homer:
Odyssey,  bk xi [298-304] 246a 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 75b 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  125b-126a  /  Meno, 179d183a / Phaedo, 226c-234c; 246d-250b /
Republic,  bk X, 437c-441a,c / Timaeus, 452d453b; 476a-477a,c / Laws, bk
x, 767c-768c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 3
[406*30-^5]
635d  12  'LxjcK'ETixjs-.Nature  of  Things,  bk hi [670-783] 38d-40a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 21 265b-c 13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[219-227]  89b / Aeneid, BK VI [710-751] 230a-231a 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
28a-29b

[857a]
b  5^ to 5d CiiAPTiiR 38: IMMOKTALI I V 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i,
ch  ii 5b c / Third Ennead, tr ii, ch i^ 88d-89b; tr hi, CH 4, 95b c; tr
iv,  ch 2-3 97d 98c: ch 6 99b100b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch S, 145d: ch
9,  146d:  CH 13-15 149b 150c; cii 24 154b d; ch 27, 156d; tr vii, ch 14
200b  c;  ir  vui,  ch  5-5  I 202a-203d / Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 14-16
304a-305c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 30 318b319b; BK XII, ch 20
355b-357a;  rk  xxii.  < h 27-28 613b-614a 20 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica,
part  hi  suppl,  Q  77,  A I, ANS 943a-944d; q 79, a i, ans 951b953b 21
Dante:  Divine  Comed\\ paradise, iv [49-63] 111b 25 Montaigne: Essa\'s,
206d-207a;    249b-250a;   264b-265c;   268a-2'69a   35   Locke:   Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch XXVII, sect 6 220c-d; sect 14 223d-224b; sect
27 227d-228a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latus, bk xxiv, 207a-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall  135a;  226b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
187a-b;  part i, 255c-256b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [737-807] 19b-21a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 316b 51 Tolstoy: War and Feace, bk vii, 295b-c 54
Freud: War and Death, 764b 5h. The state of the soul apart from the body
4 Homer: Iliad, bk xxii
[361-366]
159a; bk xxiii
[54-107]
161d-162b  /  Odyssey,  bk  xi  243a-249d;  bk  xxiv [1-203] 317a-319a 5
Euripides: Helen [1009-1016] 307d 7 Plato: Fhaedrus, 124c-126c / Phaedo,
TlZo,-  226c; 230d-234c; 246d-247b / Gorgias, 292b294d / Republic, bk x,
437c-441a,c / Laws, bk XII, 793c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect
21 265b-c; BK VII, SECT 50 283a 13 Virgil: Georgics, iv [471-477] 96b 14
Plutarch: Romulus, 29a17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr i 139a-b; tr hi, ch
13  149b-d;  ch  18 151b-c; ch 24-25 154b155c; ch 27 156c-d; tr iv% ch i
159a-d  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 23 334c335c; BK XIII, ch 2
360b-361a;  ch  16 367a-d 19 Aquinas: Sumtna Theologica, part i, q 29, A
I,  rep  5  162a-163b;  q  77, a 8 406b-407a; q 89 473a-480c; q 117, a 4
599b-d;  q 118, a 3 603b-604b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
67,  AA 1-2 81c-83b; part hi suppl, q 70 893c900d; Q 93, A I 1037d-1039a
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[67-108] 92a-c
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  270c 271b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk hi, 150d-151c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 248c-250a

[857b]
759  prop  38 40 461d31 Sn\<)/. \: Ethics, pari 462d 41 Gib HON: Decline
and Fall, 233d 44 \^^^s^^Y.\^.: Johnson, 192d 193c; 224b 48 Ml Lvii.Li::
Stohy  Du{, 28a 5c. The judgment of souls Old Testami nt:/^/?, 19:29; 21
/  Psalms,  49:6-9;  50  csp 50:4, 50:6, 50:21-22; 96:10-1^— (D) Psalms,
48:7-11;  49  csp 49:4, 49:6, 49:21-22; 95:10-1^ / Proverbs, 22.22-27, /
Ecclesiastes,  3:16-17;  11:9-10;  12:14  /  Isaiah,  11:1-9 csp 11:3-5;
24:21-22;  34;  66—  (/>>) Isatas, 11:1-9 csp 11:^-5; 24:21-22; 34; 66 /
Daniel,  12  / Joel Apocrypha: Judith, 16:17— (D) OT, Judith^ 16:20-21 /
//  Maccabees,  7:31-36—  (D)  OT,  // Machabees, 7:31-36 New Testament:
Matthew,  3:7-12  csp  ^lo,  3:12;  7:1-2; 10:14-15; 11:20-24; 12:34-^7;
13:18-50 esp 13:30, 13:39-43, 13:49-50; 2425 / John, 12:48 / Acts, 17:31
/  Romans,  2  /  II  Timothy, 4:1/ Hebrews, 9:27 / / Peter, 4 :5-6 / //
Peter,  2:9;  3:7-13 / / John, 4:17 / Jude, 14-15 / Revelation, 20:9-15—
(D)  Apocalypse,  20:8-15  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [568-571] 248d 5
Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [228-231] 3d 5 Euripides: Helen [1013-1016]
307d  7  Plato:  Fhaedrus,  125b-  126a  /  Phaedo,  249c250a / Gorgias,
292b-294d  /  Republic, hk x, 437c-438c / Laws, bk xii, 793c-d / Seventh
Letter, 806a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [426-4^9) 222b; [548569] 225b-226a
17  Plotinus : Fourth Ennead, tr iii, ch 24 154b-d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk xx 530a-560a,c; bk XXI, CH 11-27 570b-586a,c passim 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi suppl, QQ 87-90 997a-1016a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, hi [70-136] 4d5b; V
[1-24] 7a-b; vi [94-115] 9b-c;
xiii [85108] 18d-19a; xx [1-39] 28b-d; xxvii [55-1^6] 40a-41b; xxix
[103-120] 44a-b: purgatory,
IX  65d-67b:  paradise,  xix [100 14S) 136a-c 22 Chaucer: Parson s Tale,
par  10  498b  502a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 250a; 265b c 27 Shakespeare:
Macbeth, act ii, sc hi [1-23] 292b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity [149-164)
5a-b  /  Paradise Lost, BK III [V5~138] 142a-b; i»k xi [4583] 300a-301a;
bk xh
[451-465] 329a; [537551] 331a
35  Locke:  Toleration, 17b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 187c; 188d-189a
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233c 234b 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 514d-515a;
573c-574a  5iJ.  The process of purification: the state of Purgatory Old
Testament:  Isaiah,  4:4—  (D)  Isaias,  4:4  Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees,
12:43-46— (D) OT, // Machabees, 12:43-46

[858a]
800  THE  GREAT IDEAS (5. Conceptions of the after-life. 5d. The process
of  purification: the state of Purgatory.) New Testament: Matthew, 12:32
/  /  Corinthians, 3:11-15 7 Plato: Cratyhts, 95a-c / Phaedo, 224a-225c;
232d-234c; 246d-250b / Gorgias, 292b-294d / Republic, bk x, 437c-438c 13
Virgil:  Aeneid, bk vi [264-751] 218a-231a 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 28a-29b
17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch ii 5b-c / Third Ennead, tr iv, ch 6
99b-100b  / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 27, 156d 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  x,  ch 30 318b319b; BK XX, CH 25 554c-555a; bk xxi, ch 13 571c-572a;
ch 24 577b-579d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 69, A 2,
ANS  and  REP  2  886c-887d;  a  7,  ans  and REP 6 891d-893c; q 71, a 6
908b'909c;  Q  97, A I, REP 2 1065b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory
53a-105d esp i-ii 53a-55d, ix 65d-67b, x
[106-139]
68c-d,  XIII [34-93] 72b-d, xvii [82-139] 79b-d, XIX [97-126] 82c-d, XXI
[34-72] 85b-d, xxiii
[1-75]
88b-89a,  xxvii  94c-96a,  xxx-xxxi 99b-102b 23 H0BBI.S: Leviathan, part
hi,  244b-c;  part iv, 251b-c; 255b-258b; 271a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act i, sc v
[9-22]
37a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234b; 520c 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 173d;
193a-b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk xi, 341c-345c passim 5e.
The  state  of the damned: Hell Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 32:22 / Job,
26:6  /  Psalms,  9:16-17; 116:3— (D) Psalms, 9:17-18; 114:3 / Proverbs,
7:27;  15:11,24;  27:20  / Ecclesiastes, 6:6 / Isaiah, 5:14-15; 14:4-23;
26:10;  33:10-14;  66:24— (D) Isaias, 5:14-15; 14:4-23; 26:10; 33:10-14;
66:24  /  EzeJ^el,  31:10-18— (Z)) Ezechiel, 31:10-18 Apocrypha: Judith,
16:17— (D) OT, Judith, 16:20-21 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:16-5:14 esp 4:19—
(D)  OT,  Boo}{  of  Wisdom, 4:16-5:15 esp 4:19 / Ecclesiasticus, y.ij',
18:24;  21  :9-io 0) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:19; 18:24; 21:10-11 / Baruch,
2:17—  (D)  OT,  Baruch,  2:17  New Testament: Matthew, 3:7-12; 5:22,29;
8:12;  10:28; 11:20-24; 13:41-42,49-50; 18:79; 25:31-46 esp 25:41, 25:46
/  Marl{, 3:29; 9:43-50— (D) Mar\, y.2i); 9:42-49 / Luke, 12:5; 16:19-26
I  John, 15:6 / U Thessalonians, 1:7-9 / Hebrews, 10:26-31 / Jude, 6-7 /
Revelation  passim, esp 9, 12, 17, 19-20— (Z)) Apocalypse passim, esp 9,
12,  17,  19-20  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk xi 243a-249d esp [487489] 247d,
[568-600]  248d-249a  5 Aristophanes: Frogs [143-159] 565d-566a 7 Plato:
Phaedo, 249c-250a / Republic, bk x, 437c-438c/Lfl/i^i, bkix, 757a; bk x,
767c-768c

[858b]
5e to 5/ III
[97812 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
1023] 42d-43b 13 Virgil: Ae?ieid, bk vi
[548-627] 225b-227b;
[735-747] 230b-231a
18  Augustine: City ofGod, bk xi, ch 33 341a-d; BK xiii, CH 2 360b-361a;
ch 12 365d-366a; CH 14-15 366b-d; bk xiii, ch 23-BK xiv, ch i 372a-377a;
bk  xiv,  ch  15  388d-390a;  bk  xv,  ch  I  397b,d-398c; bk xix, ch 13
519a-520a;   ch  28  529d-530a,c;  bk  xx,  ch  15  543d-544b;  BK  XXI,
560a-586a,c  /  C/rw/w;2 Doctrine, bk i, CH 20-21 629b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  10,  A  3,  rep  2  42c-43b  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  Q 69 885a-893c; q 70, a 3 897d-900d; q 86
992b-996a,c; q 87, a i, rep 4 997b-998c; q 90, A 3 1014d-1016a; qq 97-99
1066a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell la-52d esp iii
[1-18]
4a-b,
[82-129]
5a-b, vi
[loo-iii]
9c, VII
[100-130] lOc-d, XI 15a-16b, xiv
[16-72]
19c-20b,  XXVII  [55-136]  40a-41b, xxviii [139142] 43a, XXXIII [91-150]
50c-51a;  paradise,  VII  [64-84] 115d'116a; xv [10-12] 128c 22 Chaucer:
Friar's  Tale 278a-284a / Summoned s Prologue 284b-285a / Parson's Tale,
par  10,  499b-502a  23HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part iii, 193d-195d; PART IV,
250c-251b;  254a-255b;  271a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
ii,  119b-122a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 266c 26 Shakespeare: Richard III,
act i, sc iv [4263] 115a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 418c-419a
31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 227a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
i-ii 93a-134a esp BK I [44-270] 94b-99a, bk ii [521-628] 122b125a; bk vi
[867-877]  215a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, SECT 62
194c-d; sect 72 198a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 188d-189a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 149c-150c passim; 234a-c 44 BoswELJ^: Johnson, 363a-b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 347a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
lOc-d; BK V, 127c-d; bk vi, 169c-170b; bk xi, 34]c-345c 5/. The state of
the  blessed: Heaven Old Testament: Psalms, 16 esp 16:10; 36 esp 36:8-9;
37;  84;  149—  (D)  Psalms, 15 esp 15:10; 35 esp 35:9-10; 36; 83; 149 /
Isaiah,  65:8-25—  (Z)) Isaias, 65:8-25 / Daniel, 7:18 Apocrypha: Wisdom
of  Solomon, 1:15; 3:19,13-15; 47-5:5; 5:i5-i6-(£>) OT, BooI( of Wisdom,
1:15; 3:1-9,13-15; 47-5:5; 5:16-17 New Testament: Matthew, 5:1-12,19-20;
6:1921,33;  7:2i-23;  13:43;  19:21;  25:31-46  esp 25:34, 25:46 / Lu{e,
16:19-26 / John, 6:3840; 8:51; 10:24-30; 11:23-27; 16:20-24; 17:1-3

[859a]
5fto  6a  Chaptek  38:  IMMCJR  1  ALl I V 801 / Romans, 8:i8; 14:17 / I
Corinthians,  15:4057  /  //  Corinthians,  4:17-5:10 / Galatians, 6:8 /
Ephesians,  2:18-22 / Hebrews, 10:^4 /James, 1:12/ I Peter, i csp 1:3-5,
1:9/  /yoA/;.  2:15-17;  3:1-3 / Revelation esp 7, 14, 21 — (D) /f/^otj-
/v/Jjfc  esp  7,  14,  21  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  iv  [554-569] 204d 5
Aristophanes:  Frogs [14^-159] 565d-566a 7 Plato: Apology, 211b-212a.c /
Phaedo,  249d250a  / Republic, bk x, 437c-440d 13 \'irgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[638-678J 228a-229a 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 140d / Sertorius, 460d461b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 16 23b-c; BK IX, par 6 63a-b; bk xii,
par  23  104b c; BK XIII, par 50-53 124c-125a,c / City of God, BK IX, CH
14-15  293a-294a; ch 17 295a c; BK XI, CH 11-13 328d-330b; bk xii, ch 20
355b-357a;  bk  xiii,  ch  20-24 370c-376a,c; bk XIX, CH 4 511a-513c; ch
10-13  516c-520a;  CH  27  529a-d;  bk  xx,  ch  17  544d-545c;  bk XXII
586b,d-618d  esp  ch  1-5 586b.d-590a, CH 12-21 600d-606d, ch 29-30 614b
618d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 4 625b-c; ch 19-22 629a-630a 19
Aquinas: Siimma Theologica^ part i, q 95, a 4, ANS 509b-510a; part i-ii,
q  4,  aa  1-2  629d-631a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67
81b-87c;  q  68, a 6 93c-94c; part ii-ii, q 18, A 2 462d-463d; q 19, a n
472d-473d;  q  26,  A  13  519d-520d;  q  28,  a  3  528d-529c; qq 92-96
1025b-1066a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv [4081] 75d-76a;
xxviii-xxxiii 96a-105d; paradise 106a-157d esp in [43-90] 109d-110b, vi
[112-126] 114d-115a, XIV [1-66] 126d-127c, xxi
[1-102]
138b-139b, xxi:i
[1-75]
139d-140c,  XXVIII  [94-114]  149d-150a, xxx-xxxiii ISld157d 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and Cressida, bk v, stanza 259-261 lS'\a.-h / Second Nun's Tale
[15,788822]  467a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  65a-b;  part hi,
191d-193d;  195d-197c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  99b-100a;  248c-250b  31
Descartes: Meditations, iii, 88d-89a 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[7]
la;
[13] lb;
[52]
2b;  [133-148]  4b-5a  /  On  Time  12a-b  / At a Solemn Musicl^ 13a-b /
Lycidas  [165-185]  31b  / Comus [986-1023] 55b-56b / Sonnets, xiv 66a /
Paradise Lost, bk iii-xh 135a-333a esp bk iii
[56-64] 136b, [135-143] 138b, [344-415] 143a144b,
bk v
[246-261]
ISOb-lSla,
[461-651]
185a-189b, bk vii
[150-161]
220b, bk viii
[595-630] 245a-246a, bk xi [696-707] 314b
33 Pascal: Pensees, 643 290b- 291a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  vii,  sect  5  132c; ch xxi, sect 38 187b-c; sect 45 189b-d; sect 62
194c-d; sect 72 198a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234b-d 44 BoswEi.!.:
Johnson, 192d-193a; 391d-392a

[859b]
46  Hfgf.l:  Philosophy of History, part i, 227c 52 Dostokvsky: Brothers
Karamazof,  bk  m.  22d23c; BK XI, 342c 53 J AM is: Psychology, 199b 5g.
The  resurrection  of  the body Old Testament: Job, 14:13-15; 19:25 27 /
Isaiah,  26:i()—  (D)  Isaias,  26:19  /  Eze\iel, 37:1-4— (O) Ezechtel,
37:1-14  / Daniel, 12:1-2 New TESTAMEhfr: Matthew, 27:52-53; 28 csp 28:6
/  Marl{,  12:18-27  / Lul{e, 24 csp 24:6, 24:34, 24:46 / John, 2:18-22;
5:21-29;  11:144  /  Acts,  24:15; 26:8 / Romans, 6:^11 / / Corinthians,
6:14;  15  /  //  Corinthians,  4:14  /  / Thessalonians, 4:13-18— (D) /
ThessjIonian  s,  4:12-17 / Hebrews, 11:35 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
x, ch 29, 317b318b; BK XIII, ch 16-20 367a-371a; ch 22-24 371c-376ax; bk
xx,  ch 6-7 534a 536d; ch 910, 540b 541a; ch 14-21 542d-551a; bk xxi, CH
i-io  560a  570b; bk xxii, ch 4-5 588b590a; ch 11-21 599c 606d; ch 25-28
612a614a / Christian Doctrine, bk r, ch 19-21 629a-b; ch 24 630c-631a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, A I, REP 3 81b-82c; part hi
suppl,  qq  75-86  935a-996a.c;  q  93, a i 1037d-1039a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, vi
[94-111]
9b-c; x
[1-15]
13d; x'lii
[85-108]
18d-19a; paradise, vii
[121-148]
116b-c; xiv
[r-66]
126d-127c; xxv [97-129] 145b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 192c-193c;
195b-d;  part  iv,  254b-255b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 311a-b 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [227-343]  140b143a; bk xii [402-427] 328a-b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 95 431c 38 MosTESQUiEu: Spirit ofLaws,
bk  xxiv,  205d206a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233d; 234d 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  472a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [737-807] 19b-21a 6. Doctrines
of   impersonal   survival   6a,   Immortality  through  offspring:  the
perpetuation  of  the sF>ecies Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 30:3-6; 40:19;
44:1113—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  30:3-6;  40:19;  44:"-i3  7  Plato:
Symposium, 165b-166b / Laws, bk iv, 685 b-c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch
4
[41 5*22 -^8]
645c-d 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, CH I
[731^18-732*4] 272a-b
/  Politics, bk i, ch 2 [1252*26-32] 445c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv.
254c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk 11, 81a-d 27 Shakespeare:
Sonnets, i-xvii 586a 588d

[860a]
802   THE   GREAT  IDEAS  (6.  Doctrines  of  impersonal  survival.  6a.
Immortality  through  offspring:  the  perpetuation  of the species.) 28
Harvey:   On   Animal   Generation,  364a;  384b;  390c-391c  30  Bacon:
Advancement  ofLearning,  29a-b;  72c73a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par 173 61a-b / Philosophy of History, intro, 189b-c; PART I,
212b-c;   246d-247a   48   Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  340b-341a  54  Freud:
Narcissism,  401b;  406c  /  General  Introduction,  616a-b / Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 653b-c; 655b-656a 6b. Enduring fame: survival in the
memory  Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  10:7  / Ecclesiastes, 9:5 Apocrypha:
Judith,  16:20-25—  (D) OT, Judith, 16:24-31 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:1-6;
8:9-13  —  (D)  OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom,  4:1-6; 8:9-13 / Ecclesiasticus,
^j:26',  39:1-11;  40:19;  44:8-15;  46:11-12—  (Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
37:29; 39:1-15; 40:19; 44:8-15; 46:13-15 / / Maccabees, 3:1-7— (D) OT, /
Machabees,  y.i-y / II Maccabees, 6:21-31 -(D) OT, II Machabees, 6:21-31
4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix [410-429] 61b-c; bk xii
[309-328] 85b-c; BK XXII
[299-305] 158b
/ Odyssey^ bk xxiv [191-202] 319a 5 Sophocles: Philoctetes
[i 408-1 444]
194d195a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, la-b 6 TuvCYBiDES : Peloponnesian
War, bk ii, 398a-c 7 Plato: Symposium, 165b-167a / Laws, bk iv, 685b-c 9
Aristotle:  Politics^ bk v, ch 10 [1312^23-39] 514d 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk  i [121-124] 2c 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 10
261d262a;  bk  iv, sect 19 265a; sect 33 266c-d; bk VI, sect 18 275d; bk
vii, sect 6 280b; bk viii, sect 44 289a; bk lx, sect 30 294b-c

[860b]
6b to 6c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[453-463] 115b;
[606610] 119b; BK IV [321-322] 175b
14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  125b  15  Tacitus:  Histories, bk i, 195a-b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv 5c-7a; xvi
[1-90] 22c-23b; purgatory, xi [73-117] 69c70a; paradise, ix [37-63] 119a
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,    bk   ii,   81a-d   25   Montaigne:   Essays,   112d-113a;
267a-c;301bc;304d-306a  27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets, lv 594c-d; lxv 596ab;
Lxxxi  598c-d  28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 312c-d 29 Cervantes:
Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  226d228d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
27d-28c;  29a-b;  36a-c;  72c-73a  32 Milton: On Shakespear. 1630 16a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  148  201a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 535a-536a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 273b; 274d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a-b; 219d
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  494b,d-495a 42 Kant: Science of Right,
428b-429a   44  BoswEi^h:  Johnson,  57d-58a;  163d  [fn  4]  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  348 Hid / Philosophy of History,
intro, 153b-c; part i, 212b-c; 254d-255d; part II, 262c-263a; 274a-275a;
278d-279a;  281d282d  47  Goethe:  Faust, prelude [59-74] 2b-3a; part II
[9981-9982]  243a  6c, Participation in the eternity of truth, ideas, or
love  17  Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 34-36 338b-339d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  v,  prop  21-42 458a463d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro, 156d168c esp 156d-157b, 168b-c; 190a-b; 203c206a,c

[861a]
CROSS-REFERENCES   For:  Other  discussions  of  man's  attitude  toward
mutability  and  death, sec Change 12b; Happiness 4b; Life and Death 8c;
Time  7.  The  basic terms and propositions involved in arguments for or
against  the  immortaUty  of  the  to  their mode of being, see Angel 4;
Eternity  4a;  Form  2d;  Man  3b;  Soul  4d(2).  Other  discussions  of
immortality  as a postulate of the practical reason, see Metaphysics 2d;
Necessity  and  Contingency  4b.  Another  statement  of the doctrine of
reincarnation  or  the transmigration of souls, see Soul 4d(i). Articles
of  religious belief bearing on immortality, such as predestination, the
Last  Judgment,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  see  God 7f-7h;
Happiness  7c;  Soul 4d(3). The relevanceof the doctrine of innate ideas
to immortality, ^^<?Idea 2b; Knowledge 6cf3); Memory and Lmagination 3a;
Mind  4d(2).  The  relevance  to  immortality  of  the theory of mind or
intellect  as  an incorporeal power, see Man 3a (2); Matter 4d; Mind 2a;
Soul  3b.  The  state of the soul separated from the body, see Knowledge
7c; Soul 4d. The moral significance of immortality in relation to divine
rewards and punishments, see God 5i; Punishment 5d. Other discussions of
the  underworld,  or  of  Hell,  Purgatory, and Heaven, see Eternity 4d;
Happiness  7c-7cf3);  Punishment 5e-5e(2); Sin 6d-6e. The immortality of
enduring  fame, see Honor 2d. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works
not  included  in Great Boof^s of the Western World, but relevant to the
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided
into  two groups: L Works by authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. AuGUSTiNE. On the Immortality ofthe Soul
tion  to Marcia) Aquinas. Summa Contra Gentiles, bk iv, ch 79-95 Gregory
of  Nyssa.  On  the  Soul and the Resurrec- . Quaestiones Disputatae, De
Anima,  a  14  tion  Dante.  Convivio  {The  Banquet),  second treatise,
Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology,  propositions CH 9 (4-6) 104-105,
208-210  F.  Bacon.  "Of  Death,"  in  Essays  Saadia Gaon. The BooJ^ of
Beliefs and Opinions, Hume. Of the Im?nortality of the Soul treatise vi,
viii  .  Of  Suicide  Bonaventura.  Bretiloquium,  part  vii J. S. Mill.
"Theism,"  part  hi,  in  Three Essays on R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part vii
Religion  Albo.  The  Bool^of Principles {Sefer ha-l%arim), bk W. James.
Human  Immortality  iv,  ch  29-41  Nicolas  of  Cusa. The Vision of God
Epicurus. Letter to Menoeceus Vaughan. The Retreate Cicero. De Republica
{The  Republic),  vi King. The Exequy . Tusculan Disputations, i Browne.
Hydriotaphia . De Senectute {Of Old Age) H. More. The Immortality of the
Soul

[861b]
Chapter   38:   IM\fORTALlTY   803  Ovid.  Metamorphoses  L  Seneca.  De
Consolatione  ad Marciam {On ConsolaIIPompon Azzi. On the Immortality of
the Soul

[862a]
804  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Leibnitz. Discourse on Metaphysics, xxxii-xxxvi .
Monadology,  par  19-28 J. Butler. The Analogy of Religion, part i, ch i
Law.  An  Appeal  to All That Doubt . . . the Truths of the Gospel, ch i
SwEDEXBORG.  Hcaven and Its Wonders and Hell Voltaire. "Heaven," "Hell,"
''Heil  (Descent into)," "Purgatory," "Resurrection," in A Philosophical
Dictionary Mendelssohn. Phddon; oder Ucber die Unsterblichkeit der Seele
Lessing.  How  the Ancients Represented Death Wordsworth. Intimations of
Immortality  Cousin.  Lectures  on the True, the Beautiful and the Good,
part  III  (16)  Hazlitt.  On  tlie  Feeling  of  Immortality  in  Youth
Feuerbach.  Gedanl^en  iiber  Tod  und Unsterblich\eit I. H. FicHTE. Die
Idee der PersonlichJ^eit und der individuellen Fortdauer J. H. Newtvl\n.
"The   Immortality   of  the  Soul,"  in  Parochial  and  Plain  Sermons
Kierkegaard.    Concluding    Unscientific    Postscript,   pp   152-158
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol  III,  SUP, CH 41 .
"ImmortaUty:  A  Dialogue,"  in Studies in Pessimism Fechner. Life After
Death . Religion of a Scientist

[862b]
Clifford.  "The  Unseen  Universe," in vol i. Lectures and Essays RoYCE.
The Conception of Immortality Fiske. Life Everlasting PoHLE. Eschatology
Santayana.  Reason  in Religion, ch 13-14 HuGEL. Eternal Life BosANQUET.
The Value and Destiny of the Individual \'oNiER. The Hiunan Sold and Its
Relations  with  Other  Spirits Bradley. Essays on Truth and Reality, ch
15(B)  Farnell. Gree}^ Hero Cults and Ideas ofImmortality McTaggart. The
Nature  of  Existence,  ch  43, 62 Scheler. Vom Ewigen im Menschen Lake.
Immortalitv and the Modern Mind Broad. The Mind and Its Place in Nature,
ch  i 1-12 Frazer. The Golden Bough, part ii, ch 2; part hi; PART IV, BK
I,  ch  5-6;  part  V,  CH  i6;  part  VII,  CH  lO-II  .  Man, God, and
Immortality,  part  iv  J. S. Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect
XVIII  Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality, part v Kirk. The Vision of God
Hocking. Thoughts on Death aiid Life A. E. Taylor. The Christian Hope of
Immortality Perry. The Hopefor Immortality

[863a]
Chapter  ^^:  INDUCTION  INTRODUCTION AS the list of Additional Readings
indicates,  jt\  the  theory  of  induction falls within the province of
logic  and  is  part  of  the  logician's  concern  with  the methods of
inference or reasoning employed in the sciences. The great controversies
about induction seem to be of relatively recent origin in the history of
logic,  beginning  perhaps with the argument between William Whewell and
}.  S.  Mill  over  the  contributions  of  reason and experience to the
mductive  process.  Later in the nineteenth century and in our own time,
writers  like  Johnson  and  Keynes,  Russell  and  Nicod,  who  present
different  formulations  of  inductive  inference, call attention to the
unsolved  problems  with  which  any  theory is left. They underline the
assumptions  that  seem to be unavoidable in any statement of the formal
conditions  which validate the so-called "inductive leap"— the jump from
observed particulars to general truths, truths having a wider generality
than the particular evidences from which they are drawn or on which they
are  based.  The problem of induction, in anyone's version of it, is the
problem of generaUzation. This may involve psychological questions about
how the mind generalizes from experience. But however they are answered,
the  basic  logical  questions  remain  substantially unaltered. By what
criteria is valid distinguished from fallacious induction? Can induction
be  secured from error by rules of inference? Is induction indispensable
in the development of scientific knowledge, or is there, as Whewell, for
example,  suggests,  a  sharp  distinction between the inductive and the
deductive  sciences?  What is the relation of induction to deduction? Is
it the relation of a method of discovery to a method of demonstration or
proof?  Is  it  a relation between two modes of reasoning, both of which
can be formulated as processes of 805

[863b]
proof? Is there both an inductive and a dccluctive type of syllogism, or
is induction the very opposite oi all forms of reasoning and prcKjf ? it
is  with these last questions that the discussion of induction begins in
the  great  books,  especially in Aristotle's (Jrganon and Bacon's Novum
Orgamirriy  but  also  in  the  writings  of Descartes and Locke, and in
observations  on scientific method by Newton, Harvey, and Pascal. Though
many  of  the  controversies  and  problems  which become central in the
nineteenth  century  do  not  appear explicitly m the earlier tradition,
they  are  anticipated  by the fundamental distinctions and issues which
can  be  found  in  the  earlier  writers.  Bacon's dissatisfaction with
Aristotle,  for  example,  leads  him  to  formulate  specific rules for
induction.  Going  further  in  the  same  general direction. Mill later
develops  his  elaborate  theory  of inductive inference. We move in the
opposite  direction  ifwe  are guided by Aristotle's distinction between
scientific and dialectical induction and by his way of setting induction
off  as the very opposite of reasoning. The question then arises whether
Bacon  and  Mill arc treating induction in all or in only one of several
quite  distinct  senses. As THE CHAPTER on LoGic indicates, the names of
Aristotle  and  Bacon  are  sometimes  used  as  the  symbols of opposed
tendencies  in  logic.  The  one  is  supposed  to  represent  an almost
exclusive emphasis on deduction, the other the primacy and importance of
induction.  An opposition between Aristotle and Bacon is also implied in
the  current  use  of  such  phrases as "inductive logic" and "deductive
logic."  These  phrases are sometimes used to suggest that the inductive
or  the  deductive  process can be favored to the exclusion, or at least
the subordination, of the other. Such understanding of

[864a]
806  THE GREAT IDEAS the matter usually includes the popular notion that
induction  is  always  reasoning  from  particulars  to  universals  and
deduction  always  reasoning from universals to particulars. But none of
these  things  seems  to  be  true,  or  at  least  not  without serious
qualification.  Neither  Aristotle  nor  Bacon  emphasizes  deduction or
induction to the exclusion of the other. On the contrary, both appear to
insist  on the absolute priority of induction, since, according to them,
it  provides  deductive  reasoning  with its ultimate premises. Far from
conflicting,  induction  and  deduction  complement  each  other.  *'The
consilience  of the results of both these processes," Mill writes, "each
corroborating  and  verifying  the  other,  is  requisite to give to any
general  proposition  the  kind and degree of evidence which constitutes
scientific  proof."  Until  principles are established, the deduction of
their implications or consequences cannot begin. Unless principles, once
they  are  obtained,  are then used in the proof of other truths, or are
otherwise  rationally  employed, the purpose of inductive generalization
is  not fully reahzed. In this understanding of the relationship between
induction  and  reasoning,  Aristotle and Bacon do not seem to disagree,
nor  does  either  of  them conceive induction as a process of reasoning
from  particulars to universals. There is no question that the direction
of  induction  is  from  particulars;  but in the precise sense in which
induction precedes deduction the sense in which both Bacon and Aristotle
regard  it as the source of axioms— they do not think it is a process of
reasoning  or  a form of proof. As for deduction, it is questionable, at
least  for Aristotle, whether its direction can be described as from the
universal  to the particular. Aristotle seldom uses the word "deduction"
as  the  name  for  that  phase  of  thought  which  is complementary to
induction.  He speaks rather of demonstration. Demonstration takes place
through  the  various forms of reasoning which he calls "syllogisms." As
the chapter on Reasoning explains, these are collections ofpremises each
of  which  yields  a  conclusion by valid inference. In the most perfect
forms  of reasoning, the conclusion is as universal as its premises, and
though there are syllogisms in which a par-

[864b]
ticular   proposition  can  be  demonstrated  from  a  universal  and  a
particular  premise,  it  is  seldom  the  case  that  from  exclusively
universal  premises  a  particular  conclusion  can be validly drawn.The
statement  that  deduction  is  reasoning from universals to particulars
certainly  does not seem to fit Aristotle's theory of the syllogism, and
even  less  his conception of scientific demonstration, the aim of which
is to prove universal, not particular, propositions. "We learn either by
induction or by demonstration," Aristotle writes in the Prior Analytics,
"Demonstration develops from universals, induction from particulars." In
the   Posterior   Analytics  he  says  that  the  ultimate  premises  of
demonstration  must  be  primary  or  basic  truths. A basic truth is an
immediate proposition—what is sometimes called a "first principle" or an
"axiom." Since in his view "an immediate proposition is one which has no
other   proposition   prior   to  it,"  the  basic  premises  cannot  be
demonstrated. Whence come these primary premises which are indispensable
to  demonstration  but which demonstration cannot establish? Aristotle's
answer  is  that "we know the primary premises by induction." In another
place he says, "it is by intuition that we obtain the primary premises."
The  word  "intuition" indicates an essential characteristic of the sort
of induction which, because it is not itself a form of reasoning, can be
prior to all reasoning and must be, in order to supply the premises from
which  reasoning  proceeds.  Reasoning  is  discursive.  It is a process
involving  steps. One proposition is drawn from another by the mediation
of a third. Intuition, in contrast, is immediate. Like an act of seeing,
it  apprehends its object at once and directly. When Aristotle speaks of
induction  as  a  kind  of  intuition,  he  implies,  therefore, that it
consists  in  the  immediate grasp of a universal truth. The proposition
thus  held  he  calls  "immediate"  precisely  because  it  can be known
intuitively and in no other way. Intuitive induction, as opposed to what
may be called "inductive reasoning," consists in seeing the universal in
the  particular.  When  what  is  seen  is  expressed  in  the form of a
proposition,  the  universal  implicit  in the known particulars is made
explicit.

[865a]
Chapter  39:  Induction  and  intuition  arc, however, not identical for
Aristotle.   In   one  passage  in  the  Prior  Analytics  he  considers
syllogistic  induction,  which can hardly be called "intuitive.'* And in
the  Ethics,  where  he  discusses  intuitive  reason,  he distinguishes
between  two  sorts  of  primary  truth  that can be known by intuition.
"Intuitive  reason," he writes, "is concerned with the ultimates in both
directions;  for  lx)th  the  first  terms  and  the last are objects of
intuitive  reason and not of argument, and the intuitive reason which is
presupposed  by  demonstrations grasps the unchangeable and first terms,
while  the  intuitive  reason involved in practical reasoning grasps the
last  and  variable  fact,  i.e.,  the minor premise. For these variable
facts are the starting-points for the apprehension of the end, since the
universals  are reached from the particulars; of these therefore we must
have  perception, and this perception is intuitive reason." This applies
to  theoretic  as  well  as practical knowledge. By intuitive reason, it
seems,  we  grasp  both  the  universal  principles  or  axioms  and the
particular  facts of sense-perception. As perception is intuition on the
part  of  the sensitive faculty, so induction is an intuitive use of the
intellect  (though  Aristotle  attributes  both  to "intuitive reason").
These  two forms of intuition are functionally related. The induction of
universal   truths   from   particulars  is  impossible  without  sense-
perception, "for it is sense-perception alone which is able to grasp the
particulars."  But, according to Aristotle, a single isolated perception
does  not  give  rise to an intuitive induction. Repeated perceptions of
things  of  a  certain sort particulars of a certain class—are formed by
memory  into  what  he  calls  "an  experience."  Because the experience
refers,  not  to  a  single  individual,  but  to  a  class  of  similar
individuals,  it  provides  the material for the mind's intuitive act of
induction.  This  theory  of the role of experience in induction is more
fully  discussed in the chapter on Experience. For our present purposes,
the   main  point  is  that  the  universal,  lying  implicitly  in  the
experience,  is  ready,  as  it were, to be extracted therefrom and made
explicit.  "Though the act of sense-perception is of the particular, its
content is universal," Aristotle writes. With

[865b]
INDUCTION  807  llic  help of memory and experience, induction makes ihc
latent univcrsiil manifest. Bacon's criticis.m of the logic of Aristotle
seems  to  rest  on two counts: first, he complains of Aristotle's Qvcr-
cmphasis   on   syllogisms,  whether  they  are  used  dialeclically  or
demonstratively;  and  second,  he  charges  Aristotle with a superhcial
understanding  of  induction.  One  of  the  chief  eflorts of the Novum
Organum  is  to  correct  the latter mistake. "There are and can exist,"
says  Bacon,  "but  two ways of investigating and discovering truth. The
one  hurries  on  rapidly  from  the  senses and particulars to the most
general  axioms,  and  from them, as principles, and from their supposed
indisputable truth, deduces the intermediate axioms. This is the way now
in use. The other constructs its axioms from the senses and particulars,
by  ascending continually and gradually, until it finally arrives at the
most  general  axioms,  which  is  the  true but unattempted way." Where
Aristotle  proposes  that only the primary truths or first principles be
established  by  induction,  while  all  the  others  (which Bacon calls
"intermediate  axioms")  are  to  be derived from them by demonstration.
Bacon  urges  a method of induction which shall mount gradually from the
least  general to the most universal propositions. We should not "suffer
the  understanding  to  jump and fly from particulars to remote and most
general  axioms."  We  should  "proceed  by  a true scale and successive
steps,  without  interruption  or breach, from particulars to the lesser
axioms,  thence  to  the  intermediate (rising one above the other), and
lastly,  to  the  most general." According to this theory, induction can
intuitively  draw  more general from less general truths, as well as the
least  general  truths from the particulars of perception. It might seem
at  first  as if there were no place for deduction in the development of
science.  But  Bacon  divides  the study of nature into two phases: "the
first  regards the eficiting or creating of axioms from experiments, the
second  the  deducing  or deriving of new experiments from axioms." Here
too  there seems to be a crucial difference between Bacon and Aristotle.
This  difference  is indicated by Bacon's emphasis upon experiments both
as

[866a]
808  THE  GREAT IDEAS the source of inductive generalization and also as
that   which  is  ultimately  derived  by  deduction  from  axioms.  The
difference  between  experience  (which  Aristotle  makes  the source of
induction)  and experiment is more than verbal. "The axioms now in use,"
Bacon  contends,  "are  derived  from  a  scanty handful, as it were, of
experience,  and  a  few  particulars of frequent occurrence." There has
been too little attention given to negative instances, that is, of cases
which  seem  to  run  counter  to  the  generalization being formed. "In
establishing  any  true axiom," Bacon insists, "the negative instance is
the  most powerful." The chapter on Experience, dwells on the difference
between  ordinary  experience  and  planned experiments. Where Aristotle
seems to be satisfied with the ordinary experience which arises from the
perceptions  of men in the course of daily hfe. Bacon thinks it does not
suffice.  Because  it  is  haphazard, it fails to collect the variety of
instances,  both  positive  and  negative,  upon  which genuine and soHd
inductions  can  be  founded.  Unusual  and  special experiences must be
sought  out,  and the effort must be made to invent experiences which do
not  arise  spontaneously.  For  this,  experiment—or  the production of
experiences—  is  necessary.  Bacon  thinks  we  must, "by every kind of
experiment,  elicit  the  discovery  of  causes  and  true axiom.s." Two
CONSEQUENCES  FOLLOW  from the several differences we have noted between
Aristotle's  and  Bacon's  theories  of  induction.  In the first place,
Aristotle  does  not  seem  to  think that induction can be methodically
prescribed by logical rules. It is a natural act of intelligence to draw
universals  from  experience.  Though men may differ in the readiness of
their  native  wit,  the  induction of the primary truths, which are the
axioms  or  first principles of science, does not require special genius
nor  can  it  be  improved  or rendered more certain by following rules.
Precisely  because  it  is  intuitive rather than discursive, induction,
unlike  reasoning,  cannot  be  regulated  by rules of inference such as
those  which  govern  the  syllogism.  Without  disagreeing  that  it is
intuitive rather than argumentative, Bacon seems to think

[866b]
that  induction  requires  the practice of the most detailed and precise
method.  Not  only  must  the  various  ascending stages of induction be
regulated  by  observance  of  an order of generality, but the making of
experiments  and the collection and arrangement of particulars, "forming
tables  and  coordinations  of instances," must be governed by a complex
set  of  rules.  The  twentyseven  tables of instances, set forth in the
second book of the Novum Organum, constitute the heart of Bacon's method
of  induction.  This  new  method  "of  discovering  the  sciences,"  he
observes, "levels men's wits and leaves but little of their superiority,
since  it  achieves everything by the most certain rules." In the second
place, since genuine induction depends for Bacon upon ample experiments,
it  belongs  primarily  to  the method of the experimental sciences— the
physical  or  natural  sciences  in  which  experimentation is possible.
Though  the first principles or axioms of arithmetic and geometry may be
learned  by  induction,  the  method  of gradual ascent from experiments
through intermediate generalizations does not apply to mathematics. Here
we  may  have  the  beginning  of  the notion that only the experimental
sciences   are   primarily   inductive,  whereas  other  sciences,  like
mathematics,  are  primarily  deductive.  But  such  a  division  of the
sciences does not accord with Aristotle's theory of induction. He thinks
mathematics  and  metaphysics  require induction for their foundation no
less  than physics and in no different way; if anything, induction is of
the  greatest importance for metaphysics, because all its principles are
indemonstrable, whereas some of the principles needed in mathematics and
physics can be demonstrated in metaphysics. Yet no science is peculiarly
inductive,  just as none stands in a special relation to experience. All
depend  equally  upon experience for the induction of the primary truths
on  which  their  demonstrations rest. Descartes seems to fall somewhere
between  Aristotle and Bacon. He regards arithmetic and geometry as more
certain  than  the  physical  sciences,  because  mathematics is largely
developed  by  deduction,  whereas  the  study  of  nature  depends upon
induction from experiments. In this lies the superiority of mathematics.
"While

[867a]
Chapter  39: our inferences from cxj^riencc arc trccjucnily fallacious,"
Dcscarlcs  writes,  *Meduclion,  or the pure illation of one thin<^ from
another  .  .  .  cannot be erroneous when perlonned by an understanding
that  is in the least degree rational." Nevertheless, Descartes does not
exclude  induction  as  the  source of the axioms of mathematics or, for
that  matter,  of  metaphysics;  he  only excludes the kind of induction
which  depends  upon  experiments. Such axioms as when ccjuals are taken
from equals the remainders are equal or the whole is greater than any of
its parts are products of induction, as may be seen, he points out, from
the  fact  that  a  child  can  be  taught these general truths only "by
showing  him  examples in particular cases." Similarly, the metaphysical
truth  in  the proposition / thinkj therefore, I exist cannot be learned
by  deduction  or  syllogistic  reasoning. The axiom that to thinJ^is to
exist  has  to  be  learned  by  induction  "from  the experience of the
individual—  that  unless  he exists he cannot think. For our mind is so
constituted  by  nature  that general propositions are formed out of the
knowledge  of  particulars."  From  the  foregoixg  we  can  gather that
different  theories  of  induction may be, in large part, theories about
different  kinds  of induction. Common to induction of every sort is the
motion  of  the  mind from particulars, apprehended by sense, to general
propositions  or  universal notions. But the character of the induction,
or  its  conditions  and  method,  may  differ  according to the precise
character  of  its  source:  (i)  whether it arises from ordinary sense-
experience or from planned experiments; and (2) whether it is based upon
a  single  experiment or upon an enumeration of instances. There remains
the  most  radical  distinction  in type of induction: (3) whether it is
intuitive  or  discursive—accomplished by an act of immediate insight or
by  a  process  of  reasoning from premises to a conclusion. These three
divisions  cross  one  another  to  some extent. Descartes, for example,
seems  to regard the complete enumeration of a series of connected facts
as a way of drawing a general conclusion about their connection. That he
has  inductive  reasoning  rather  than  intuitive induction in mind, we
learn from his statement

[867b]
INDUCTION 809 tliai "by adcc]ualc enumeration or induction is meant that
mcth(Hl  by  which we attain surer conclusions than by any other type of
prfxif.  with  the  exception  of  simple  intuition. Pascal seems to be
making  the  same jxmit when he says that "in all matters whose proof is
by  ex[x*riment  and not by demonstration, no universal assertion can be
made  except  by  the  general  enumeration of all the parts and all the
different  cases." fiacon, on the other hand, always thinks ol induction
as  intuitive  generalization,  and  therefore maintains that "induction
which  proceeds  by  simple  enumeration  is puerile, leads to uncertain
conclusions,  and  is  exposed  to  danger  from one contradictory inThe
elaborate   procedure  which  Bacon  proposes  for  collating  instances
stresses,  not  completeness of enumeration, but an examination of their
relation  to one another and, in the light thereof, an interpretation of
their  significance.  Mill's  four  or  five methods of induction bear a
close  resemblance  to  Bacon's  more  numerous tables of instances; but
Mill's  methods  are  attempts  to  formulate the rules of inference for
inductive  reasoning, whereas Bacon's rules are rules, not of reasoning,
but  of tabulating the particulars from w hich intuitive generalizations
can be formed. On Mill's view of induction, it may be questioned whether
induction  from  an  exhaustive  enumeration is induction at all, for it
seems  to  result  in  a  summary  of the facts enumerated rather than a
generalization from particulars. Where there is no inductive leap, there
is  no induction. Where the inductive leap does occur, however, it seems
easier to understand it as an intuitive act—a seeing of the universal in
the  particular—  rather  than as a process of reasoning. Each of Mill's
methods  requires  a  rule  of  inference  which  is  itself a universal
proposition.  His  critics  have  asked.  Whence  come  these  universal
propositions  about the relations of cause and effect or about the order
and  uniformity  of  nature?  They point out that he cannot answer tliat
these  propositions  are  themselves  conclusions of inductive reasoning
without begging the question. Such criticism of inductive reasoning does
not seem to apply to Aristotle's conception ot

[868a]
810  THE  GREAT IDEAS it, for with him it is not, as with Mill, distinct
in  form  from the syllogism. It is simply a distinct type of syllogism,
w^hich consists in reasoning from effect to cause rather than from cause
to  effect.  Nor does the observation that an inductive inference cannot
be  more  than  probable  apply  to what Aristotle means by an inductive
syllogism.  The  certainty  or  probability of non-syllogistic induction
depends  on the source of the inference—whether it derives from a single
specially  constructed  experiment  or from an enumeration of particular
instances,  with  or  without  a  statistical calculation based on their
frequency.  The  conception  of  a  perfect  experiment implies that the
operation  of  a  universal law can be exhibited in a single case. It is
almost  as  if  the  controlling  aim of the experiment were to make the
universal manifest in the particular. Newton's experiments on reflection
and refraction seem to be of this sort. From them certain laws of optics
are directly induced, even as, according to Aristotle and Descartes, the
axioms of mathematics or metaphysics can be directly induced from simple
experiences, available to a child or famihar to all men. Yet Newton does
not think that the inductive establishment of such laws is as certain as
demonstration.  The  analytic  method,  he  writes,  "consists in making
experiments  and  observations  and  in drawing general conclusions from
them  by  induction.  And  although  the  arguing  from  experiments and
observations  by  induction  be no demonstration of general conclusions;
yet  it is the best way of arguing which the nature of things admits of,
and may be looked upon as so much stronger, by how much the induction is
more  general.  If no exception occur from phenomena, the conclusion may
be  pronounced  generally;  but  if at any time afterwards any exception
shall  occur  from  experiments, it may then begin to be pronounced with
such   exceptions  as  occur."  Because  it  must  depend  on  inductive
generalizations  from  experience  which,  in  his  view,  can  never be
certain,  Locke  doubts  that physics can ever become a science. "I deny
not,"  he  writes,  "that  a  man,  accustomed  to  rational and regular
experiments,  shall be able to see further into the nature of bodies and
guess righter at their yet unknown properties, than one that is a

[868b]
stranger  to  them;  but  yet,  as I have said, this is but judgment and
opinion,  not  knowledge and certainty. This way oigetting and improving
our J^owledge in substances only by experience and history, which is all
that the weakness of our faculties in this state of mediocrity . . . can
attain  to, makes me suspect," Locke concludes, "that natural philosophy
is  not  capable of being made a science.''' Hume offers two reasons for
the  inconclusiveness  and  uncertainty  which he thinks qualify all our
generalizations or inductions from experience. The first calls attention
to  the  fact  that,  unlike  mathematical  reasoning,  inferences  from
experience  in  the  realm  of  physical matters depend on the number of
cases observed. "The conclusions which
[reason] draws from
considering  one  circle,"  he  says,  "are  the same it would form upon
surveying  all the circles in the universe. But no man, having seen only
one  body  move, after being impelled by another, could infer that every
other  body  will  move  after  a  Uke  impulse."  The  principle "which
determines him to form such a conclusion" is, according to Hume, "Custom
or  Habit";  and precisely because inductive generalization is an effect
of  custom rather than of reasoning in the strict sense, the strength of
the  induction—or  the  force of custom— varies with the number of cases
from   which   it   arises.  "After  the  constant  conjunction  of  two
objects—heat  and  flame,  for  instance,  weight  and  solidity—we  are
determined  by custom alone to expect the one from the appearance of the
other. This hypothesis," Hume maintains, "seems . . . the only one which
explains  the  difficulty,  why  we  draw, from a thousand instances, an
inference which we are not able to draw from one instance, that is in no
respect different from them. Reason is incapable of any such variation."
Since  all  the  relevant  cases can never be exhaustively observed, the
inference  from a customary conjunction must always remain uncertain, no
matter  how high a probabiHty it derives from the multiplication of like
instances.  To  this  first  point,  concerning  the  dependence  of the
probability of generalizations from experience upon the frequency of the
observed instances, Hume adds a second point about the similarity of the
cases under obser-

[869a]
vation.  Analogy,  he  says, "leads us to expect from any cause the same
events, which we liavc observed to result from similar causes. Where the
causes  are  entirely similar, the analogy is perfect, and the inference
drawn from it is regarded as certain and conclusive. . . . But where the
objects have not so exact a similarity, the analogy is less perfect, and
the  inference  is  less  conclusive; though still it has some force, in
proportion  to the degree of similarity and resemblance." The absence of
perfect  similarity  is Hume's second reason for the inconclusiveness or
uncertainty of inductive generalizations. The contrary supposition— that
one  case  can  be  perfectly  representative  of  an infinite number of
similar cases—may explain why Aristotle seems to think that induction is
able  to  produce  the  primary  truths  or principles of science with a
certitude  which  gives  certainty  to all the demonstrations founded on
these  axioms.  Another  explanation of Aristotle's view may be found in
his distinction between scientific and dialectical induction. He regards
the  former as based on the kind of common experience which, unlike even
the  best  experiment, admits of no exceptions. In contrast, dialectical
induction,  or  the  still  weaker  form  of  induction  which  he calls
"rhetorical,"  is  based  on  an  enumeration of cases (which may not be
complete)  or upon a single example (which provides no safeguard against
possible  exceptions).  In  its dialectical form, the inductive argument
proceeds from a number of particulars OUTLINE OF TOPICS 1. The theory of
induction:  generalization from particulars la. Induction and intuition:
their  relation  to  reasoning or demonstration lb. Inductive reasoning:
the  issue concerning inductive and deductive proof 2. The conditions or
sources  of induction: memory, experience, experiment 3. The products of
induction: definitions, axioms, principles, laws 4. The use of induction
in   argument   4^.  Dialectical  induction:  securing  assumptions  for
disputation  4^.  Rhetorical  induction:  inference  from example in the
process  of  persuasion  5.  The role of induction in the development of
science: the methods of experimental and enumerative induction

[869b]
Chapter  39:  INDUCTION  811  taken  for  granted. Aristotle offers this
example  of dialectical induction: **Sup[X)sing the skilled pilot is the
most  effective,  and likewise the skilled charioteer, then, in general,
the  skilled  man is the best at his particular task." In its rhetorical
form,  no  more  than  a single example m.iy be used, as when the orator
generalizes  that  honesty  is  the  best  ptjlicy  from  the story of a
particular  individual who was finally rewarded for his virtue. In lx)th
forms,  the inductive generalization is at best probable; and it is more
or  less  probable according to the soundness of the suppositions or the
examples  from  which it originates — to be tested only by extending the
enumeration  of  particulars.  But if an induction is merely probable in
the first place, it can only be made more probable, it can never be made
certain,  by  multiplying  cases  or by increasing their variAristotle's
theory  of  dialectical  induction  thus  seems to have a bearing on the
probability  of  induction  from  limited  experiments (or from a single
experiment  whose  perfection  is not assured) and of induction from the
frequency  or variety of observed instances. The other point to be noted
is  that  Bacon's  basic  rule  of  gradual ascent from particular cases
through  less  general to more general propositions seems to be relevant
to  dialectical induction, but not, on Aristotle's view, to that kind of
induction which produces the axioms or principles of PACB 812 '13 814

[870a]
812 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The theory of
induction:  generalization from particulars la. Induction and intuition:
their  relation  to  reasoning  or demonstration 8 Aristotle : Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72^18-24]
99b-c; CH 23
[84^31-85*1]
115d116a; CH31 [87^39-88^17] 120a-c; ch 33
[88^
30-89^1] 121b-c; bk II, CH 2
[90*24-30]
123b-c; CH 19 136a-137a,c / Topics, bk i, CH 12 148d; BK VIII, CH i
[155^35-156*7]
211d-212a;
[156^10-18] 212c-d / Metaphysics,
BK I, CH 9 [992^24-993*1] 511a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098*34-^3]
343d; bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6 389d; ch 8
[1142*23-31]
391b-c; CH II 392c-393b esp
[1143*32-^6] 392d-393a / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 20
[1393*25-26] 641a
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-335c  esp 333d-334d 30 Bacon:
AdvaJicement  of  Learning,  43d-44c; 59c; 61d; 96d-97a / Novum Organum,
105a195d  esp  BK I, aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 69 116a-b, APH 105 128b-c,
bk  ii,  aph i-io 137a140d, APH 15-16 149a-b, aph 20-22 150d153c, APH 52
194c-195d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  iii  3b-5a esp 4a-b; vii, 10c-12a; ix
14d-15d; xi, 17b-d / Objections and Replies, 123a-b; 167c-d

[870b]
\  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James :P>jvr/!o/o^^,116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (Z))  //  Esdras,  7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 40, schol 2 388a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
1-5  171a-173a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c; div 9
454c-455a;  sect  iv,  div  26 460b-c lb. Inductive reasoning: the issue
concerning  inductive  and deductive proof 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk ii, ch 23 90a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i [71*1-11] 97a; c?i3
[72''25-33] 99c; ch 18 lllb-c; bk ii, ch 7
[92*34-''i] 126b/ Topics, bki, ch 18 [108^7-12]
152d  /  Physics, bk viii, ch i [252*23-25] 336a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 4
[io95*3o-''8]
340c; CH 7
[1098*35-^3] 343d; bk vi, ch 3
388b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356^5-18]
596a-b  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth day, 252a-b 28 Harvey:
Motion  of  the  Heart,  280c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 42a-c;
57b-58b;  61  d;  96d-97a  / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp bk i, aph 11-26
107d-108d,  aph  69  116a-b,  APH  103-106  127d-128c,  bk ii, aph 10-52
140c-195d 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; vii, 10c-12a; xi 17b-18b; xii,
24a-b / Discourse, part vi, 61d62c / Objections and Replies, 167c-d

[871a]
b  2  to 4j Chapter 39: INDUCTION 813 34 Nfwton: Principles, bk mi, rule
iv 271b / Optics, BK III, 543a -b 35 Locke: Himian Understanding, bk iv,
ch  xii,  SECT lo 361b-c 35 Humf: Hurjian Understanding, sect iv, div 26
460b-c; SECT ix, niv 82 487b-c; sect xii, DIV 13 1 -132 508d 509d passim
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 45b 46a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-447b passim;
475b,d  [fn  i]  passim  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity 659a 51
Tolstoy:  Har  and  Peace,  epilogue  11,  690b  53  James:  Psychology,
674a-675b  esp  675b  2. The conditions or sources of induction: memory,
experience,  experiment  8  Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 [46*
18-28]  64a;  bk ii, ch 23 [68^15-29] 90b-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i,
ch i
[71*1-8] 97a;
CH 3
[72^25-33]
99c; CH 18 lllb-c; ch 31
[87^39-88*17] 120a-c; bk
ii, ch 2
[90*24-30]
123b-c; ch 7
[92*34-^1] 126b; ch 19 [99^20100^5] 136a-d /
Topics, bk i, ch 12 148d; ch 18
[108^7-12] 152d; bk
II, ch 7
[113*31-33]
158d; bk VIII, ch i [I55^^5-I56*7] 211d-212a;
[156^10-18] 212c-d / Physics, bk i, ch
i  259a-b;  CH  8  [191*24-34]  267a-b / Heavens, bk hi, ch 7 [306*6-18]
397b-c / Generation and Corruption, BK I, CH 2
[316*5-8] 411c / Metaphysics,
bk I, CH I 499a-500b; ch 9
[992*^24-993*1]
511a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[io95*30-''8]
340c; ch 7
[io98*34-*'8]
343d-344a; bk vi, CH 8
[1142*12-19]
391b; en 11
[1x43*32-^6]
392d-393a  /  R/ietoric,  bk  ii,  ch  20  [1393*221394*8]  640d-641d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theological part i-ii, q 51, A I, ANS 12b-13c 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  prep,  la-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 200a-b;
207d-208a  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-268d;  285c-d  /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  322d-323d;  324c-d / On Animal Generation,
331b-335c;  383d;  473a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 16a; 34b;
57b-d; 59c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 17 108a; APH 19 108b; aph 22 108c;
aph  25  108d;  aph  69  116a-b;  aph  104-105  128a-c; bk ii, aph 11-15
140d-149a 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; vii, 10c-12a / Discourse, part
vi,  61d-62c  /  Objections and Replies, 167c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2  387b-388b  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  iii-iv  270b271b  / Optics, bk hi, 543a-b 35
Berkeley:   Human   Knowledge,   sect   107  433d-434a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect hi, div 19, 458a

[871b]
42  Kant: Pure Reason, 5al3d; 45b 46a: 66d 93c / Judgcmrnf, 562d 563b 45
Faraoav:  Researches  in  Hlertricitv,  659a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of
History,  i'ari iv, 361a b 54 I'keud: Instincts, 412a 3. The products of
induction:  definitions,  axioms,  principles,  laws 8 Aris ron.E: Prujr
Analytus,  bk  ii,  ch  2^  90a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  uk i, ch 7,
[j2^'2=^-y^\ 99c; CH 18 lllb-c; CH SI
[87*' :i9 88*17] 120a c; hk
II, CH 2
[90*24-^01 123b c; cH
7 126b; CH 19 136a-137a,c / Topics, bk i, ch 12 148d; CH 18
[108*7-12] 152d; bk
vmi, ch r
[i55*'35-i5^''7) 211d-212a;
[i56»'io-i8] 212c-d
/  Generation  and  Corruption, bk i, cm 2 [316* 5-8] 411c 9 Aristoti.e:
Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[!095*so-*'8J
340c; CH 7
[1098*34-^:5] 343d;
bk vi, ch 3
[in9*'25-34]388c; ch 6 389d; ch
ii [1143*25- ^'13] 392d-393a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 79,
A 12, ANS 425c-426b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, lac 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  third day, 200a-b; 207d-208a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
333d  335a  esp  334c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement ofLearning, 34b; 57b-d;
96d-97a  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 17-25 108a-d; aph 103-106 127d-128c;
bk  ii, aph i-io 137a-140d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 123a-b;
167c-d  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule iii-iv 270b271b / Optics, BK
III,  543a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SECT 25 120c-d
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  107  433d-434a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div 2 451b-c; div 9 454c-455a; sect iv, div 26
460b-c   42   Kant:   Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  66d  93c;  110a  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  475b,d [fn i] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
361a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 690b 54 Freud: Instincts,
412a-b  4.  The  use of induction in argument 4a, Dialectical induction:
securing  assumptions  for  disputation 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 12
148d; ch 18
[108^7-12] 152d; BK VIII, CH
I
[i55''i6-i56*7]
211b-212a;   [i56'*io-i8]   212c-d;   ch   2  [157*1938]  213b-d;  ch  8
[i6o*35-''i]  217d;  ch 14 [i64* 12-17] 222d 9 Aristotle: i?A^/o/'/V, bk
i, ch 2
[i 356*36-*'26]
596a-b

[872a]
(4.  The  use  of  induction  in  argument.)  4b,  Rhetorical induction:
inference  from  example in the process of persuasion 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  24  90c91a / Topics, bk viii, ch i [156*^10-18]
212c-d; CH 8
[160^35-^1] 217d
/  Metaphysics,  bk ii, CH 3 [995^6-8] 513c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i,
ch 2
[1356^361358^3] 596a-597d; ch 9 [1368^29-31] 611b-c;
bk II, ch 20 640d-641d; ch 23 [1398*32-^18] 646d-647a; ch 25
[1403^5-9] 652d;
bk  hi,  CH  17 [1417^35-1418*3] 672b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
58c-59a  42  Kant:  Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 376c-d 5. The
role  of  induction  in  the  development  of  science:  the  methods of
experimental  and enumerative induction 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk
ii,  ch 23 90a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3 [72^25-33] 99c; CH 18
lllb-c; bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Fitysics, bk i, ch 2
[185*13-14] 259d; bk
v, ch I [224^28-30] 304d; bk viii, ch i [252*23- ^5] 336a-b / Generation
and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 9 [992^30-993*1] 511b; bk VI, ch i [1025^ 1-16] 547b; bk xi, ch 7
[1064*4-9]
592b;  bk  XIII,  CH  4  [1078^28-30]  610b  9  Aristotle: Generation of
Animals, bk v, CH 8
[788^10-21] 330c
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[1095*30-^8] 340c; CH
7
[1098*34-^3] 343d;
BK  VI, CH 3 388b-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk hi, ch 1-2 199a-2O0a
esp 199c-d CWSS'KEFEKENCES Science 4d, 5d.

[872b]
814 THE GREAT IDEAS 4^/0 5 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-c 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences,  200a-b;  207d-208a  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart,
280c;  285c-d  third day, / Circulation of the Blood, 324c-d / On Animal
Generation,  332a-335c  esp  334c-d; 383d; 473a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  16a;  34b;  42a-c; 56b'58c; 96d-97a / Novum Organum 105a-195d
esp bk i, aph 11-26 107d-108d, APH 69 116a-b, APH 104-106 128a-c, bk ii,
APH  i-io  137a-140d,  aph  15-16  149a-b,  aph  20-21 150d-153b, aph 52
194c-195d  31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; vii 10b-12a / Discourse, part
vi, 61d-62c / Objections and Replies, 167c-d 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a-b /
Arithmetical   Triangle,  451b-452a;  458b-459b;  464a-466a  34  Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  iii-iv  270b271b; general schol, 371b-372a /
Optics,  bk III, 543a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 107 433d-434a
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a; sect hi, div 19,
458a;  sect  iv,  DIV  26  460b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d; 45b-46a;
72c85d  esp  72c-74b,  82a-b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 387a-b /
judgement, 562d-563b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445d-446b; 475b,d
[fni]
45  Faraday : Researches in Electricity, 659a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  690b  53  James:  Psychology,  385a-b; 677b; 862a-865a 54
Freud:  Instincts,  412a-b  Ii For: Other discussions of induction as an
intuitive  act  of  generalization,  see  Judgment 8a; Knowledge 6c(2) ;
Principle   3a(i),   3a(3)-3b;  Reasoning  5b(i)  ;  Science  5d.  Other
treatments   of  inductive  reasoning  and  its  relation  to  deductive
reasoning,   see   Reasoning  4c,  6c;  Science  5d;  and  for  parallel
distinctions  in  modes of argument, see Experience 2d; Reasoning 5b(3),
5b(5).  Discussions dealing with the sources or conditions of induction,
generalization,  or  abstraction, see Experience 2b; Idea 2g; Memory and
Imagination  3c, 6c(i); Sense 5b; Universal and Particular 4c. Induction
as  the  source of principles, axioms, or scientific laws, see Principle
3b;  Science  4d;  Universal  and  Particular  4f.  Other  treatments of
dialectical  and  rhetorical  induction,  see Dialectic 2b, 3b; Rhetoric
4c(i); and for their contrast with dialectical and rhetorical reasoning,
see Dialectic 3c; Reasoning 5c-5d; Rhetoric 4c(2). The role of induction
in the experimental sciences, see Experience 5a; Reasoning 6c;

[873a]
y  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are  works not included in Great
Booths  ofthe  Western  World,  but relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter  deals. These works arc divided into two groups: I.
Works  by  authors  represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the dale, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  .\dditional  Readings  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk iii-iv II. Philodevius. On
Methods  of  Inference  John  of  Sai.nt  Thomas.  Ciirsus Philosophicus
Thomisticus,  Ars  Logica,  part  i,  bk hi, ch 2; q 8 (2); PART II, Q 5
Whately.  Elements of Logic, bk iv, ch i GrATRY. Logic, PART IV Whewell.
The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, VOL II, BK XI, ch 1-6; BK XIII
.  On the Philosophy of Discovery SiGWART. Logic, PART III, CH 5 Jevons.
The  Principles  ofScience, ch 7, ii ; bk iv, esp CH 22 LOTZE. Logic, BK
I,  CH 3 (a) Bradley. The Principles ofLogic, bk ii, part ii, ch 3 C. S.
Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol ii, par 619-644, 669-693, 755-791 Venn.
Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic ch 5-15, 17, 24

[873b]
Chapter  39:  INDUCTION  815  Pearson.  The  Grammar  of  Science,  ch 3
Bosanquet.  Logic,  vol  ii,  ch  3-5  . Science and Philosophy, 4 J. C.
Wilson.  Statement  and Inference, part iv PoiNCARE. Science and Method,
bk  ii,  ch  ^-4  Cassirer.  Substance and Function, part ii, ch 5 N. R.
Campbell.  Physics; the Elements, ch 4 W. E. Johnson. Logic, part ii, ch
8-1  i;  part hi, ch 2 J. M. Keynes. A Treatise on Probability, part III
KicoD.  'The  Logical  Problem of Induction," in Foundations of Geometry
and  Induction  MiSES.  Probability,  Statistics, and Truth M. R. Cohen.
Reason  and  Nature,  bk  i,  ch  3(3)  Jeffreys.  Scientific  Inference
Meyerson.  Du  cheminement  de  la  pensee  Dewey.  Logic, the Theory of
Inquiry,  ch  21  B.  Russell.  The  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  6  .
Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy, CH 3 . Human Knotuledge, Its
Scope and Limits, PART V, CH 7; PART VI, CH 2-3

[874a]
INTRODUCTION  ONE  of  the  persistent  questions concerning infinity is
whether  we  can  know or comprehend it. Another is whether the infinite
exists,  and  if  so,  to what kind of thing infinity belongs. It is not
surprising,  therefore, that the discussion of infinity often borders on
the  unintelHgible.  The  idea  of  infinity, like the idea of eternity,
lacks  the  support  of  the imagination or of senseexperience. The fact
that  the  infinite  cannot be perceived or imagined seems sufficient to
lead  Hobbes  and  Berkeley  todenyitsreaUty.  "Whatsoever we imagine is
finite,''  writes  Hobbes. "Therefore there is no idea, or conception of
anything  we  call  infinite. . . . When we say anything is infinite, we
signify only that we are not able to conceive the ends and bounds of the
thing  named,  having  no  conception  of  the  thing,  but  of  our own
inabihty."  On  similar  grounds  Berkeley  rejects  the  possibihty  of
infinite  division.  "If  I  cannot  perceive  innumerable  parts in any
infinite  extension,"  he  writes,  "it  is  certain  that  they are not
contained   in  it:  but  it  is  evident,  that  I  cannot  distinguish
innumerable  parts  in  any  particular fine, surface, or solid, which I
either  perceive  by  sense, or figure to myself in my mind; wherefore I
conclude  that  they are not contained in it." But for most of the great
writers  on  the  subject, the impossibiUty of representing infinity and
eternity  to  the  imagination  does  not  render  them inconceivable or
meaningless.  Yet  it  does account for the difficulty of grasping their
meaning, a difficulty further increased by the fact that, whatever their
meaning,  infinity  and eternity are indefinable. To define the infinite
would be to limit—even in thought— the unlimited. The notion of infinity
involves greater perplexities than that of eternity. The meaning of

[874b]
Chapter  40:  INFINITY eternity is weighted with the mystery of God, the
world,  and  time. All these affect the concep- .* tion of infinity; but
for the infinite there are also the mysteries of number and of space, of
matter  and  motion.  In the sphere of quantity, or of things subject to
quantity, infinity is itself the source of mystery, or at least the root
of  difficulty  in analysis. It is the central term in the discussion of
the  continuous and the indivisible, the nature of series and of limits.
As  INDICATED  in  the  chapter  on  Eternity,  that idea in each of its
applications  seems  to  have  one or the other of two meanings— (i) the
meaning  in  which it signifies infinite time, time without beginning or
end,  and  (2)  the  meaning  in  which it signifies the timelessness or
immutability  of  being.  Both  meanings  are  negative,  so  far as our
understanding  is  concerned.  Yet what is signified by the second is in
itself  something  positive,  at least in the opinion of those who think
that  to  be exempt from change entails having every perfection or being
lacking  in  nothing.  This  spht  in meaning also occurs in the idea of
infinity.  As  applied  to  being, the term infinite signifies something
positive,  even  though  our  understanding of what is signified remains
negative  or,  at best, analogical. An infinite being is one which lacks
no  attribute that can belong to a being. This is the positive condition
of absolute perfection. The infinite here still means the unlimited, but
that  which is unlimited in being has no defect. To lack deficiencies is
to  be  perfect.  It is in this sense that Spinoza defines God as "Being
absolutely  infinite,  that  is to say, substance consisting of infinite
attributes,  each one of which expresses eternal and infinite essence.*'
Like  Spinoza,  Aquinas  maintains  that  "besides  God  nothing  can be
infinite." But he 816

[875a]
Chapter  40:  distinguishes the absokite or positive sense in whicli God
alone  is  infinite  from the sense of the word in which it can be siiid
that  "things  other  than  God  can  be  rchilivcly  inlinilc,  but not
absolutely  infinite."  This other meaning, according to Aquinas, is not
only relative but negative, for it connotes "something im|xrrI fect." It
signifies  indeterminacy  or  lack  of perfection in being. What Aquinas
calls the relative or potential infinite, he attributes to matter and to
quantities—to  bodies,  to  the  magnitudes  of  space  and time, and to
number.  This  sense  of  "infinite"  corresponds  to  that  meaning  of
"eternal,"  according  to  which  time  consists of an endless series of
moments,  each having a predecessor, each a successor, no matter how far
one  counts them back into the past or ahead into the future. But in the
field  of  quantities  other  than  time,  the  meanings of infinite and
eternal  part  company.  There  is,  of course, some parallelism between
infinite  space  and  infinite time, insofar as an infinite extension is
one  which  does  not  begin  at  any  point  or  end  at  any;  but the
consideration  of  space and number leads to an aspect of infinity which
has no parallel in the consideration of eternity. "In sizes or numbers,"
Pascal  writes, "nature has set before man two marvelous infinities. . .
.  For,  from  the  fact  that  they can always be increased, it follows
absolutely  that  they can always be decreased. ... If we can multiply a
number  up  to 100,000 times, say, we can also take a hundred thousandth
part  of  it  by dividing it by the same number we multiply it with, and
thus  every  term of increase will become a term of division by changing
the  integer  into  a  fraction.  So  that  infinite  increase  includes
necessarily   infinite  division."  As  endless  addition  produces  the
infinitely  large, so endless division produces the infinitesimal or the
infinitely  small.  A  trillion trillion is a finite number, because the
addition  of  a  single  unit creates a larger number. The fact that the
addition  of  anotlier unit produces a different number indicates that a
trillion  trillion  has  a determinate size, which is the same as saying
that  it  is  a finite number. An infinite number cannot be increased by
addition, for it is constituted— in thought at

[875b]
INFINITY  817  least—  as a number larger than the sum of any two finite
numbers;  which  is  anoihcr  way  of  saying  that i( is apprtxiched by
carrying  on  the process of addition endlessly. The size of an infinite
number  is therefore indetermiWhat Galileo points out about two infinite
quantities  seems to hold for an infinite and a finite quantity. He asks
us  to consider the totality of all integers (which is infinite) and the
totality  of  their  squares  (which is also infinite). On the one hand,
there  appc-ar to be as many squares as there are integers; on the other
hand,  the  totality  of  integers  includes  all the squares. Precisely
because  "the  number  of  squares  is not less than the totality of all
numbers,  nor  the  latter greater than the former," Gahleo insists that
"the  attributes  'equal,'  'greater,'  and 'less' are not applicable to
infinite,  but  only  to finite quantities." Nor does the sense in which
one  finite  quantity can be greater or less than another— that is, by a
determinate  difference between them—apply in the comparison of a finite
and  an  infinite  quantity. The latter, being indeterminately large, is
indeterminately  larger  than  any finite quanThese remarks apply to the
infinitely  small  as  well.  The infinitesimal is immeasurably small or
indeterminately  less  than  any  finite  fraction, no matter how small,
because  its  own  size  is indeterminate. The finite fraction, itself a
product  of  division,  can  be  divided  again, but if an infinitesimal
quantity  were  capable  of further division, it would permit a smaller,
and  since  that  smaller  quantity  would  be a determinate fraction of
itself,  the  infinitesimal  would have to be determinate in size. Since
that  is  not so, the infinitesimal must be conceived as the indivisible
or  as  the limit approached by carrying on division endlessly. "Because
the hypothesis of indivisibles seems somewhat harsh," Newton proposes an
analysis  in terms of what he calls "nascent and evanescent quantities,"
or  quantities  just  beginning  to  be more than nothing or just at the
point  at which they vanish into nothing. "As there is a limit which the
velocity  at  the end of a motion may attain, but not exceed . . . there
is a like limit in all quantities and proportions that begin or cease to
be." Newton warns his

[876a]
818  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  reader,  therefore, that if he "should happen to
mention  quantities as least, or evanescent, or ultimate," the reader is
"not  to suppose that quantities of any determinate magnitude are meant,
but  such  as are conceived to be always diminished without end." Later,
speaking  of  quantities  which  are  "variable  and  indetermined,  and
increasing or decreasing, as it were, by a continual motion or flux," he
adds: "Take care not to look upon finite quantities as such." The method
of  fluxions  provides  an  infinitesimal  calculus on the hypothesis of
limits  rather  than  of  indivisibles. Through all these conceptions of
infinitymetaphysical,  mathematical, and physical run the paired notions
of  the  unlimited and of limits approached but not attained. The finite
is  neither unlimited nor does it insensibly approach a limit. There are
also  the  opposite  notions  of  the perfect and the indeterminate. The
finite  is  neither,  for  it is determinate without being a totality or
complete.  Though  they have a common thread of meaning, and though each
raises  similar  difficulties  for  the understanding, the conception of
infinity  in  being  or  power,  and  the  conception  of  infinite  (or
infinitesimal)   quantity   require  separate  consideration.  The  same
questions  may  be  asked  of each, questions about the existence of the
infinite and about our knowledge of it, but the same answers will not be
given  in  each  case.  There  are  those  who  deny the existence of an
actually  infinite  body  or an actually infinite number, yet affirm the
infinite  existence  of God. There are those who declare the infinity of
matter to be intrinsically unintelligible, but maintain that God, Who is
infinite,  is  intrinsically  the most intelligible object. They add, of
course,  that  the  infinite  being of God cannot be comprehended by our
finite  intellects.  On  each of these points, an opposite view has been
taken,  but  the  dispute concerning the infinity of God involves issues
other  than  those  which  occur  in  the  controversy over the infinite
divisibility  of  matter  or  the  infinity  of space and time. It seems
advisable,  therefore,  to deal separately with the problems of infinity
as  they  arise with respect to different objects or occur in diff^erent
subject matters.

[876b]
The  conception of God, in the words of Anselm, as a being "than which a
greater  canU  not  be  conceived"—  or, in the words of Kant, as an ens
realissimuniy  a.  most real being—expresses the plenitude of the divine
nature  and existence. The mediaeval thesis, defended by Descartes, that
God's  essence  and  existence  are  identical,  implies that neither is
contracted  or  determined  by  the  other.  The still earlier notion of
Aristotle,  repeated by Aquinas, that God is pure actuaUty, carries with
it  the attributes of completeness or perfection, which are the positive
aspects  of  immutability or incapacity for change. Spinoza's definition
of  substance  as  that  which  exists,  not only in itself, but through
itself   and   by  its  very  nature,  entails  the  autonomy  or  utter
independence  of  the  divine being. These are so many different ways of
stating  that  God  is  an infinite being. Both Aquinas and Spinoza make
infinity  the  basis  for  proving  that there can be only one God. When
Spinoza  argues  that  "a  plurality  of  substances possessing the same
nature  is  absurd,"  he  has  in  mind  the  identification of infinite
substance  with God. "If many gods existed," Aquinas writes, "they would
necessarily  differ from each other. Something would therefore belong to
one,  which did not belong to another. And if this were a privation, one
of  them  would  not be absolutely perfect; but if it were a perfection,
one  of  them  would be without it. So it is impossible for many gods to
exist"—  that  is,  of  course,  if infinity is a property of the divine
nature.  Aquinas  makes this condition clear when he goes on to say that
"the  ancient  philosophers,  constrained  as it were by the truth, when
they  asserted  an  infinite  principle, asserted Ukewise that there was
only one such principle." But while it is impossible for there to be two
infinities  of being, it is not impossible for there to be two, or more,
infinite  quantities. One explanation of this difference seems to be the
actuality  or  existence  of  an  infinite  being,  in  contrast  to the
conceptual  character  of the infinite objects of mathematics, which are
sometimes  called "potential infinites" because they are conceived as in
an  endless process of becoming, or as approaching a limit that is never
reached. When the physical existence of infinite quan-

[877a]
lilies is asserted, as, for example, a universe of infinite extent or an
infinite  number  of  atoms,  the  uniqueness of these actual totalities
seems  to  follow.  Two  infinite worlds cannot co-exist, though the one
world  can  be  infinite  in  several  distinct  respects—  in  space or
duration,  or  in the number of its constituents—even as the infinity of
God,  according  to  Spinoza, involves "infinite attributes, each one of
which  expresses  eternal  and  infinite  essence."  Spinoza's  argument
against two actual infinities seems to find confirmation in the position
taken  by  Aquinas  that God's omnipotence does not include the power to
create  an  infinite  world.  God's  infinity, as we have already noted,
follows  from  the  identity  of  God's  essence  and existence. Since a
created  being  has existence added to its essence, Aquinas asserts that
"it  is against the nature of a created thing to be absolutely infinite.
Therefore,"  he  continues,  "as  God,  although  He has infinite power,
cannot  make  a  thing  to  be  not  made (for this would imply that two
contradictories  are  true at the same time), so likewise He cannot make
anything  to  be  absolutely  infinite." On this view, an infinite world
cannot  coexist  with  an infinite God, if, in their separate existence,
one is dependent on the other, as ereature upon creator. The infinity of
the  world  or  of nature, in Spinoza's conception, is not separate from
the  infinity  of  God,  but  consists  in  the infinity of two of God's
attributes—extension  and  thought.  In  our  time  there has arisen the
conception  of a finite God—a God who, while the most perfect being, yet
is  not  without  capacity  for  growth  or change, a God who is eternal
without  being  immutable.  This  conception,  which  in  the  light  of
traditional  theology  appears  to  be  as  self-contradictory  as round
square,  has arisen in response to the difficulties certain critics have
found  in  the  traditional doctrine of an infinite being. They point to
the  difficulty  of  understanding  how finite beings can exist separate
from, yet in addition to, an infinite being; they also cite difficulties
in  the  notions  of  infinite  knowledge,  infinite power, and infinite
goodness. The infinity of the divine omniscience extends to the possible
as well as to the actual. But the possible includes things which are in-

[877b]
Chapter  40:  INFINITY 819 compatible with one another, things which, in
the  l.in^iuagc of Lcibniiz, arc not compossihle. The mcompossthlc would
thus  seem  to  Ik  cmbraced  in the infinite scope of divine thought or
knowledge.  In the view of one lhcf)logian, Nicolas of Cusa, the mystery
of  GtxJ's  intinily  is  best  expressed  by aflirming that in Ciod all
contradictions arc somehow reconciled. The infinity of CJod's p<jwer, or
the  divine  omnipotence,  also raises questions alx)ut the possible and
the  impossible.  Is  nothing  impossible to God or must it be said that
there  arc certain things which not even God can do, such as reverse the
order  of  time or create a world which shall be as infinite and perfect
as  himself? In the assertion that God cannot do the impossible, Aquinas
sees  no  limitation on God's power. The impossible, he writes, does not
"come  under  the  divine  omnipotence, not because of any defect in the
power  of  God,  but  because  it  has  not  the nature of a feasible or
possible  thing."  For this reason, he claims, "it is better to say that
such things cannot be done, than that God cannot do them." The inability
to  do  the undoable constitutes no violation of infinite power, even as
the  lack  of  nothing  docs not deprive infinite being of anything. The
infinite  goodness  of God is sometimes set against the fact of evil, or
the existence of imperfections, in the created world. This aspect of the
problem  of  evil,  like  that  which  concerns man's freedom to obey or
disobey  the  divine  will,  cannot  be  separated  from the fundamental
mystery  of  God's  infinity—  in  power  and  knowledge  as  well as in
goodness. The problem is considered in the chapter on Good and Evil. The
point there mentioned, that evil is essentially non-being or deprivation
of being, leads to one solution of the problem. It accepts the finitude,
and   consequently   the  imperfection,  of  creatures  as  a  necessary
consequence of God's infinity. The best of all possible worlds cannot be
infinitely  good.  To MAN ALONE, among all admittedly finite things, has
infinity been attributed and even made a distinctive mark of his nature.
Docs  this introduce a new meaning of infinity, neither quantitative nor
divine?  It  has  seldom  if  ever been questioned that man is finite in
being and power. The limits of

[878a]
820  THE  GREAT  IDEAS human capacity for knowledge or achievement are a
perennial  theme  in man's study of man. Yet it is precisely with regard
to  capacity that certain writers have intimated man's infinity. Pascal,
for   example,   finds  the  apparent  contradictions  in  human  nature
intelligible  only  when  man  is understood as yearning for or impelled
toward  the  infinite.  "We  burn  with desire," he says, "to find solid
ground and an ultimate sure foundation whereon to build a tower reaching
to  the Infinite. But our whole groundwork cracks and the earth opens to
abysses."  In this fact lies both the grandeur and the misery of man. He
aspires  to the infinite, yet he is a finite being dissatisfied with his
own  finitude  and frustrated by it. It is sometimes said that the touch
of  infinity  in  man—with the suggestion that it is a touch of madness—
consists  in  his  wanting  to  be  God. Those who regard such desire as
abnormal  or  perverse  interpret  it as a misdirection of man's natural
desire  to knovv' God face to face and to be filled with the love of God
in  the divine presence. But, according to the theory of natural desire,
the tendency of each nature is somehow proportionate to its capacity. If
man's restless search for knowledge and happiness can be quieted only by
the  possession  of  the  infinite truth and goodness which is God, then
man's  intellect  and will must somehow be as infinite in nature as they
are  in  tendency. Yet that is not an unqualified infinity, for the same
theologians  who teach that man naturally seeks God also hold that man's
finite  intellect  cannot  comprehend  the  infinite being of God as God
knows  Himself.  Nor  do  they think that man's capacity for knowing and
loving  God  can  be fulfilled except in the beatific vision, which is a
supernatural  gift  rather than a natural achievement. These and related
matters are discussed in the chapters on Desire and Knowledge. The great
books  speak  of  other  objects  than  God as objects of man's infinite
desire.  The  appetite for money, for pleasure, or for power seems to be
an  infinite  craving  which  no  finite  quantity  of  these goods ever
satisfies.  Tv/o  comments  are  made  upon this fact, which is so amply
evidenced  in  the  human  record.  One  is that man's infinite lust for
worldly  goods  expresses  even  as it conceals his natural desire for a
truly infinite good. The other is that these worldly goods are

[878b]
seductive  objects  precisely  because  they are infinite. Here the word
"infinite"  is used, not in the sense which signifies perfection, but in
the quantitative sense which has the meaning of indetermination. Plato's
division,  in  the  Philebus,  of goods into the finite and the infinite
separates  measured  and  definite  goods  from  those  which  need some
limitation   in   quantity.  Socrates  exemplifies  the  distinction  by
reference  to the fact that "into the hotter and the colder there enters
a  more and a less" and since "there is never any end of them . . . they
must  also  be  infinite."  In contrast, "when definite quantity is once
admitted,  there  can  be  no  longer  a  'hotter' or a 'colder.' " Such
things,  he  says,  "which  do not admit of more or less" belong "in the
class  of  the  Hmited  or  finite." Following the line of this example,
Socrates  later  distinguishes between infinite and finite pleasures, or
pleasures  without  Hmit  and  those  which have some intrinsic measure.
"Pleasures  which  are  in excess," he says, "have no measure, but those
which  are  not  in excess have measure; the great, the excessive ... we
shall  be  right  in  referring to the class of the infinite, and of the
more  and  less,"  and "the others we shall refer to the class which has
measure."  The  fact that the goodness of wealth or of certain pleasures
is  indeterminate  or  indefinite  makes  it  necessary  to determine or
measure  the  amount of wealth it is good to possess, or the quantity of
such  pleasure  it  is  good  to enjoy. As in the case of desire, so the
human  intellect is also said to be infinite in the sense of reaching to
an  indefinite quantity. On the theory which he holds that the intellect
knows  by  means  of universal concepts, Aquinas attributes to the human
mind  "an  infinite  power;  for  it apprehends the universal, which can
extend  itself  to  an  infinitude  of  singular things." Each universal
signifies  what  is  common to an indefinitely large class of particular
instances.  There  is still another sense in which the intellect is said
to  be  infinite,  namely,  by  reason of its having the potentiality to
apprehend  all  knowable  things. But this is a relative infinity, as is
the  corresponding  infinity  of prime matter, which is conceived as the
potentiality  for  taking  on  all forms. In both cases, the infinite is
quaUfied by a restriction—on the kind of things

[879a]
Chapter 40 knowable to the intellect and the type of forms receivable in
matter.  The  infmily  of prime matter—matter totally devoid of form— is
also  comparable  to  the  infinity  of  God  in  a  contrast of extreme
opposites:  the  absolute  indeterminacy of pure potentiality on the one
hand,  the  absolute  perfection  of  pure  actuality  on the other. The
infinity  of  matter  involves different considerations when the problem
concerns, not prime matter, but material things— bodies. The question is
twofold. Can there be a bodv of .f^ Is there an infinite number infinite
magnitude  of  bodies  .? To both questions Aristotle gives the negative
answer,  while  Spinoza  seems  to  answer  the first, and Lucretius the
second,  affirmatively.  Spinoza's  affirmation  may  be  qualified,  of
course,  by  his conception of infinite body as an attribute of God. But
there  is  no  qualification  on  Lucretius'  assertion that "the first-
beginnings of things are infinite," unless it is his statement that "the
first-beginnings  of  things  , have different shapes, but the number of
shapes is finite." It is only the number of atoms which is infinite, not
their  variety.  Aristotle presents many arguments against the existence
of  an  infinite  body  or  an  infinite  number of things, all of which
ultimately  rest  on  his  distinction between an actual and a potential
infinite.  It  is  not  that  infinity  in  magnitude  or  multitude  is
impossible—  for he affirms the infinity of time and he insists upon the
infinite  divisibility  of  matter—  but rather that if an infinite body
existed  its  infinity  would  have  to  be  actual. Its actuality would
necessarily   involve   certain   determinations,  especially  those  of
dimension  and place, which would be inconsistent with the indeterminacy
of the infinite. Similarly, a multitude of co-existing things-unlike the
moments  of time which do not co-exist—cannot be infinite, because their
co-existence  implies  that they can be actually numbered, whereas their
infinity  implies  that  they  are  numberless.  The potential infinite,
Aristotle  writes,  "exhibits  itself in different ways— in time, in the
generations  of  man, and in the division of magnitudes. For generally,"
he says, "the infinite has this mode of existence: one thing is always

[879b]
INFINITY 821' being taken after another, and each thin^ that is taken is
ahvavs  tmitc. but alwavs diflVrent. " W hen this takes place in the lii
vision  of  spatial  magnitudes,  "what  is taken persists, while in the
succession  of  times  and of men, it lakes place by the passing away of
these  in  such  a  way  that the source of supply never gives out." The
opposition   between   Lucretius   and  Aristotle  with  regard  to  the
divisibility  of  matter  is discussed in the chapter on F^lemf.nt. Tlie
notions  of  intinity and continuity are differently employed on the two
sides  of  the  argument. Where Aristotle makes the continuity of matter
the  condition  of its infinite divisibility, Lucretius makes the atom's
continuity—   its   solidity   or   lack  of  void—  the  cause  of  its
indivisibility.  Where Aristotle asserts that at any moment there can be
only a finite number of particles in the world Ix^cause the partition of
matter  cannot  be  infinitely  carried  out  short  of  infinite  time,
Lucretius,  on  the  contrary,  thinks  that the division of matter into
smaller  and smaller parts finds an end in the atomic particles; and yet
he  also  asserts  an  infinite  number of atoms. To contain an infinite
number  of atoms, an infinite space is required, according to Lucretius.
This  presents  no  greater  difficulty  for  him than an infinite time.
Aristotle, on the other hand, differentiates between space and time with
respect to infinity. Time can be potentially infinite by way of addition
because "each part that is taken passes in succession out of existence."
But  though  space  may be infinitely divisible, it cannot be infinitely
extended,  for  all  its  parts, unlike those of time, must co-exist. It
would  therefore  have  to  l>e  an actually, rather than a potentially,
infinite  quantity,  and  this Aristotle thinks is impossible. These and
other conflicting views concerning the infinity of space and time appear
in Rant's statement of the first cosmological antinomy. His intention is
not  to  resolve the issues, but to show that they cannot be resolved by
proof  or  argument.  To  do  this, Kant sets up what seems to him to be
equally  strong—  or  equally inconclusive—arguments for and against the
infinity  of  space  and time. Suppose it be granted, Kant argues on the
one  hand,  that  "the  world  has  no beginning in time." Then it would
follow that "up to every given moment in time, an eternity must have

[880a]
822  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  elapsed,  and  therewith passed away an infinite
series  of  successive conditions or states of things in the world." But
since  "the  infinity of a series consists in the fact that it can never
be  completed by means of a successive synthesis," it also "follows that
an  infinite series already elapsed is impossible, and that consequently
a  beginning of the world is a necessary condition of its existence." On
the  other hand, Kant argues with what he thinks is equal force, "let it
be granted that
[the world] has a beginning. A beginning," he
explains,  "is  an  existence  which  is preceded by a time in which the
thing  does not exist." Then, Kant continues, "on the above supposition,
it  follows  that there must have been a time in which the world did not
exist,  that  is,  a void time. But in a void time, the origination of a
thing  is  impossible;  because  no  part  of  any  such time contains a
distinctive  condition of being in preference to that of non- being. . .
. Consequently, many series of things may have a beginning in the world,
but  the  world  itself  cannot  have a beginning, and is, therefore, in
relation  to  past  time,  infinite."  With  regard  to  the infinity or
finitude  of  space,  Kant proceeds similarly. If we suppose space to be
infinite, then "the world must be an infinite given total of co-existent
things." But in order to "cogitate the world, which fills all spaces, as
a whole, the successive synthesis of the parts of an infinite world must
be  looked  upon  as completed; that is to say, an infinite time must be
regarded  as  having  elapsed  in  the  enumeration  of  all co-existing
things."  This, Kant argues, "is impossible," and therefore "an infinite
aggregate of actual things cannot be considered as a given whole." Hence
it  follows  that  "the  world  is,  as  regards extension in space, not
infinite,  but  enclosed  in  limits." If, however, we suppose "that the
world  is  finite  and  Umited in space, it follows," according to Kant,
"that  it  must  exist in a void space, which is not limited. We should,
therefore,  meet not only with a relation of things in space, but also a
relation  of  things  to spaced But the "relation of the world to a void
space  is  merely  a  relation  to no object'' and "such a relation, and
consequently  the limitation of the world by void space, is nothing." It
follows, therefore, Kant concludes, that "the world, as regards

[880b]
I  space,  is  not  fimited;  that  is,  it  is  infinite  in re gard to
extension."  The  way  in  which these opposite arguments I nullify each
other  reveals more than our inability to prove or disprove the infinity
of  space  and time. It shows, in Kant's theory of human knowledge, that
we  are  "not entitled to make any assertion at all respecting the whole
object of experience— the world of sense." One other problem of infinity
in  the sphere of physics receives its initial formulation in one of the
great books—in the part of the Dialogues Concerning the Two New Sciences
where  Galileo  discusses  the  uniform acceleration of a freely falling
body.  The body which is said to accumulate equal increments of velocity
in  equal  intervals  of  time  is  also  said  to  start "from infinite
slowness,  i.e.,  from  rest."  One  of  the  persons  in  the  dialogue
challenges  this,  saying  that  "as the instant of starting is more and
more  nearly  approached,  the  body moves so slowly that, if it kept on
moving  at  this  rate, it would not traverse a mile in an hour, or in a
day, or in a year, or in a thousand years; indeed, it would not traverse
a  span  in  an  even  greater  time;  a  phenomenon  which  baffles the
imagination, while our senses show us that a heavy falling body suddenly
acquires  great  speed." What our senses seem to show us is corrected by
an  experiment  which  refines  the observation. But this still leaves a
purely analytical question. Against the statement that the "velocity can
be  increased  or diminished without limit," Simplicio points out in the
dialogue  that "if the number of degrees of greater and greater slowness
is  limitless, they will never be all exhausted," and therefore the body
will  never  come to rest when it is slowing down or be able to start to
move  when it is at rest. "This would happen," Salviati answers, "if the
moving  body  were  to maintain its speed for any length of time at each
degree  of  velocity,  but  it merely passes each point without delaying
more  than  an instant, and since each time interval, however small, may
be  divided  into  an  infinite number of instants, these will always be
sufficient   to   correspond  to  the  infinite  degrees  of  diminished
velocity."  The  problem  of the infinitesimal velocity provides another
illustration of the difference

[881a]
Chapter  40:  between  infinity  in  the  physical  ami ihc mathematical
orders.  Unlike  parallel  lines in liuclulcan geometry, which are lines
that  remain  equidistant  from  one  another when both are prolonged to
infinity,  an  asymptote  is  a  straight  iline  which  a  curved  line
continuously  approaches  but never meets, even when both are infinitely
extended. The distance between the curve and its asymptote diminishes to
smaller  and smaller intervals, but no matter how small they become, the
two  lines  never  coincide. The diminishing intervals between the curve
and its asymptote are like the diminishing degrees of velocity in a body
starting from or coming to rest. But we know that the body does begin or
cease to move, and so there is the mysterious jumping of the gap between
rest and motion in the physical order, whereas in the mathematical order
the limiting point can be forever approached and never reached. There is
one other context in which infinity is discussed in the great books. The
logicians  treat certain terms and judgments as infinite. Aristotle, for
example,  regards  the  negative  term—such  as  not-man or not-white—as
indefinite.  The  indefiniteness  of  its signification may be seen when
such  terms  are  used  as  subjects  of discourse. What is being talked
about?  The  answer  must be given, in part at least, in positive terms:
not-man  represents  the whole universe leaving man out, or the totality
of  everything  except  man.  Thus,  in  its positive signification, the
negative  term has a kind of infinity— the infinite totality of subjects
diminished  by  one,  the  one that is negated. In his classification of
judgments,  Kant  makes  a  threefold division of judgments according to
quality:  the  affirmative, the negative, and the infinite. The infinite
judgment involves a negative in its construction, but when that negative
is given an affirmative interpretation, the infinite significance of the
proposition  becomes  apparent.  An  example  will  make this clear. The
proposition  this  animal  is-not  white is negative; it simply denies a
certain  quality  of a certain thing. But the proposition this animal is
not-white  is  infinite,  for it affirms the negated term, and so places
the subject in the infinite class or totaUty which includes everything

[881b]
INFINITY  823 except white things. (The position of ihr hy- {)htn serves
to  indicate  whether  the  Matcnicnt  shall l)e construed negatively or
allirinativtly   and   infinitely.)   The  problems  of  definition  and
demonstration  are differently solved by logicians accortling to the way
in  which  they  propose  to  avoid  infinite regressions in analysis or
reasoning.  There  would  be  no end to the process of defining if every
term  had  to  be  defined  before it could be used in the definition of
another  term.  There  would be no beginning to the process of proof if,
before  a  proposition  could  be  used as a premise to demonstrate some
conclusion,  it had itself to be demonstrated as a conclusion from prior
premises.  In  his  essay On Geometrical Demonstration, Pascal refers to
the  proposal  of a plan for defining and proving everything. "Certainly
this  method  would  be  beautiful,"  he  says,  "but  it  is absolutely
impossible;  for  it is evident that the first terms we wished to define
would  presuppose  others  for their explication, and that similarly the
first propositions we wished to prove would suppose others that preceded
them,  and  it  is  thus  clear  we  should  never  arrive  at the first
propositions."  The  chapter  on  Defixition considers the character and
choice  of  the  indefinable  terms  by  which an infinite regression is
avoided  in  the  elucidation of meanings. The chapters on Induction and
Principle  consider  the  various  sorts of primary propositions—axioms,
postulates, assumptions— by which a similar regression is avoided in the
process  of  proof.  The  chapter  on Cause deals with the problem of an
infinite  regression  in  causes  and effects. Here it is appropriate to
consider  the  difference  between  an infinite series of reasons and an
infinite  series  of  To  the  extent  that  both  are truly series— the
succession  of  one  thing after another—neither seems to be impossible,
given  infinite  time  .  Those  who deny the possibility of an infinite
number  of  causes  distinguish between essential and accidental causes,
that  is,  between  causes  which  must  co-exist with their effects and
causes  which  can  precede  their effects, and cease to be before their
effects  occur.  If  there  were  an  infinite  time,  there could be an
infinite series of accidental causes. But it may be questioned whether,

[882a]
1.  The general theory of infinity and the material infinite 2. Infinity
in  the  logical order 2a. The infinity of negative and indefinite terms
2^. The distinction between negative and infinite judgments 2c. Infinite
regression  in  analysis  and  reasoning 3. The infinite in quantity 3^.
Number:  the  infinite  of  division  and addition of exhaustion and the
theory  of  limits  3c. The infinity of asymptotes and parallels ^d. The
infinite extent of space 3^. The infinite duration of time and motion 4.
The infinity of matter body 4^. The infinite divisibility of matter: the
issue  concerning atoms 5. Infinity in the world 5^. The infinite number
of  things  and the infinite number of kinds ^b. The number of causes 6.
The  finite  and  the  infinite in the nature of man 6a. The infinity of
desire  and  will: the limits of human capacity 61?. The infinity of the
intellect:  man's  knowledge  of the infinite 7. The infinity of God ya.
The  infinite  being or essence of God yb. The infinite power of God yc.
God's infinite goodness and love yd. God's infinite knowledge

[882b]
824  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (  even  granted  an infinite time, the relation
beconclusion  cannot  be known until the truth of tween the premises and
conclusion of reasoning its premises is known, then the pursuit of truth
permits  an  infinite regression. If the truth of a may be vitiated by a
search ad infinitum. OUTLINE OF TOPICS 825 lb. The infinite in being and
quantity:  the actual and potential infinite; the formal 826 827 3^. The
infinite  divisibility  of continuous quantities: the infinitesimal; the
method 828 4^. The infinite quantity or extent of matter: the problem of
an  actually  infinite  829 4^. The infinite potentiality of matter: the
conception of prime or formless matter 830 831 83:

[883a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  arc the vohimc and page numbers ot the passages referred to. I'or
example,  in  4  Homiir: IliuJ, mk ii (265-28^1 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  vohimc  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one column, the letters a and b refer to the upperand lower
halvesof  the  page.  Forexample,in53 James :Pivr/ro/o^j.ll6a-l 19b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the page,
the letters c and d to the upperand lower halvesof the right hand sideof
the  page.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in the lower half of the left-hand Tside of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Neheiniah,  7:45—  (D)  // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The general theory of infinity
8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk hi, ch 4-8 280c-286d 12 LucREiTUs: Nature of
Things,  bk  i [951-1113] 12d-14d 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vi, ch 2
311b-c;  CH  17-18,  319d-320d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7
31a34c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 92, a i, rep 6,12
1025c-1032b  28  Galileo: Ttvo New Sciences, first day, 139c153a passim,
esp  144b-145a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48 llOd111a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  86b  /  Objections  and Replies, 112a-c;
123c-d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 2 355a; def 6 355b; def 8 355c;
prop 7-8 356c-357d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 231-233, 213b-214a/
Geofnetrical  Demonstration, 434b439b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma
i-ii  and  scHOL  25a-32a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi,
sect  8-CH  XVII,  sect  22 167c-174a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
123-132 437c-439c

[883b]
Chapter  40:  INFINITY  825  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect xh, div
124-125  506a-507a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24d;  26d;  130b- 149d esp
130b-133c, 136a-137a
[thesis]; 156b-157d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, additions, 17 119a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue  ii,  693c694d  \a.  The  definite  and indefinite: the
measured and the indeterminate 7 Plato: Parmenides, 505c-506d; 510c-511a
/ Philebus 609a-639a,c esp 615c-617d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch 13 [^2^423] 48b-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5 (986* 12-^2] 504b-c; CH 6
(987*'i9-988'^i6]  505d506b;  CH  8  [989"3o-''2i]  507c-d;  bk v, ch 30
547a-d;  bk  vh,  ch  10  (1036*2-9]  559b-c;  BK  IX, CH 7 [1049*19-^1]
574d-575a;  bk xiii, CH 10 [1087*10-25] 619c 9 Aristotle: £//i;W, bk ii,
ch 6
[iio6'*28-35J
352b-c  11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811d-812a; 826d-827a 16 Kepler:
Harmonies of the World, 1078a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii, ch 3
28a-c / Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 13-16 55b-57c / Sixth Ennead, tr vi, ch
18, 320c-d

[884a]
(  1 . The general theory of infinity. 1 a. The definite and indefinite:
the measured and the indeterminate^ 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
20  32d-33a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch 18 354b-d 19 Aquinas; Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  48,  A I, REP 4 259b-260c; part i-ii, q i, a 4
612a613a;  q  7,  a  2,  rep  2  652d-653c  31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  112a-b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 158a-159d; 196c-197a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 6 117a-b lb» The iafiaite in being and
quantity: the actual and potential infinite; the formal and the material
infinite 7 Plato: Parmenides, 495c-497c / Sophist, 571d573b 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk i, ch 2
[185^28-^4]
260a-b;  [185^17-19]  260c;  bk  hi,  ch  4-8  280c286d / Generation and
Corruption, bk i, ch 3
[318^13-24] 414c-d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 5
[987*13-19]
505b; bk ix, ch 6
[1048^9-17]
574a;  bk  xi,  ch  10 [1066*35-^22] 594d-595b; bk XII, CH 7 [1073*3-13]
603a-b  11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead,
tr  vi,  ch  17,  319d320a  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 20-21
49d-50a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 7 31a-34c; q 12, a i,
rep 2 50c-51c; q 14, a i, ans 75d-76c; q 50, a 2, rep 4 270a-272a; q 54,
a  2, ans 285d-286c; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a; q 2, a 6, ans
619d-620d  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part hi, q 7, a 12, rep I
754c-755c;  q  10, a 3, rep 1-2 769d-771b; part hi suppl, q 92, a i, rep
12  1025c-1032b  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, first day, 145b-146c;
150d-151c  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  86a-88d  / Objections and
Replies,  112b;  def viii 130d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 3,6 355b;
prop  8,  DEMONST  and schol I 356d; prop 9 357d; prop 10, schol 358a-b;
prop  13-14  359c360a;  prop  15,  schol-prop  16  360b-362a; prop 21-23
364a-365a;  prop  28,  demonst  365d-36ea 33 Pascal: Pensees, 121 195a /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  434b-439b  34  Newton:  Priiiciples, bk hi,
general schol, 370a-371a 35 Locke: Hiunan Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii,
SECT  4-6  149b-d;  ch  xiv, sect 26-27 160c161a; sect 30 161c-d; ch xv,
sect  2-4  162c163b;  CH XVI, sect 8 167c; ch xvii 167d-174a passim, esp
sect  7 169b-c; ch xxix, sect 16 237b-238a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect 123-132 437c-439c

[884b]
826 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to Ic 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div
124,  506b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  124d-125b; 130b-133c; 135a-137a,c;
160b-163a  /  Judgement,  498b501b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  22  17c-d;  part i, par 104— part ii, par 105 39b40a; additions, 17
119a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d-160b;  165a-b  53 James:
Psychology,  668a-669a 2. Infinity in the logical order 2a. The infinity
of negative and indefinite terms 7 Plato: Sophist, 57ld-573c / Philebus,
615c61 6c 8 h^isTOT-L-E-. Interpretation, ch 2 [16*30-33] 25c; CH 3
[16^11-16] 25d; CH
10
[i9*»5-ii] 29d /
Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 46 70b-71d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 158a-159d 2b.
The  distinction  between  negative  and infinite judgments 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 10
[12^6-15] 17d18a / Interpretation, ch
5
[17*8-9] 26b; ch 6
26c-d; CH 10 29d-31c / Prior Analytics, bk i, CH 3 [25^19-26] 40c; CH 46
70b-71d  35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vii, sect I 283a-b 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 40a-c; 210c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i,
par  53 25c-d 2c. Infinite regression in analysis and reasoning 7 Plato:
Parmenides,  489a-d  /  Theaetetus,  542a544a esp 543d-544a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3 99b-100a; ch 19-23 lllc-ll^a. / Physics,
bk  i,  :  ch 4 [187^7-14] 262d; ch 6 [189*11-19] 264c / Metaphysics, bk
iv,  ch  3  [1005^15-34]  524d-  '.  525a; ch 4 [1006*5-12] 525a-b; ch 6
[1011*314] 530d; BK XI, ch 6
[1063^7-12] 591d
/ Soul, BK I, ch 3 [407*22-30] 636d-637a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[1094*18-22]
339b; BK III, ch 3
[1112^33-1113*3] 358d359a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 17, 122d123a; bk ii, ch 20, 164c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  TJieologica,  part  i, q 36, a 3, REP 4 194c-195d; part
i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  94,  A  2, ans 221d-223a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 292c-d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph 48 llOd111a 31 Descartes: Ohjectio7is and Replies,
llla-d;  213c-d; 224b,d 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 431b434a /
Arithmetical Triangle, 451b-452a; 458b459b; 464a-466a

[885a]
3  to 3c Chaf>ter 40: INFINITY 827 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii.
cm  xxi,  SECT  23  183b d; sect 25 184a b; bk hi, ch iv. SECT 5 260c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  Hid  112d;  115d  119a; 135a-173a csp 158a 159d 53
James:  Psychology,  321b  [fn i]; 525a 526b 3. The iafiaite in quantity
3a.  Number:  the infinite of division and addition 7 Plato: Parmenides,
495d-497b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 4 (20 3*^22 24] 281c;
[204*7-8]
282a; ch 5
[204*'6-q]
282c; CH 6 [2o6''i5] 284b; [2o6^^-207''i4] 284d-285c; CH 7
[207*32-*'i4] 285d 286a
/ Metaphysics, BK XI, CH 10
[io66*'23-26] 595b
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  ix,  prop  20  183b184a 11 Archimedes: Sand-
Reckpner  520a-526b passim 11 NicoMACHUs: Arithmetic, bk i, 812a; bk ii,
829b  17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vi, ch 2 311b-c; CH 17, 319d-320a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  18  354b-d  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 7, a 3, rep 3 32c-33c; a 4 33d-34c; part i-ii, q
i,  a  4,  rep 2 612a-613a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, A
12,  rep  I  754c-755c;  q  10,  a 3, rep 2 769d771b 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first  day,  144b-145a  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
112b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  121  195a;  233,  213b-214a  /  Geometrical
Demonstration,  434b-439b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv,
sect  30 161c-d; ch xvi, sect 8 167c; ch xvii 167d-174a passim, esp sect
9  170a-b;  ch  XXIX, sect 16, 237b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
127  438c-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 136a-b / Judgement, 498b-d; 499d-500a
3^.   The   infinite   divisibility   of   continuous   quantities:  the
infinitesimal;  the  method  of  exhaustion  and  the theory of limits 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch i
[2oo''i5-i9]
278a; ch 4 [203^15-18] 281c; ch 6 [2o6*8-''33j 284b-285b; ch 7 285d-286c
passim;  bk  v,  ch  3  [227^1-34]  308a-b;  bk vi, ch 1-2 312b,d1 ''26]
324c-325b / Heavens, bk i, ch i
[268*6-11] 359a; ch
5
[271^8-12] 362d / Generation and Corruption,
BK  I, ch 2 [317*3-13] 412d-413a / Metaphysics, bk III, CH 4 [1001^7-19]
520b-c; bk v, ch 13 315d; ch 10
[240^8-24
[1020*9-14] 541b; [1020*26-33] 541c
11  Euclid:  Elements, bk v, definitions, 4 81a; bk X, prop I 191b-192a;
bk xii, prop 2

[885b]
339a  340b; prop s 345b 346b; prop 10 12 351b 359a; prop iS 367a 368b 11
Akcmimkdks:  Sphere  and Cylinder, bk i, assumptions, 5 404b; prop i^ 14
411a  414a;  prop v3 34 424b 427a; pRf)P 42 431b 432b; I'ROP 44 433a b /
Measurement of a Circle 447a 451b passim / Conoids and Spheroids, PROP 4
459a  460b; pRf)P 21-22 470a 471b; prop 25-^0 473a 479b / Spirals, 484b;
prop  18-20  492b 495b; prop 24 27 496b 500a / Equilibrium of Planes, bk
i,  prop  6-7  503b504b; PROP 9 505a b; prop i^ 507a 508b; bk II, PROP 4
512b  513a  /  Quadrature  of the Parabola 527a-537b csp 527a b, prop 16
533b  534a,  prop 24 537a b / Method 569a592a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic,
bk  i, 811d-812a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 973a-975a; 979b983b passim 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, A 3, rep 3 32c-33c; q 53, a i,
ans  and rep i 280d-282a; a 2, ans and rep i 282a 283b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi suppl, q 84, a 3, CONTRARY 985d-989b 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences, first day, 139c-153a passim; second day, 193b-194d; third
day,  201a-202a;  205b-d;  224b-c  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
112b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop 15, schol, 361b-c 33 Pascal:
Equilibrium of Liquids, 395a-b / Geometrical Demonstration, 434b-439b 34
Newton:  Principles, bk i, lemma i-ii and SCHOL 25a-32a esp lemma i 25a,
lemma  i  i, SCHOL 30b-32a; prop 73, schol 133b-134a; BK II, LEMMA 2 and
SCHOL   168a-170a   /   Optics,   BK   HI,  542b-543a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xv, SECT 9 164b-d; ch xvi, sect 4 166a-b; ch
XVII,  SECT  12  170d;  sect  18  172c-d;  ch xxix, sect 16 237b-238a 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 98 432a; sect 12^-132 437c-439c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  124 506a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
70c-d;  161d 163a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat 169a-251b passim, esp 172b,
177a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a d; epilogue II, 695b-c 3c.
The  infinity  of  asymptotes  and  parallels 11 Euclid: Elements, bk i,
definitions,  23 2a; postulates, 5 2a 11 Apollonius: Conies, bk ii, prop
14-15  691b692b;  PROP  17  693b  694a  31  Descartes:  Geometry, bk ii,
306b-307a  34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma 18, schol 57a-b; lemma 22,
65b;  prop  27, schol, 69b- 70a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
120d-121c

[886a]
828  (3.  The  infinite in quantity.) ^d. The infinite extent of space 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 5
[205^10206*8]
283b-284b; bk iv, ch 5
[212^11-21]
292a  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  5-7 362c-367b / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 10
[1066^22-1067*38]  595b-596a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i
[951-1113]   12d-14d  esp  [951-1007]  12d-13b;  bk  ii  [89-94]  16a-b;
[294-307]  18d-19a;  [1048-1066] 28b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi,
ch  5  324d325c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 23, A 7, ANS
138d-140a;  q  46,  a  i,  rep 8 250a252d; Q 66, a 4, rep 5 348d-349d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  part ii, 162b-c; PART IV, 271b 30
Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 llOd111a 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  112b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 121 195a; 205-206 211a / Geometrical
Demonstration,  434b-439b  passim  34  Newton:  Principles, definitions,
schol, 8b11a / Optics, BK III, 542b-543a 35 Locke : Human Understanding,
bk  ii, ch xiii, SECT 4 149b; SECT 21 152d-153b; ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d;
ch  xv  162b-165c passim; CH XVI, SECT 8 167c; ch xvii 167d-174a passim,
esp  sect  3-4  168b-d, sect ii 170c 35 Berkeley: Human Kfiowledge, sect
117  436a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24c-d; 28d-29c; 135a137a,c; 152a-d;
160b-163a  /Judgement,  501a-b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
693c694a  53  James:  Psychology, 631a 3^. The infinite duration of time
and  motion  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  / Timaeus, 450c451a; 460c-d 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[104^13-18]
148a-b  /  Physics, bk hi, ch 7 [207^21-27] 286b; CH 8 [208*20-23] 286d;
bk  iv,  ch  13  [222*2932] 302b; bk vi, ch 2 [233*13-^16] 315a-c; ch 10
[241*26-^20] 325b-d; bk viii, ch 1-2 334a337b; CH 6 344b-346b passim; ch
8-9  348b353b  /  Heavens, bk i, ch 2 [269^2-10] 360c-d; CH 3 [270^1-24]
361c-362a; bk i, ch 9 [279*12]- bk II, ch I
[284*^6] 370b-376a passim; bk
ii,  ch  6  379c-380c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  II, CH lo-ii
437d-441a,c / Meteorology, BK I, CH 14
[353*15-19] 459c
/ Metaphysics, bk IX, CH 8 [1050^20-28] 576c-d; bk xi, ch 10
[1067*33-38] 596a; bk xii, ch 6
[1071^3]-
CH 7
[1072^14] 601b-602d; ch 7
[1073*5-11]
603b;  CH  8  [1073*24-34]  603c  9  Aristotle  : Motion ofAnimals, ch 6
[700^29701*7] 236a'b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[215-264]
3d-4b;
[483-634] 7a-8d;
[988-1051] 13b-14a;
BK II
[80-141]
16a-d;
[294-307]
18d-19a;
[569-580] 22b; [1048-1066] 28b-c; [1105-1147]

[886b]
THE GREAT IDEAS M to 4a 29a-c; bk v [170-194] 63b-c; [376-379] 66a;
[416-431] 66c-d; [1204-1217] 76d-77a
12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk v, sect 13 271b; SECT 23 272b; bk vi, sect
15  275a-b;  bk ix, SECT 28 293d-294a; bk x, sect 7 297b-c; sect 27 299d
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  xiii,  429a-b  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv,
888b-891a  17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 1-5 35a37c / Third
Ennead,  tr  vii 119b-129a passim / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 8 161d-162d
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  21 49d50a; bk xi, par 12-17
92b-93c;  par  40 98d99a / City of God, bk xi, ch 4-6 324a-325d; BK XII,
CH  12-20 349b-357a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, A 2, REP
2  41d-42c; a 4, ans 43b-44b; a 5, ANS 44b-45c; q 14, a 12, ans 85d-86d;
q 46 250a-255d; q 61, a 2 315c-316a; q 66, a 4 348d-349d; q 75, a i, rep
i 378b-379c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 77, A 2, ANS
and  rep  i  945a-946b;  q  91, a 2 1017c-1020c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, i
[73-81]
107a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 293d-294a
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth  day,  245b-d  30 Bacon: Novum
Organum, bk i, aph 48 llOd111a; BK II, APH 35, 163a-b; aph 48, 186b-d 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  27b-c  33  Pascal: Pensees, 121 195a; 205-206
211a;  231232  213b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  434b439b  passim 34
Newton:  Pri?iciples,  def  hi  5b;  definitions,  schol, 8b; law i 14a/
Optics,  bk  hi,  540a541b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv,
SECT  26-31  160c-162a;  ch xv, sect 3-5 162d163c; SECT 11-12 165a-c; ch
xvi,  sect  8 167c; ch xvii 167d-174a passim, esp sect 5 168d-169a, sect
10  170b-c,  sect  16 172ab; CH xxix, SECT 15 237a; sect 16, 237d238a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 26d; 27b-c;
130b-133c;  135a-137a,c;  152c;  160b-161d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  693c694a  53  James : Psychology, 882a 4. The infinity of
matter  4a. The infinite quantity or extent of matter: the problem of an
actually infinite body 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 4
[187^14-22]
262d; bk hi, ch 4 [203^15-29] 281c-d; ch 5
[204*35-206*8]
282b-284b / Heavens, bk i, CH 5-7 362c-367b / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[1073*3-13] 603a-b

[887a]
4^  to  53  Chapter 40: 12 LvcRETivs: Na/ure of Things, bk i [1008-1051I
13c-14a;
[1094-111^)
14c  d;  dk  ii (478 568] 21a-22b; [1048-1089] 28b d 17 Plotinus: Second
KnntaJ,  tr iv, cm 7, 52b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, pari i, g 7, a
3  32c-33c; q 47, a 3, rei' 2 258c-259a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
i^  359c-d;  PROP  14, coROL 2 360a; prc)i> 15, schol 360b361d; PART II,
PROP  2  374a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, SECT 21-22
152d-153c;  ch  xxiii, sect 27 211a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
47   421c422a  4b»  The  infinite  divisibility  of  matter:  the  issue
concerning atoms 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 6-7 284b286c; BK VI, CH
4 316d-318a / Heavens, bk hi, CH 6
[:504^23-305*9]
396a-b; bk iv, ch 6
[313^6-22] 405a,c / Generation and Corruption,
bk i, ch 2
[3i5^25-3i7"i7] 411b-413a; ch
8 423b-425d; ch 9
[327*1-23]
426a-c; ch 10
[327^34-328*18] 427b-c / Metaphysics, bk vh,
ch  13  [1039^2-11]  562d;  bk  x, ch i [1053*2124] 579d / Sense and the
Sensible, ch 6 [445^*4446*20] 683b-684c; ch 7
[449*21-30] 688d689a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk i [483-634] 7a-8d 16 Copernicus:
Ret'olutions  of  the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 517a-b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead, tr iv, ch 7 52a-c / Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  I,  ANs 14b-15b; q 7, a 3, rep 3
32c-33c; a 4, ans and rep i 33d-34c; q 50, a 2, ans 270a272a 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences, first day, 147d-148b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  8  140b  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  112b 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  hi  270b271a / Optics, bk hi, 541b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  h,  ch  xvh,  sect 12 170d; ch xxiii, sect 31
212b-c;  ch  XXIX,  SECT  16, 237b-d; bk iv, ch x, sect 10, 351d-352a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  47  421c422a  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
lOOc-d;  131c;  137a-140c;  152a-d;  161d-163a 43 Federalist: number 31,
103d  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  850b,  d855a,c 4c. The
infinite  potentiality  of  matter:  the conception of prime or formless
matter 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455c-458b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 7
[191*7-12]
266d; ch 9
[192*25-33]
268c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch i
[328^32-329*

[887b]
INFINITY 829 24I 428b,d429a; ch 5
[3j2»i9 26] 432c d
/  Soul,  iiK HI. < M 5 [4V>*i(>- 7) 662c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
iv,  <:m i \ SOad; cm 6 51 d 52a / Third Ennead, m vi, CH 7-19 llOd 119a
18  Aucustink:  Confessions, hk xh. par \ 6 99d100c; par 9, 101c; par 14
16  102b  103a; par 22 104a b; |)ar 24 26 104c 105b; par 28 ^i I05c107a;
par  40  109b  llOa;  bk xiii, par 48 124a 19 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica,
part  i,  q 7, a i, ANS and rep 2 31a-d; a 2, ans and ri-.p \ 31d-32c; a
3,  rip 4 32c 33c; a 4, ans 33d 34c; Q 66, AA 12 343d 347b 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  494a  b  5.  Infinity in the world 5a. The infinite
number  of  things  and  the  infinite number of kinds 7 Plato: Sophist,
573a-b  8  Aristotle  '.Sophistical  Refutations, CH i [165*513] 227b-c/
Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i84»'i5-24]
259b-c; ch 4 [187*25-188*18] 262b-263c; cii 6
[189*11-20]
264c; BK III, CH 4
[203''i5-29]
281c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  ^  [984*11-17]  502b;  BK  HI, CH 4
[999*24-29] 518a 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, cm i
[715^^2-17]
255c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356^28-35] 596b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10081051] 13c-14a; bk
ii  [478-568] 21a-22b; [10481089] 28b-d 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i,
ch  i  252a  c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, a 4 33d-34c; q
23,  a  7  138d-140a; q 46, a 2, rep 8 253a-255a; q 50, a 3 272a-273b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, prop 16 362a; prop 21-23 364a-365a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  121  195a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 193a-200c esp 197b-198a 53
James: Psychology, 873a-b 5b. The number of causes 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk  vir,  ch  i  326a-327b  /  Generation  and Corruption, bk ii, ch i i
[^57*^2629] 440a / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2 512b513b; BK VII, CH 6
[io3i''28-io32*4] 554d;
CH  8  [10^3^2-5] 556c / Soul, BK HI, CH 2 [425** ii-i7]657d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 2. a 3, ANS 12c-14a; q 75, a i, rep i 378b
379c;  part  i-ii,  q  I,  a  4,  ANS  and  rep  2-3 612a 613a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 43a d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 llOd Ilia
31 Descartes: Meditations, hi, 87c-88a / Objections and Replies, llla-d;
213c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i. appendix, 370c-371b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  130b-133c;  140b.d  143a;  152a-153a;  164a-171a  /  Judgement,
556b-c; 577c-578a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 693c694a

[888a]
6.  The finite and the infinite in the nature of man 6a. The infinity of
desire and will: the limits of human capacity Old Testament: Psalms, 42;
63—  (D) Psalms, 41; 62 / Proverbs, 27:20 / Ecdesiastes, 4:7-8; 5:10-12;
6:7— (Z)) Ecdesiastes, 4:7-8; 5:9-11; 6:7 / Isaiah, 14:12-14 {D) Isaias,
14:12-14  /  Haba%u\,  2:5—  (D) Habacuc, 2:5 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
10:9;  11:10;  14:9;  23:16-17;  31:1-11—  (D)  OT, Ecdesiaticus, 10:10;
11:10;  14:9;  23:21-24;  31:1-11  /  Baruch,  3:16-19— (Z)) OT, Barudi,
3:16-19  New  Testament :7o/!/2, 4:13-14 / / Timothy, 6:10 5 Euripides :
Phoenidan Maidens
[499-525]
382b-c  5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [143-197]  630d-631b 7 Plato: Gorgias,
275d-277b  /  Republic,  BK VIII, 412a / Philebus 609a-639a,c / Laws, BK
VIII,  733b-d;  bk  ix,  751b-d  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2
[994^916] 512d-513a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[1094^18-22]
339b; BK III, CH 12 [1119^6-12] 366c / Politics, BK I, CH 8
[i256^26]-cH
9
[1258^18]
450c452b;  BK II, CH 7 [1267^42-^5] 463b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi
[59-93]
30d-31b;
[931-977]
42a-c;
[1003-1010]
43a;
[1076-1084]
44a; bk iv
[1097-1120]
58c-d;   BKV  [1405-1435]  79b-d;  bk  vi  [1-34]  80a-c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk hi, ch 9 184c185d; BK IV, CH 4-5 225a-230b; ch 9 237d238d
14  Plutarch:  Pyrrhus, 319b-321a / Caius Marius, 353d-354a,c / Potnpey,
525a'b;   533a-c  /  Caesar,  599b-c  /  Cicero,  706b-c  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 1-6 la-2c; par 19 5d; bk ii, par 2-4 9b-d; bk iv,
par  15-19  23a-24b;  bk  vi, par 26 42d-43a; bk xi, par 1-4 89b-90b; bk
xii,  par  10  101c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 63, A 3
327b-328b;  part  i-ii, q i, a 4 612a-613a; Q 2, A I, REP 3 615d-616c; q
30,  a  4  751c752b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 27, a 6
524c-525c;  q  28, a 3 528d-529c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i,
stanza  58-66 8b-9b / Wife of Bath's Prologue [59535960] 262a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 76c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 123d; 149b-d; 224d225a;
350d-354b; 429a-b; 489b-c; 503b-d 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act ii,
sc i
[10-34] 574c-d; act hi, sc
ii  583c-586c  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, sc III
[109-124]  109b;  ACT III, sc II [65-107] 120d121b / Macbeth, acti, sc v
288a-d;  sc  vii 289b-290b 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv 89a-93a passim,
esp 90b-91b

[888b]
830  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6 to 6b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 109 193b-194a; 125-183
195b-204b;  425  243b-244b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect 45 189b-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 236b-238a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  71b-d  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals^
256c-257c   /   Practical  Reason,  298d-300a  /  Judgement,  584d-585c;
586d-587a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-463a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  intro,  par  5-10 13a-15a; par 13-14 15c-16a; par 22-27 17c-18d;
PART  I,  par  35  21a-b;  part ii, par 105 40a; additions, 6 117a-b; 11
118a;  17  119a;  22  120c-d; 26 121a-b; 118 136a-b 47 Goethe: Faust esp
part  i  [3217-3250]  79a-b,  part  II  [11,239-258]  273b-274a 50 Marx:
Capital,  62a-b;  71d-72c; 292c-295a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
i,  671d672a;  epilogue  ii,  692c-694d  54  Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents, 800d801a 6b. The infinity of the intellect: man's knowledge
of  the infinite Old Testament: Exodus, 33:12-33 /Job, 11:79; 26:14; 2^5
36:26;  38-41  /  Proverbs,  20:24;  25:3/ Ecdesiastes, 3:11; 8:17; 11:5
Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:13-16 (D) OT, BooI{ of Wisdom, 9:13-16 /
Ecclesiasticus,  1:2;  18:4-7—  (-^) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:2; 18:2-6 New
Testament:  John,  1:18  /  Romans,  11:33-34  / / Corinthians, 2:16 / /
Timothy,  6:15-16  7 Plato: Philebus, 610d-613a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
i, ch 4
[187^7-14]
262d; ch 6
[189*11-19]
264c; bk hi, ch 6
[207*21-31] 285c-d / Metaphysics, bk
ii, ch 2
[994^17-30] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 4 [999*24-29]
518a; bk xii, ch 7
[1072^14-29] 602d-603a;
BK XIII, ch 10 [1087*10-25] 619c / Soul, bk I, CH 3
[407*22-30]
636d-637a; bk hi, ch 4
[429*19-28] 661c; CH 5 [430*10-17] 662c
9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 2 [1356^28-35] 596b-c 11 NicoM.\cHus:
Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812a  16  Kepler:  Harmonies of the World, 1080a 17
Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead, tr vi, ch 3, 312a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk v, par 20 32d33a; bk vii, par 20-21 49d-50a; bk xii, par 3-6 99d-100c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; q 7, a 2, rep 2
31d-32c;  qq 12-13 ^^b75b; Q 14, A I, ANs 75d-76c; a 12 85d-86d; Q 28, A
4,  REP 2 160c-161d; Q 32, A I 175d178a; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 79,
a  2,  ANS 414d-416a; q 86, a 2 462a-463a; q 87, a 3, REP 2 467b-468a; q
88, a i, ans 469a-471c; a 3 472c-473a; q 91, a 3, rep 2 486b-487d; q 94,
A I, ANS 501d-503a; part i-ii, q 2, a 6,

[889a]
to  la Cmaptkr 40: INFINITY 831 ANS 619d 620d; q 7,0, a 4, ans and rep 2
751c-752b  Aquinas: Summa Thrologica, part i-ii. q 68, A 2, ANS 89c 90c;
part  hi, o i". a t, 769d771b; part hi sitppl, q 92 1025b 1037c csp A I,
ANS and REP 6.12 1025c 1032b Dante: Divine Comcdw prR(;AT<)RY, hi
[^720
21 45] 56b; PARADISE, IV (115I-V
[12I Hid 112b;
XIX  [22-99]  135b-136a;  xxi (7^-102] 139a b HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
54b-c;  part h, 162c-d; part iv, 262b Montaigne: Essays, 238c 239b; 251c
257d Harvey: On Animal Generation, 494a b Descartes: Meditations, 72a-b;
hi,  86b  87a;  IV  89a-93a  passim  /  Objections  and Replies, 112a-d;
121d-122b;  169a;  211c d; 212c 213a; 213d-214a Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop  ^o  366c-d  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  2^-2^^  213b216a  /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 435a-b Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xiii, sect 4 149b; ch xiv, sect 26-31 160c-162a; CH XV, sect 2-3 162c-d;
sect  12  165b-c;  ch  XVI,  sect  8  167c; ch xvh 167d-174a esp sect 15
171b-172a; ch xxh, sect 9 202c-203a; ch xxhi, sect 31 212b-c; sect 33-37
212d214b  passim;  ch  xxix, sect 15-16 237a-238a; BK IV, CH X, SECT 19,
354b-c  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 35 2 405b Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 308d Kant: Practical Reason, 291a-292a / Judgement, 495a-498b;
501a-b  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 13-14 40 42 46 15c-16a;
part  hi,  par  185  64b-d; par 358 113c / Philosophy of History, intro,
186a; part ii, 270d-271c; 278a-c; part hi, 304c-306b Goethe: Faust, part
i  [1810-1815] 43a; part 47 II [11,441-452] 278b Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  i,  50b-c;  bk hi, 51 156d; 162b-164a,c; bk xv, 631a-c; epilogue ii,
693c-694d  James:  Psychology,  392a;  631a  53 , The infinity of God 17
Plotinus  :  FowrM  Ennead, tr hi, ch 8, 146b-c; TR IV, ch 9 162d-163a /
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  CH  lo-i  I 233b-234a / Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch 4
306d-307a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1-6 la-2c; BK VI, par 4
36a-b;  bk  vii, par i 43b-c; par 7 45a-d; bk xiii, par 12 113b-d / City
of  God, BK V, CH 9-10 213b-216c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
7  31a-34c;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  part  i-ii, Q I, A 4, REP I
612a-613a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[3745] 56b; par.\dise, xxxiii 156b-157d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  part ii, 162a-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 251c-257d

[889b]
d  31  Dhscartrs:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52b d / Meditations, hi, 86a /
Objections  and  Replies  122a  b;  123c  d:  dei vhi 130d 31 Spirto/.A:
Ethics, part i, dkf 6 355b; prop 10II 358a 359b; prop i^ 359c d; prop 16
362a;  PART  II, PROP 7 375a c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, hk hi [^72 415)
I43b144b; BK viH
[411
421I 241a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 2^1 2^^ 213b 216a 34 Ni;wrf>N: Principles,
bk hi, gknkral sciiol, 370a 371a 35 Lockh: Human Understanding, bk h, cm
xvh,  sKcr  I  167d  168a: ch xxhi, sect ^4^5 213a c; BK HI, CH VI, SECT
II-I2  271b  272b  passim  40  C7ibbon: Decline and Fall, 81b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 230a b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 188c; 192c d / Practical
Reason, 344b-c / Judgement, 590b d; 592a c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xv,  631a-c  la.  The  infinite  being  or essence of God Old Testament:
Exodus,  3:14  /  /  Kings,  8:27—  (D)  /// Kings, 8:27 / Job, 11:7-9 /
PsalmSy  9:7;  45:6;  48:8-14;  102:12;  136; 139:7-10— (D) Psalms, 9:8;
44:7;  47:9-15;  101:13;  135;  138:7-10 / Isaiah, 41:4; 43:10-11; 44:6;
48:12  —  (D)  Isaias,  41:4;  43:10-11; 44:6; 48:12 / Daniel, 4:34— (D)
Daniel, 4:^51 New Testament: John, 8:58 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i,
par  10  3b-c;  bk VII, par 20-21 49d-50a; bk xiii, par 4 111c / City of
God,  bk  xh,  ch  2  343c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c19
Aqiinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, aa 1-2 31a 32c; q 14, a i, ans
75d-76c;  a  3  77d78b;  Q  54,  A  2,  ans  285d-286c; q 75, a 5, rep 4
382a-383b;  q  79,  a  2,  ans  414d-416a; q 86, A 2, REP I 462a-463a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi, q 2, A I, ANS 710a-711c; part hi
suppl,  q  92, a i, rep 6,12 1025c 1032b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 293d 294a
31  Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d / Meditations, 72a-b; hi, 86a /
Objections  and  Replies,  108b-114c  passim  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i
355a-372d  esp  def  i  355a,  def 3,6 355b, axiom 1-2 355c-d, prop 1-17
355d-363c,  prop  20-21 363d-364c, prop 2^ 364d 365a, prop 25 365b, prop
29-31  366b-367a; part ii, prop i 373d-374a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 469 256a
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, SECT 2-4 162c-163b; sect 12
165b-c;  ch xvh, sect I 167d-168a; sect 16-17 172a-c; sect 20 172d-173c;
ch  xxhi,  sect  3^35  212d-213c;  BK hi, ch VI, sect 11-12 271b-272b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 117 436a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 201b-c;
205a  b  46  Hkcel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d160b; 165a-b; part
hi, 305c-306c

[890a]
832  (7.  The  infinity  of  God.)  lb.  The  infinite  power of God Old
Testament:  Genesis, 18:14 / Exodus, 15:18 / Deuteronomy, 10:14; 32:39 /
/  Samuel,  2:6-8  — (D) / Kings, 2:6-8 / Job, 12:14-15; 38-41 / Psalms,
62:11;  114;  148—  (D)  Psalms, 61:12; 113:1-8; 148 / Isaiah, 40:22-31;
44:24-46:13  —  (D)  Isaias, 40:22-31; 44:24-46:12 /Jeremiah, 32:27— (D)
Jeremias,  ^2.:2.j  /  Daniel,  4:34-35 — (D) Daniel, 4:31-32 Apocrypha:
Judith, 16:13-17— (D) OT, Judith, 16:15-21 / Rest of Esther, iy.^-ii-{D)
OT,  Esther,  13:9-11  / Wisdom ofSolomon, 11 :i 7-26; 12:12-18— (D) OT,
Boo{  of  Wisdom,  11:1827;  i2:i2-iS  / Ecclesiasticus, 18:1-7— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  18:1-6 / // Maccabees, 8:18— (D) OT, II Machabees, 8:18
New  Testament:  Matthew,  3:9;  19:26  /  Mar\,  10:27  /  Luke, 1:37 /
Ret'elation,  19:6—  (D)  Apocalypse,  19:6 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk
xii, ch 7
[1073*311] 603a-b
17 Plotinus: F//?^ Ennead, tr v, ch 10 233b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk i, par 12 4a; bk V, par 20 32d-33a; bk vii, par 6-7 44d-45d / City of
God,  bk  v,  ch  10  215c-216c;  bk  vii,  CH  30 261b-d; bk xiv, ch 27
396c-397a;  bk  XXI, ch 5-8 563d-568d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 25, Q 45, a 5, REP 3 245c-247a; AA 2-3 144c-147a; Q 65, A 3, rep 3
2 489d-490c; 613a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 341c-342b;
q  92,  a 2, rep PART i-ii, Q I, a 4, rep I 612a113, A 9 368d-369c; part
ii-ii,  q  23, a 2, REP 3 483d-484d; part hi, q 10, a 3, rep 3 769d-771b
31  Descartes: Meditations, iii, 86a / Objections and Replies, 229c-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, def 3-6 355b; def 8 355c; PROP 1-8 355d-357d;
prop  11-17  358b363c;  PROP  20-25  363d-365b;  prop  32-35  367a-369a;
appendix  369b-372d; part ii, prop 3 374a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
it [119-225] 113b116a; bk hi
[372-415] 143b-144b
/  Samson  Agonistes  [300-329]  346a-b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 654 292b 34
Newton:   Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol,  370a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xv, SECT 12 165b-c; ch xvii, sect i 167d-168a;
ch  XXIII,  SECT 34-35 213a-c passim; bk hi, ch VI, SECT 11-12 271b-272b
passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 152 443c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  334a-b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 186c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
180b-c;  181b;  192c-d;  201 b-c / Practical Reason, 352a-c / Judgement,
502d-503a; 504b-d; 592a-c; 600d-601c

[890b]
the  great  ideas  lb  to  Id  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro,
156d160b  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  684b-d  51 Tolstoy: 7c. God's
infinite  goodness  and  love  Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  43:1-4; 46:3-4;
49:1415; 63:8-9-(D) Isaias, 43:1-4; 46:3-4; 49:14-15; 63:8-9 / Jeremiah,
31  esp  31:3—  (D)  Jeremias, 31 esp 31:3 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
11:23-26;  16:20-29—  (Z))  OT,  BooJ^  of Wisdom, 11:2427; 16:20-29 New
Testament: Matthew, 19:16-17 / John, 3:16; 13:31-17:26 / Romans, 8:35-39
/ Galatians, 2.\iQ I Ephesians, 3:14-21 / I John, 3:1 17 Plotinus: Fifth
Ennead,  tr v, ch io-ii 233b234a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 20
32d33a;  bk  xiii, par 2-5 llla-d / City of God, bk XI, CH 10 327d-328d;
bk  xii, ch 1-3 342b,d-344b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, A
3,  rep i 12c-14a; q 4, a i 20d-21b; q 6, aa 1-3 28b-30b; q ii, a 3, ans
49a-c; q 54, a 2, ANS 285d-286c; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 612a-613a; q
5,  a 2, rep 3 637c-638a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64,
A  4,  rep 3 69b-70a; part ii-ii, q 23, a 2, rep 3 483d-484d; part hi, q
i, a i 701d-703a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv
[40-81]
75d-76a; paradise, xxix
[127-145]
151c-d  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  v,  prop 35-36 460d461c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [139-173]
220a221a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 580 276b 35 Locke: Human Understandifig, bk
ii, ch XVII, sect I 167d-168a; bk in, ch vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b passim
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  263a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  325d-326a;  345a-c;  351b-352c /
Judgement,  592a-c  44  B0SWEI.1.:  Johnson,  539d-540a  52  Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  24a-c  7d.  God's  infinite knowledge Old
Testament:  I  Samuel,  2:3—  (D) / Kings, 2:3 / Job, 11:5-11; 34:21-25;
36:4;  37:16  /  Psalms, 94:7-12; 100:5; 117:2; 119:142,160; 139; 146:6;
147:5—  (£>)  Psalms,  93:7-12;  99:5; 116:2; 118:142,160; 138; 145:6-7;
146:5  /  Proverbs,  15:3,11  /  Isaiah,  29:15-16;  40:28— (Z)) Isaias,
29:15-16;  40:28 Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 13:12— (D) OT, Esther, 13:12
/ Ecclesiasticus, 15:18-19; 16:1720; 17:15,17,19-20; 23:18-20; 39:19-21;
42:1821 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:19-20; 16:1620; 17:13-17; 23:25-29;
39:24-25; 42:18-22 / Susanna, 42-43— (D) OT, Daniel, 13:42-43

[891a]
7^ Chapter 40: INPINI'lT 833 New Testament: Romans, ii:v^-.^6 / / Corin-
[12] Hid 112b;
xix  (22-99I  135b  136a;  xxi  thians,  1:17-2:16/  Ephesians, v 1 f> /
Colosstans, 1 7 ^ » "5 1 1 39a b 2:2-3 / lletyreu'S, 4:13 / / John, 3:20
30 Macon: Adtanccmcnt 0/ learning, 98d 99b 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr
ii,  cii  21  279b31  Dkscartks:  Ohjectiom  and Replies, 122a b 280a 31
Simn'oza:  E/hics, part i, vhov 21 364a c; 18 Augustine: Confessions, hk
hi.  par 10 15b-d; part ii, prop i 373d 374a: I'ROP v 4 374a c BK V, par
5 28b-c / City of Cod, bk v, cii c, 10 32 Milton: Paradise Eost, i.k ii
[188
ic,^]  ll5b;  213b-216c;  BKXi,cn i(),328c d;cn2i 333a d; mk hi |s6 i^jI
136b  138a;  hk  mi  (i(h>  150)  BK XII, CH 17-18 353a 354d / Christian
Doc219b  220a;  bk  viii (412 4^6) 241a b trine, bk i, ch 8 626c-627a 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, cii xv, 19 Aquinas: Summa Theohgica,
pari  1,  y 14, sKcr 12 165b-c; cii xvii, sect i 167d 168a; A I, ANS 75d
76c;  a  t,  77d-78b; a 12 85d 86d; ch xxiii, sect 54 t,^ 213a c passim;
i»k  hi,  Q 16, A 5, ANS 97c 98b; q 18, a 4 107d 108c; ch vi, sect 11-12
271b  272b passim Q 54, a 2, ANS 285d 286c; q 79, a 2, ans 414d42 Kan r:
Practical  Reason,  303b 304a; 325d416a; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep i 612a
613a  326a;  344a  348a; 351b 352c / Judgement, 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, iv [ii5]-v 590b d; 592a-c CWSS-KEFEKENCES For: The distinction
between  the potential and actual infinite, and the infinite of division
and  addition,  see  Quantity  7.  Other  discussions of the infinity of
space,  time, and motion, see Astronomy 8c(i); Change infinite time, see
Eternity  i ; Time 2. The issue concerning the existence of atoms or the
infinite divisibifity of matter, see Element 5b; One and Many 33(3). The
problem  of  an infinite regression in causes, if<f Cause ib, 7b; Change
14;  Principle ib; and for the related problem of infinite regression in
definition  and reasoning, see Definition ic; Principle 3a(3); Reasoning
5b(i).   The   treatment  of  the  infinite  and  the  infinitesimal  in
mathematics,  i^^ Mathematics 4d; Quantity 2, 3a, 3c, 4c, 7. The special
logical sense in which judgments are called "infinite," see Judgment 6b.
The  conception  of  the  human  intellect and of prime matter as having
comparable  types  of  infinity,  see Mind 2b. Another discussion of the
finite  and the infinite in relation to human nature, see Man lod, 13The
special  consideration  of  infinity  in  relation  to human desire, see
Desire 7-73(3); and for the special consideration of the limits of human
knowledge,  see  Knowledge 53-53(6). The problem of our knowledge of the
infinite,  see  Knowledge  53(4).  The  infinity  of  God,  and of God's
knowledge, power, and goodness, see Being 7b(4); God

[891b]

[892a]
834  THE GREAT IDEAS I. Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy, part i,
26-27  Spinoza.  Correspondence,  xii Newton. The Method of Fluxions and
Infinite  Series  Berkeley.  The Analyst . A Defence of Free Thinking in
Mathematics  Hume.  A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part ii, SECT I-II
Kant.  De Mundi Sensibilis {Inaugural Dissertation) . Prolegomena to Any
Future  Metaphysic, par 50-54 Hegel. Science of Logic, vol i, bk i, sect
i,  ch 2 (b,c); sect II, cH 2 (c) W. James. Some Problems of Philosophy,
ch   io-ii  II.  Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology,  (j)  Anselm  of
Canterbury.  Monologium  .  Proslogium  Maimonides.  The  Guide  for the
Perplexed,  part  i,  CH73  Duns Scotus. Opus Oxoniense, bk i, dist 13 .
Reportata  Parisiensia  Crescas.  Or Adonai, propositions 1-3 Nicolas of
Cusa.  De  Docta  Ignorantia  Bruno. De Vinfinito, universo e mondi . De
Immenso   et   Innumerabilibus   Donne.   Lovers  Infinitenesse  Suarez.
Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxviii, xxx (2), XXXV (3), xLi (5)

[892b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas. Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, bk II, CH 17
.  Correspondence  with Clarice Voltaire. "Infinity," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher, ch 18 Bolzano. Paradoxien des
Unendlichen  Whewell.  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery, ch 26 Stallo.
Concepts  and  Theories of Modern Physics^ ch 13 Bradley. The Principles
of Logic, Terminal Essays, VI Fullerton. The Conception of the Infinite,
and the Solution of the Mathematical Antinomies Bosanquet. Logic, vol i,
ch  4  C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 1 12-126 CouTURAT. De
Vinfini  mathematique Cantor. Contributions to the Founding ofthe Theory
of  Transfinite  Numbers  RoYCE. The World and the Individual, series i;
Supplementary  Essay (4) Peano. Formulaire de mathematique E. W. HoBsoN.
The  Theory  of Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory of Fourier's
Series  Poincare. Science and Method, bk ii, ch 3 Whitehead and Russell.
Principia  Mathematica,  part  III,  SECT  c; part V, sect e B. Russell.
Principles  ofMathematics,  ch  13, 17, 23, 37-43 . Our Knowledge of the
External  World,  v-vii . Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, ch 3,
9' 13 Sitter. Kosmos (The Expanding Universe) Weyl. The Open World, lect
hi

[893a]
a^^/^r4i:  JUDGMENT  INTRODUCTION  THE  word  "judgment"  liasa range of
meanings  which  includes  three  principal  variants referring to (i) a
quality  of  the  mind, (2) a faculty of the mind, and (3) an act of the
mind.  Of  these  three  meanings,  it is the third which is extensively
considered  in  this chapter; and it is this meaning of "judgment" which
many  writers  use  the  word  "proposition"  to express. They sometimes
substitute  the one word entirely for the other; sometimes they use both
words,  not  as  strict  synonyms,  but  to express distinct yet closely
related  aspects  of the same fundamental phenomenon. The sense in which
judgment  is  a  quality of the mind is the sense in which we ordinarily
speak  of a person as having sound judgment or poor judgment. "We credit
the  same  people," Aristotle says, "with possessing judgment and having
reached   years   of   reason  and  with  having  practical  wisdom  and
understanding."  To  be  '  'a  man  of  understanding  and  of  good or
sympathetic  judgment,"  he continues, is to be "able to judge about the
things  with which practical wisdom is concerned." The capacity to judge
well  concerning what is to be done is often connected with the capacitv
to   deliberate   about   the  advantages  and  disadvantages  or  other
circumstances  relevant  to the action in question. It may or may not be
accompanied  by a capacity to resolve thought into action, to carry into
execution  the decision which judgment has formed. These three qualities
of  mind—deliberateness,  judgment,  and  decisiveness—are  conceived by
Aristotle and Aquinas as belonging together as parts of the intellectual
virtue  they  call  "prudence"  or "practical wisdom." The qualities may
occur  separately,  but  the  prudent  man  will possess all three. This
meaning  of  "judgment"  is  reserved  for  discussion in the chapter on
Prudence; and in the chapter on Law will be found the consider835

[893b]
ation  of  the judgment which a court renders— the judgment which is the
decision  of  a )udgc when he applies the law to the particular case. In
the  legal  sense  of a judicial decision, judgment reflects not so much
the  quality of the judge's mind as his duty and authority to dispose of
the  case  and to have his decision executed by the appropriate officers
of  the  law.  The  legal  significance  of  judgment  is  not primarily
psychological  or  logical;  and,  just  as  the  moral consideration of
judgment  falls  under  prudence,  the  legal consideration is also more
appropriately  developed  in  the  context of other We are left with the
meanings which belong to psychology, logic, and the theory of knowledge.
The  sense  in  which "judgment" designates a faculty or function of the
mind—2i  distinct  sphere of mental operation— is much more special than
the  sense  in  which "judgment" or "proposition" signifies a particular
act of the mind in the process of knowing or in the verbal expression of
that  process. Many authors discuss the kinds of judgment which the mind
makes, and the kinds of propositions it forms and asserts or denies, but
only  a  few  notably  Locke and Kant— use the word "judgment" to name a
mental  faculty.  Locke,  for  example,  says  that  "the  mind  has two
faculties  conversant  about truth and falsehood." One is the faculty of
knowing;  the other of judging. "The faculty which CJod has given man to
supply  the  want  of  clear  and certain knowledge, in cases where that
cannot  be  had,  is judgment: whereby the mind takes its ideas to agree
and  disagree,  or,  which  is  the  same, any proposition to be true or
false,  without  perceiving a demonstrative evidence in the proofs." The
way  in  which  Locke  distinguishes between knowing and judging and the
fact that he relates this distinction to the difference be-

[894a]
836 THE GREAT IDEAS tween certainty and probability suggest the parallel
distinction  between  knowledge and opinion. The faculty of judgment for
Locke  is  the  equivalent of what other writers treat as the forming of
opinions.  Kant  also makes judgment a faculty. Along with understanding
and  reason, judgment is one of the three faculties of cognition. It has
a  distinct function of its own and is coordinate with the other two. As
the  laws  of  nature are the work of the understanding in the sphere of
speculative  reason;  as  the rules of the moral law are the work of the
reason  in the practical sphere, wherein it is related to the faculty of
desire;  so  the  purposiveness  of  nature  comes  under the faculty of
judgment which operates in relation to the faculty of pleasure and pain.
Kant  divides  all the faculties of the soul into "three which cannot be
any further derived from one common ground : xhtfaculty ofknowledge, the
feeling of pleasure and pain and the faculty ofdesire.'' He sees each of
the  three  cognitive functions (of understanding, judgment, and reason)
as  standing in a pecuUar relation to these three primary faculties. The
faculty  of  judgment functions with respect to pleasure and pain, which
is  connected  with the faculty of desire. Yet the aesthetic judgment of
beauty  and the theological judgment of purposiveness in nature are of a
speculative  rather  than  a  practical  character. Because of these two
related  facts,  Kant  holds  that  "the  judgement  in the order of our
cognitive  faculties,  forms  a mediating link between Understanding and
Reason." Kant, perhaps more than any other thinker, makes judgment— both
as  a  faculty and as an act—one of the central terms in his philosophy.
It  is pivotal in each of the three critiques, but it is the Critique of
Judgement  which  serves  to connect the Critique of Pure Reason and the
Critique of Practical Reason. "The Understanding legislates a priori for
nature  as  an  object  of  sense—for  theoretical  knowledge of it in a
possible  experience.  Reason  legislates  a  priori for freedom and its
peculiar  causality;  as  the  supersensible  in  the  subject,  for  an
unconditioned  practical  knowledge.  The  realm  of the natural concept
under  one  legislation,  and  that  of the concept of freedom under the
other, are entirely removed from all mutual influence which

[894b]
they  might  have  upon  one  another (each according to its fundamental
laws)   by   the  great  gulf  that  separates  the  supersensible  from
phenomena."  It is the judgment, according to Kant, which "furnishes the
mediating  concept  between  the concept of nature and that of freedom."
Kant's theory of the faculties of understanding, judgment, and reason is
so  complex  a  doctrine  that  it cannot be readily compared with other
analyses  of the capacities or functions of mind. His threefold division
bears  a  superficial  —perhaps  only  a verbal— resemblance to Aquinas'
division  of  mental  acts  into  conception,  judgment,  and reasoning.
According  to  Aquinas,  judgment  is  the second of the three acts of a
single  cognitive  faculty  variously  called  "mind"  or "intellect" or
"reason."  This  faculty, he writes, "first apprehends something about a
thing, such as its essence, and this is its first and proper object; and
then  it understands the properties, accidents, and various dispositions
affecting  the  essence.  Thus  it  necessarily  relates  one thing with
another  by  composition  or  division;  and  from  one  composition and
division  it  necessarily  proceeds to another, and this is reasoning.'"
The first act of the mind is conception, />., the simple apprehension of
the  essence and properties of a thing. Judgment, the second act, unites
or  separates concepts by affirming or denying one of another. As in the
Kantian  analysis,  judgment  is a kind of mediating link; for after the
judgment  is  formed by what Aquinas calls the "composition or division"
of  concepts,  it  in  turn  serves as the unit of the mind's third act,
which  is  reasoning. Reasoning is the process of going from judgment to
judgment. The act of judgment is that act of the mind, and the only act,
which can have the quality of truth or falsity. "Truth," Aquinas writes,
"resides  in  the  intellect  composing  and  dividing";  for  when  the
intellect  "judges  that  a  thing  corresponds  to  the  form  which it
apprehends  about  that  thing, then it first knows and expresses truth.
... In every proposition," the mind "either applies to, or removes from,
the   thing  signified  by  the  subject  some  form  signified  by  the
predicate." Moreover, the judgment involves assertion or denial as the

[895a]
concept docs noi. Whatever truth there is inipHcitly in concepts must be
cxphcated  in  judgments  and  the  truth of the conchision in reasoning
depends  upon  the  truili of the )udgments which are the premises. Tlie
judgnuiu, Itheretore, is the basic unit of knowledge. On this last point
Kant  seems  to  l>e  in agreement with earlier writers. It is possible,
therefore,  to compare Kant's classihcation of judgments or propositions
with  the  classifications  of Aristotle, Descartes, or Locke. But it is
necessary,   first,  to  consider  the  relation  between  ludgment  and
proposition.  After that we can examine the dillerence between theoretic
and  practical  judgments.  With  respect  to the theoretic judgment (or
proposition),  we shall be able to state opposite views of the nature of
the  judgment  and  diverse  views of the formal structure of judgments,
their  material  content, their relation to one another and to the whole
process   of  knowing.  The  se.ntexce  "all  men  are  mortal"  can  be
interpreted  as  expressing  a judgment or a propI osition. From certain
points  of  view,  the choice of interpretation makes no difference; for
example,  it does not matter whether, in a consideration of "all men are
mortal"  and  "some  men are not mortal," the comparison is expressed in
terms  of  universal and particular, affirmative and negative, judgments
or  propositions,  or  w  hcther it is said that these are contradictory
judgments  or  contradictory  propositions.  The basic problems of logic
seem  to  be  conceived  in  the  same way by writers like Aristotle and
Locke,  who  tend  to  use  "proposition" in place of "judgment," and by
writers  like Aquinas, Descartes, and Kant, who tend to use both \\ ords
with some difference in meaning. What is the difference? It is sometimes
understood  as  a  difference  between  an act of the mind, asserting or
denying,   and   the  subject  matter  being  asserted  or  denied.  The
proposition  is  that which may be either asserted or denied ; or in the
third  alternative  stressed by Descartes, the mind may suspend judgment
and merely entertain the proposition. It may decline to judge it true or
false, and so refuse to assert or deny it. The fact that the proposition
is  itselt either affirmative or negative does not signify its assertion
or denial by a judgment of the

[895b]
CHAi>ThK  M:  ji;i)C;NfKN'r 837 mind, for an aflirmaiivc proposition can
be  denied  and  a  negative  can  be  affirmed.  Judgment  adds  to the
projX)siiion  in  question the mind's decision with res(xcl to its truth
or  falsity. That decision may be right or wrong. A proposition which is
in  fact  true may be denied. The truth of the proposition is unaffected
by  the  falsity  of the judgment, or il the mind suspends judgment on a
pro|X)- sition which is true, the truth of the proposition has failed to
elicit  a  judgment.  This  seems  to confirm the separation between the
pro|X)sition  and  the  judgment. Sometimes the difference Ix^tween liie
judgment  and  the  proposition  is  found in the difference between the
mind's  act of "composing" or "dividing" concepts and the formulation ot
that  act  in  words.  On  this  view, the proposition is related to the
judgment as the term to the concept, as the physical to the mental word,
as  language  to  thought.  In  consequence,  there is no separation for
either  the  judgment  or  the  proposition  between  that  which can be
asserted  or  denied  and the assertion or denial oi it. The affirmative
judgment  is an assertion, the negative a denial; and the same holds for
the  affirmative  and  the negative proposition. But on either theory of
the  difference,  it  is  thought  necessary  to distinguish between the
sentence  and  the  proposition, especially when the proposition is also
regarded  as  a verbal formulation—a statement of thought in words. This
is  particularly important in a logical treatise like Aristotle's, which
analyzes  terms,  propositionSy  and  syllogisms  rather  than concepts,
judgments,  and  reasonings.  In  both  the Categories, which deals with
terms,   and   the   treatise   On   Interpretation,  which  deals  with
propositions,  Aristotle  diflerentiates  between  a  grammatical  and a
logical handling of the units of language. His distinction, for example,
between  simple  and composite expressions (words and phrases on the one
hand, and sentences on the other) is related to, but it is not identical
with,  his  distinction between terms and propositions. Not every simple
expression  can  be  used  as  a  term.  For  example,  prepositions and
conjunctions cannot be used as terms, as nouns and verbs can be. Nor can
every  sentence  be  used as a proposition. "A sentence is a significant
portion ofspeech,"

[896a]
838  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Aristotle  writes,  "some parts of which have an
independent  meaning, that is to say, as an utterance, though not as the
expression  of any positive judgment. . . . Every sentence has meaning,"
he  goes  on,  "by  convention. Yet every sentence is not a proposition;
only  such  are  propositions  as  have in them truth or falsity. Thus a
prayer  is  a  sentence, but is neither true nor false. Let us therefore
dismiss  all  other types of sentence but the proposition, for this last
concerns  our  present  inquiry, whereas the investigation of the others
belongs rather to the study of rhetoric or of poetry." It seems possible
to  relate  the two separate distinctions we have been considering— that
between  sentence  and  proposition  and  that  between  proposition and
judgment.  As  the  proposition  can be regarded as a sentence logically
(rather than grammatically) construed, so it can also be regarded as the
linguistic  expression  of  a judgment of the mind. The proposition thus
appears  to be a kind of middle ground between language and thought, for
when  a sentence is used for the purpose of stating a proposition it can
also  express  a  judgment.  When  a judgment is expressed in words, the
verbal  statement  is  also  a  proposition. The proposition is thus the
logical  aspect  of  a  sentence  and the verbal aspect of a judgment. A
similar  consideration of terms in relation to words and concepts occurs
in the chapter on Idea. What is perhaps the most fundamental division in
the  sphere  of  judgments—  the  separation  of  the practical from the
theoretic  or speculative—can be initially explained by reference to the
forms  of  language. Aristotle's remark about sentences and propositions
tends  to identify propositions with declarative sentences. Sentences in
the  subjunctive  mood  state  prayers  or  wishes, not propositions. An
interrogative  sentence  asks  a  question  to  which the answers may be
propositions,  or they may be hopes and desires. The imperative sentence
issues  a  command  to  act  in  a certain way, whether the command is a
direction  for  others  or  a decision for one's self. This last type of
sentence  represents  the  practical mood of thought as well as speech —
thought  concerned with actions to be done or not done, rather than with
what does or does not exist.

[896b]
The  imperative sentence is not the only kind of practical statement. It
is merely the most terse and emphatic. It is also the expression of that
type  of  practical  judgment  which  most  immediately  precedes action
itself,  or the execution of a command. There are other sentences which,
because   they   are  apparently  declarative  in  form,  conceal  their
imperative mood. Yet upon examination their essentially practical rather
than  theoretic  significance can be discovered. Sentences which contain
the words "ought" or "should" are of this sort, e.g., "Men ought to seek
the  truth,"  "You should work for peace," "I ought to make this clear."
By omitting "should" or "ought," these sentences can be changed into the
strictly  declarative mood of theoretic propositions, e.g., "Men do seek
the  truth,"  "You will work for peace," "I shall make this clear." They
can  also  be  made plainly imperative, e.g., "Seek the truth," etc. The
chief  difference  between  the  blunt  form  of  the imperative and its
indicative  expression  using  "ought"  or  "should"  is that the latter
indicates  the  person to whom the command is addressed. The contrast in
significance  between  a  declarative  and an imperative statement does,
therefore,  convey  the  distinction between a theoretic and a practical
proposition  or judgment. Kant's further division of practical judgments
into the hypothetical and the categorical simply differentiates commands
or  "oughts"  which  involve  no  preamble from those which propose that
action  be  taken to achieve a certain end, or which base a direction to
employ  this  or  that  means  on  the supposition that a certain end is
desired  or  sought. Examples of hypothetical or conditional imperatives
would  be such judgments as "If you want to be happy, seek the truth" or
"Seek the truth in order to be happy." The distinction between theoretic
and  practical  judgments  is  currently  made  in terms of the contrast
between  statements  of  fact and statements of value or, as in judicial
procedure,  between  statements  of fact and rules of law. A rule of law
has  the  form  of  a general practical statement, usually a conditional
rather  than  a  categorical imperative; whereas the decision of a court
applying the rule to a case is a particular practical judgment.

[897a]
:  Chapter  41 Hcginning with Francis Bacon, the distinction between the
theoretic  and  the  practical  is also made in terms of rhc di (Terence
between   the  pure  sciences  and  their  ap{>hcalions  in  technology.
Technical judgments, prescribing the svav to make something or produce a
certain  licet,  are  traditionally  associated,  under the IkmcI of the
practical,  with  moral  judgments .(MKcrning the gCKxl to be sought and
the  ways  jt  seeking  it. Both are prescriptive of conduct rather than
descriptive  of  existence  or  nature  in  ihc  manner  of  theoretical
Statements.  Thinkers  like  Aristotle,  Aquinas,  and  Kant, who divide
science  or  philosophy into the theDfctical disciplines {e.g., physics,
mathematics,  metaphysics)  and  the  practical  or  moral dis- :iplines
{e.g.,  ethics,  economics,  politics),  place  ihc  discussion  of  the
difference between theoretical and practical judgments in the context 3f
other  distinctions;  as,  for  example, between :he speculative and the
practical  reason,  or bcIcween theoretic and practical knowledge; or ji
the  context  of considering the kinds of truth appropriate to each, and
the   modes  of  inference  or  demonstration  in  each.  These  related
distinctions   and   considerations  are  :rcated  in  the  chapters  on
Knowledge,  MixD,  Reasoning, and Truth. For the most part, however, the
great  books  head.  n  the  tradition  of  logic  itself do not give an
inalysis  of  practical  judgments  or reasoning in mv way comparable to
their  treatment  oi  the  :hcoretic forms of thought and statement. The
ogical   problems   concerning  propositions  or  udgments,  now  to  be
considered,  apply  only :o the theoretic forms. Fwo BASIC ISSUES in the
theory  of  propositions or judgments have their origin in the tradition
)f  the  great  books, but for their explicit and "oil development other
works  must  be  conulted—  the special treatises on logic, of relativcv
recent  date,  Usted  in the Additional Readngs. One of these two issues
has  already  been )riefly commented on, but for the full implicalons of
the  distinction  between  propositions md judgments one must go to such
writers  as  ^egel,  Bradley,  Bosanquet, Cook Wilson, W. E. ohnson, and
John  Dewey, who make this disinction the crux of a controversy over the
cope of formal logic.

[897b]
IUI)(;mknt  8^9  i'he  other  basic issue lies in the (jpposnuin between
what  has  come  to he called "subjcctpreiiicale logic" aiul "relational
logic."  Here  one side is fully represented by the Organon of Aristotle
and  by  the  later  Ixxjks  which  ailopt  the  Aristotelian  logic  of
predication.  The  other  logical  theory  is  intimated  but  not fully
dcvelo}x-tl  by  such  writers as I^xke, 1 lume, Kant, and William James
who,  though  they  sometimes  employ the subject-predicate formulation,
tend to construct the unit of knowledge— the proposition or judgment— as
a  relation  between  ideas  or  concepts.  The  fact  that  Kant places
substance  and  accident  under the category of relation can be taken as
exemplifying  this  tendency,  as can Locke's emphasis on the connection
of,  and  agreement  or  disagreement  between, our ideas. Nevertheless,
these  are  at  most intimations of the theory that the proposition is a
relation  of  two or more terms, not the application of a predicate to a
subject.  As  indicated  in  the chapter on Logic, the relational theory
does  not receive an adequate exposition until the modern development of
symbolic  or  mathematical  logic, beginning with the writings of Boole,
Jcvons,  and  Venn,  and  culminating  in  such  works  as the Principia
Mathematica  of  Russell  and  WhiteIn  the  Aristotelian  logic, simple
propositions  consist  of a subject and a predicate—what is being talked
about  and  what  is  said  of  it.  The  copula  "is"  is  the  sign of
predication;  it  also  signifies an affirmation of the unity of subject
and predicate. For example, in "Socrates is a man** the predicate man is
applied  to  the  subject  Socrates, and the unity of being Socrates and
being  a  man  is affirmed. All the terms oi discourse can be classified
according  to  their  character as subjects and predicates; so, too, can
propositions  be classified by reference to the type of subject-term and
the  type of predicateterm which comprise them. The formal structure not
only of the proposition, but also of the syllogism, is determined by the
order  of  subjects  and  predicates.  "When  one  term is predicated of
another,"  Aristotle  writes,  "any  term  which  is  predicable  of the
predicate  will  also  be  predicable  of its subject." According to the
theory  of  the  proposition  as  a  reLition  of  terms  or of classes,
predicatioa

[898a]
840  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  represents  merely one type of relationship— the
membership of an individual in a class, or the inclusion of one class in
another.  There  are  many  other  types  of relation which, it is held,
cannot  be  reduced  to  class-membership  or  class-inclusion;  as, for
example, the relationship stated by the proposition "John hit James." or
the  proposition  "January  comes  before February." Propositions can be
classified  according  to  the  number  of  terms  involved  in a single
relationship,  or  by  reference to the type of relation which organizes
them,   whether   it  is  symmetrical  or  asymmetrical,  transitive  or
intransitive,  reflexive  or  irreflexive.  In  this  theory  it  is the
character  of the relationship, not the character of the terms, which is
the  fundamental  element  in  logical analysis, and this determines the
formal  structure  of  inference as well as of propositions. It has been
claimed  for  each of these logical theories that it is the more general
analysis  and that it is able to reduce the formulations of the opposite
theory  to its own terms or subsume them as a special case. Certainly it
is  verbally  possible  to  convert  all predications into statements of
relationship,   or  all  relational  statements  into  subject-predicate
propositions.  But  this by itself does not seem to resolve the issue to
the  satisfaction  of  either  theory;  each  side  contends  that  such
reductions  violate  its  fundamental  principles.  Stated  in  its most
drastic  form,  the unresolved question is whether there is one logic or
two—or  perhaps  more. Within the tradition of Aristotelian logic, there
are  divergent schemes for classifying propositions or judgments. So far
as  the  great  books  are  concerned,  this  can be best illustrated by
mentioning   Kant's  departures  in  analysis.  Aristotle  distinguishes
between  simple  and  composite propositions, the former consisting of a
single  subject  and  predicate,  the  latter  '^compounded  of  several
propositions."  For example, since the two predicates in the proposition
"This  man  is  good  and a shoemaker" do not form a unity, the sentence
expresses  a  conjunction of two simple propositions: "This man is good"
and  "This man is a shoemaker." Other types of compound propositions are
the  hypothetical  and  the  disjunctive,  e.g.y  "If Socrates is a man,
Socrates is mortal," and "Either all men

[898b]
are  mortal  or no men are mortal." Kant treats these distinctions under
the  head  of relation. He calls the proposition which is a "relation of
the   predicate   to  the  subject,  categorical"  and  he  regards  the
hypothetical  or  disjunctive  judgment (based on relations of cause and
effect  or  of  the parts of a whole) as concerned with propositions "in
relation  to  each  other."  Aristotle classifies simple propositions by
reference  to  their  quantity  and  quality.  In  regard to quantity he
distinguishes between the universal (e.g., "All men are mortal") and the
particular  (e.g.,  "Some  men  are  mortal").  To  these  he  adds  the
indefinite   proposition   which  leaves  the  quantity  (all  or  some)
undetermined.  Under  the  head  of  quantity,  Kant  makes  a threefold
division  according  to  unity,  plurality,  and  totality.  He adds the
singular  proposition "Socrates is mortal" to Aristotle's particular and
universal.  The difference between the singular on the one hand, and the
particular  and  the  universal on the other, seems to be represented in
Aristotle's  thought  by  the  distinction between propositions about an
individual  subject  and  propositions  about  a  universal subject. The
quality  of  categorical propositions, according to Aristotle, is either
affirmative  (i.e^ positive) or negative, e.g., "All men are mortal" and
"Some  men  are  not  mortal."  To  these  two Kant adds a third type of
judgment  under the head of quality— the infinite judgment which affirms
a  negative  predicate  of  a  subject,  e.g., "The soul is non-mortal."
Though  Aristotle  recognizes the special character of a term like "non-
mortal,"  since  it is both negative and indefinite, he does not seem to
think  that  the use of such terms affects the quality of a proposition.
Finally,  Aristotle  divides  propositions according to whether they are
simple  assertions of fact or are assertions qualified by the notions of
necessity  or  contingency  (i.e.,  possibility).  Every proposition, he
says,  "states  that  something  either  is  or  must  be  or may be the
attribute  of something else." The distinction between the necessary and
contingent  modes  of  statement  has  come to be called a difference in
"modality,"  and statements which have one or another modahty are called
"modal  propositions."  It  is  sometimes  thought that the Aristotelian
classification treats only necessary and continI

[899a]
Chapter  4 1 : gent propositions, with iluir several opposiics, as modal
propositions,  and  separates tlie simple or pure assertion from them as
non-m(xlal.  In  contrast  to  this,  Kant makes a threefold division of
judgments  under  the  head  of modality: the "problematical" (i.e., the
possible,  what may be), the "asserloric" {i.e., the existent, what />),
and  the  "apod  ic  tic"  {i.e.,  the  necessary,  what  must  be). The
classification  of  the  types  of  judgment  or  proposition is usually
preliminary  in  logical  analysis to a consideration of their order and
connection.  The  formal  pattern  of  what is traditionally called "the
square  of  opposition" is determined by the quality and quantity of the
simple   propositions   which  are  therein  related  as  contradictory,
contrar}%  and  sub-contrary. Two propositions are contradictory if they
are opposite in both quality and quantity {e.g., "All men are mortal" is
contradicted  by  "Some men are not mortal"). Two universal propositions
are  contrary  if  one is affirmative and the other negative {e.g., "All
men  are mortal" is contrary to "No men are mortal"); and an affirmative
and  a  negative  particular  proposition  are related as sub-contraries
{e.g.,  "Some  men  are  mortal"  and  "Some  men  are not mortal"). The
significance  of  these  three  basic  relationships  for  the truth and
falsity  of  the  opposed  propositions  is  discussed in the chapter on
Opposition;  and in the chapter on Necessity \ND Contingency the special
problems of opDosition among modal propositions are examined. Other than
their  opposition,  the  only  formal  relationship  of  propositions or
judgments oc- :urs in the structure of inference or reasoning. According
to  the  traditional  analysis,  the impli- :ation of one proposition by
another—  insofar IS that is determined by the form of each— is mmediate
inference.  In  contrast, the pattern )f mediated inference or reasoning
always  in-  .olves  at  least  three propositions, ordered not MiK with
respect  to  the  sequence  from premises to conclusion, but also by the
relation  of  the premises to one another. These matters are disussed in
the  chapter  on Reasoning. With respect to their origin, status, or im-
)ort, judgments or propositions are subject to

[899b]
lULXJMKNT   841   further  disiiiu  lions  in  ivpc.  The  certainly  or
probability  with  which pro}x>Mtions arc asserted or )udgmcnts are made
is connected by some writers with the distinction Ixrtwccn knowledge and
opinion,  by  others with the diflcrence Ix-twecn science and dialectic,
and  by others with the dilfercncc between knowing the relation of ideas
and  knowing  matters  of  fact  or  real  existence. Propositions which
express  certain  knowledge  are,  furthermore, divided by some analysts
into  those  which  are  axiomatic, self-evident, or immediate and those
which are known only by mediated inference, reasoning, or demonstration,
not  by  intuition  or  induction.  The former are also sometimes called
"principles,"  the  latter  "conclusions."  Lx)cke's distinction between
"trifling"   and   "instructive"propositions,  like  Kant's  distinction
between  "analytic"  and  "synthetic"  judgments, is made in the general
context   of   an   examination  of  how  we  learn  or  know.  Trifling
propositions,  according  to  I^ocke, "are universal propositions which,
though   they   be  certainly  true,  yet  they  add  no  light  to  our
understanding;   bring  no  increase  to  our  knowledge."  All  "purely
identical  propositions" are of this sort— propositions such as "body is
body"  or  "a  vacuum is a vacuum." Such propositions "teach nothing but
what  every  one  who  is capable of discourse knows without being told,
viz.,  that  the  same term is the same term, and the same idea the same
idea."  They  are  all  instances  of  the law of identity; or, as Locke
expresses  it,  they are all "equivalent to this proposition, viz., what
is,  is.'' If the trifling proposition, the analytical judgment, or what
in  our  day  is  called  a "tautology," goes beyond the statement of an
identity  between  subject  and  predicate,  it goes no further than the
explication  of  a definition. It predicates, Locke says, "a part of the
definition  of  the  word  defined," as, for example, in the proposition
"Lead  is  a  Analytical  or  explicative  judgments,  Kant  says in the
Prolegomena, "express nothing in the predicate but what has already been
actually  thought  in  the concept of the subject . . . When I say, 'all
bodies  are  extended,'  I have not amplified in the least my concept of
body,  but  have  only analyzed it . . . On the contrary, this judgment,
'All bodies have weight,' contains in

[900a]
842  THE GREAT IDEAS its predicate something not actually thought in the
general  concept of body; it amplifies my knowledge, by adding something
to  my concept, and must therefore be called synthetical." For Locke not
all  axioms  or  self-evident propositions are trifling or tautological,
for  some  go  beyond  statements  of  identity  or  the  exphcation  of
definitions,  as,  for example, that the whole is greater than the part.
Nor  are  they all useless. Some which Locke distinguishes from the rest
by  caUing  them  "maxims,"  are  of use, he maintains, "in the ordinary
methods  of teaching sciences as far as they are advanced, but of little
or  none in advancing them further. They are of use in disputes, for the
silencing  of  obstinate  wranglers, and bringing those contests to some
conclusion."  For Kant there is a further division of judgments into the
a  posteriori  and  the  a priori, according as their truth is or is not
grounded  in the data of experience. The former are empirical in origin,
the  latter  transcendental,  that  is,  they  have  a  foundation which
transcends   experience.   These  two  types  of  judgment  express  two
corresponding  types  of  knowledge  a  priori  knowledge  by which Kant
understands  "not  such  as  is  independent  of  this  or  that kind of
experience,  but  such as is absolutely so of all experience. Opposed to
this   is  empirical  knowledge,  or  that  which  is  possible  only  a
posteriori,  that  is,  through experience." In Kant's view, there is no
problem  about  the  truth  of  analytic  judgments, for these have an a
priori  foundation in the principle of contradiction. (The contradictory
of  an analytic judgment is always self-contradictory.) Nor do synthetic
judgments  which  are  empirical  or  a  posteriori  raise  any  special
difficulties.  The  central question in the theory of knowledge concerns
the  possibility  and validity of synthetic judgments a priori. "If I go
out of and beyond the conception A, in order to recognize another, B, as
connected  with  it,  what  foundation  have  I  to rest on," Kant asks,
"whereby  to  render  the  synthesis possible? I have here no longer the
advantage  of  looking  out in the sphere of experience for what I want.
Let  us take, for example, the proposition, 'everything that happens has
a cause.' In the conception oi something that hap-

[900b]
pens,  I  indeed  think an existence which a certain time antecedes, and
from  this  I  can  derive analytical judgments. But the conception of a
cause  lies  quite outside the above conception, and indicates something
entirely  different  from  'that which happens,' and is consequently not
contained  in  that  conception. How then am I able to assert concerning
the  general  conception—  'that  which  happens'—something  enI  tirely
different from that conception, and to recognize the conception of cause
although  not  contained  in  it,  yet  as  belonging  to  it,  and even
necessarily ? What is here the unknown X, upon , which the understanding
rests when it believes it has found, outside the conception A, a foreign
predicate B, which it nevertheless considers to , be connected with it?"
It  is the discovery and solution of this problem which Kant believes to
be  the  signal  contribution  of  his  transcendental  i  logic  of the
judgment.  It  may  be  wondered whether this problem ' can be stated in
terms  other  than those peculiar to Kant's analytical vocabulary. Other
writers admit that propositions which are particular and contingent have
"existential  import."  Their  truth  concerns  real  existences, and so
whether  they  are  true or not can and must be learned from experience.
These  are  like  Kant's synthetic judgments a posteriori. Universal and
necessary  propositions, on the other hand, are sometimes interpreted as
having  no  existential significance. Instead of being read as asserting
that  anything  exists,  they  are  taken  simply  as  statements of the
relation  between  our  own  ideas. These, for Locke and Flume, are like
Kant's  a  priori  analytic  judgments.  What  remains  is to discover a
parallel  for  Kant's  synthetic judgments a priori. In terms other than
Kant's, the most likely parallel seems to be the universal and necessary
proposition  conceived  as  a  statement about reality rather than about
relations  in the realm of our own concepts. When universal propositions
are  so  interpreted,  two questions arise. How do we establish that the
subjects  of such propositions really exist? What is the ultimate ground
for  the truth of such propositions, the unlimited universality of which
outruns experience? In these two questions we find a problem which is at
least  analogous  to  Kant's  problem  of  the  possibility of synthetic
judgments a priori.

[901a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  Judgment  as an act or faculty of the mind: its
contrast   with   the  act  of  conception  or  with  the  faculties  of
understanding  and  reason  844 2. The division of judgments in terms of
the distinction Ix-twecn the theoretic and the practical 3. The analysis
of  practical or moral judgments: judgments of gcxxl and evil, means and
4.  The  distinction between the aesthetic and the tcleological judgment
5.  The  nature of theoretic judgments 5 J. The linguistic expression of
judgments: sentences and propositions 5^. The judgment as a predication:
the  classification  of  subjects  and  predicates  5c.  The judgment as
relational: types of relation 846 6. The division of theoretic judgments
according  to formal criteria 6a. The division of judgments according to
quantity:  universal,  particular, singular, and indefinite propositions
6i?. The division of judgments according to quality: positive, negative,
and  infinite  propositions  6c.  The division of judgments according to
modality:    necessary   and   contingent   propositions;   problematic,
assertoric,  and apodictic judgments 6d. The classification of judgments
by   reference   to   relation:   simple   and  composite  propositions;
categorical,  hypothetical,  and  disjunctive judgments 7. The order and
connection  of  judgments  ya.  The  formal opposition of judgments: the
square  of opposition yb. The conversion of propositions: the problem of
immediate  inference yc. Reasoning as a sequence of judgments: the chain
of  reasoning  8.  The differentiation of judgments according to origin,
ground,  or  import  847 Sa. Self-evident and demonstrable propositions:
immediate  and  mediated,  intuitive and reasoned judgments Sb. Analytic
and  synthetic  judgments:  trifling  and instructive propositions 8^. A
priori  2.n6.  a  posteriori, non-existeniial and existential judgments:
the  problem  of  a  priori  synthetic  judgments  8^.  The  division of
judgments   into  the  determinant  and  the  reflective:  judgments  as
constitutive  or  as  regulative  9.  Degrees  of  assent: certainty and
probability o. The truth and falsity of judgments 848

[901b]
Chapter 41 : JUDGMENT 843 VAcr.

[902a]
844 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1; Judgment as an
act  or  faculty of the mind: its contrast with the act of conception or
with  the faculties of understanding and reason 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 4
[2^4-10]
6a / Interpretation, ch i
[16^9-18] 25a-b
/ Metaphysics, bk VI, CH 4
[1027^18-28]
550a,c;  bk  IX,  CH  10  577c-578a,c  /  Soul, bk hi, ch 6 662d-663c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par 23 50b-c; bk X, par 10 73d-74a /
City of God, bk viii, CH 6, 269b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  3, a 4, REP 2 16d-17c; Q 13, A 12, ANS 74c-75b; q 14, a 14 88d-89b; q
16,  a  2  95c-96b; q 17, a 3 102d-103c; q 58, a 2, ans 301b-d; a 4, ans
302d-303c;  q 85, a 5, ans and rep 3 457d458d; A 6 458d-459c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, A 2 381a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 66c-67a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59c-61d esp 59c-60a; 64a-b
31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 21d-22a / Meditations, II, 81a; IV 89a-93a esp
89c-90a  /  Objections  and Replies, 124b-c; 141a; 215d-216c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, prop 48-49 391a394d

[902b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves ofthe right-hand
side  of  the  page.  For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a {D), follows; e.g..
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 35
Locke  : Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx-, sect 5 179c-d; bk iv, ch v,
sect  5-6  329di  330b;  CH XIV 364b-365a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 16d-19a;
34a-45b  esp  39a-c,  41c-42c;  51d-52b;  59c-64a  esp  60a-c;  64d-66d;
99a-101b;  108a-112d  esp  llOd-lllc;  166c-171a; 193a-200c; 240b-243c /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 282 b-c / Judgement, 461a-475d esp
465c-467d, 474b-475d; 550a-551a,c; 558a; 572b-575b 53 James: Psychology,
178a-179a;  213b-214a;  313b;  638a-b;  859a;  861b  2.  The division of
judgments  in  terms  of  the  distinction between the theoretic and the
practical  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [306*14-18] 397b-c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i 499a-500b; bk IV, CH 4
[1008^2-32] 527d-528b /
Soul,  bk  III,  CH  7  [431^2-12]  664a-b;  ch  9  [432^26433*9] 665c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; cH 7
[1098*25-35]
343d; bk ii, ch 2
[1103^261104*9] 349b-c; bk vi, ch 2 [1139*21-31] 387d388a; CH5 [ii4o'^ii-i9] 389b-c; ch 8 [1142*1319] 391b
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 16 90b-91b; q 79, aa 11-13
424d-427a; part i-ii, q 13, A 6, rep 2 676c-677b

[903a]
'  Ito^b Chapter 41: JUDGMENT 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
157,  A  5,  Rtp  3  39a  40a;  q  90,  a  i, rkp 2 205b206b; a 2, REP 3
206b-207a; q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d; part hi, y ii, a i, rep 3 772b773a;
q  13,  a  i,  rep  3 780a 781b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 44a-c /
Ohjections   and  Replies,  126a-b;  237b  c;  243c-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  cm  h,  SECT  I  103d-104a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
190c-191a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b; 271a c /
Practical  Reason, 297a-c; 300d (In i|; 310a-b; 319c-321b; 329a-330c esp
329a-d;  343a  d / Judgementy 461a-475d esp 463a-467a, 474b475d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 5c-6a; part
III,  par  227  74b-d  53  James:  Psychology,  186a  3. The analysis of
practical  or  moral  judgments:  judgments  of good and evil, means and
ends;  categorical  and hypothetical imperatives 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
hi,  ch  1-4  162a-166b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i 499a-500b; bk iv, CH 4
[1008^2-32]  527d-528b  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; bk n,
ch 2 [1103^27-1104^9] 349b-c passim; bk VI, ch 2 [1139*21-31] 387d-388a;
ch 5 [1140^ 11-19] 389b-c; ch 8
[ii42'*i3-i9]
391b;  ch lo-ii 392b-393b; bk vii, ch 3 396c-398a / Politics, BK III, CH
II  [i28i''39-i282*23]  479d480a  /  RJietoric,  bk i, ch 7 604c-607d 17
Plotinus   :   Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  i  106b-107a  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk hi, par 13 16c-d; BK \Ti, par 23 50b-c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  8  270a-d; bk xix, ch 1-14 507a-520d / Christian Doctrine, bk
hi,  ch  10,  661d-662a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, A 3,
ans  and  rep  i  308b-309a;  q  79,  aa 11-13 424d-427a; q 83, a i, ans
436d-438a; a 2, ans and rep i 438a-d; a 3, ans and rep 2 438d-439c; part
i-ii, q 17, a i 686d-687c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57,
a  6, ans and rep 2-3 40a-41a 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a esp
par  7-13  402b-405a, par 17-36 407b-417b, par 59-78 427a-432a 23Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  53a-54a; 60d; 61d-62a; 65b-c; 66c-67d; 68b-c; 96a;
part  II,  149b-c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 51a-55d esp 52c-53c; 136b-139b;
520b-522a  27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc II 113c-115d
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 86c-95b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
hi,  49a-b  / Objections and Replies, 126a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 4 172b;
98  190b:  375-385  237b-239a;  456-457 254a; 505 261a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk 11, ch xxi, sect 59-70 193d-197b passim

[903b]
849 35 Hi Mr : Human Understanding, sect v, niv 16 465a d
[fn
i)  42  Kant:  Pure  Rraiori,  IMd llSn; 190c d; 236d 237a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morah,  2f>0i» 261d: 266a 267d; 268c 271a; 272a b / Prac
tical  Reason,  318c  321b  rsp  320c  321b;  327d329a; 357c 360d / Prrf
Mctaphysual  Elrmenlt  of  Ethics,  367c;  368d;  369b c; 373d; 377c d /
Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 386b d; 387b: 387d 388a; 390b,d 391c; 392b
393a  /  Sctcme of Right, 397b 398a; 416b 417b / Judgrmrnt, 477b c; 557d
|ln2]; 586a b; 595a d: 596c 598b; 605d 606b
[fn 2]
43  I'idkralist:  number  i, 29d 43 Mill: Liberty, 275a-278c passim, esp
276b277b;  287b  c  /  Utilitarianism, 446d 447a; 455c 457b passim; 461c
462a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 140 49b 54a; part hi,
par  191-192  66b c / Philosophy of History, intro, 165a -166b; PART IV,
362d  53  James:  Psychology,  202b;  794a  798b;  886b888a  54 I- revd:
Cinlization  and  Its  Discontents,  792b  c;  801  d 4. The distinction
between  the aesthetic and the teleological judgment 42 Kant: Judgement,
471b-473a; 476a-483d; 485b-489a; 492b-493b; 513b-516b; 516d517c; 528b-c;
548c-549d;  550c-551a,c;  558a  b; 559c-560c; 562a-564c; 567c-570a; 572b
578a  5.  The nature of theoretic judgments 5a. The lingui^ic expression
of  judgments:  sentences  and  propositions 7 Plato: Cratylus, 85d-86b;
109a  b / Sophist, 574d-577b 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 4-5 26a-c /
Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch i [24*16-^15] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 2 [72*7-14] 98c 19 Aquinas: Summa T/ieologica, part i, q 1 5, A 12
74c-75b;  q  85, a 2, rep 3 453d-455b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii,  q r, A 2 381a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 60a; part iv,
270a-c  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  433a b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxxiii, sect 19 251c-d; bk hi, ch vii, sect i
283a-b; bk iv, ch v 329a-331b passim; cm m, sect 1-3 331b-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 341b-342c 53 James: Psychology, 144a-b 5b. The judgment as a
predication:  the classification of subjects and predicates 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 2-3 5b-d; ch 5
[2*11-3^24] 6a-8a / Interpretation, ch 4-8 26a28a; ch
ii  31c-32c  / Prior Analyturs, bk i, ch 27 [43*25-44] 60c-d / Posterior
.Analytics, bk i, ch 4 100a lOlb; ch 18 22 lllb 115b/ Topics,

[904a]
846  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  The  nature of theoretic judgments. 5b. The
judgment   as   a   predication:  the  classification  of  subjects  and
predicates.) BK I, CH 4-9 144b-147b / Physics, bk i, ch 3
[186*22-187^10] 261b-262a; ch 6
[i89'»28-33]
264d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, ANs lOd-lld; Q 3, A
4,  REP  2  16d-17c;  q  13,  a  5 66b-67d; a 12, ans 74c-75b; q 16, a 2
95c96b;  A 6, ANS 98b-d; q 58, a 2 301b-d; a 4 302d-303c; q 76, a 3, ans
391a-393a;  q  85,  a  5, REP 3 457d-458d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part iv,
270a-c  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, def ix 130d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  51d-52b;  180c-182b 53 James: Psychology, 144a-b; 313a-b; 638b;
861b;  870b-873a  5c.  The  judgment as relational: types of relation 35
Locke:  Human  Understatiding,  bk iv, ch i, SECT 1-7 307a-308a; ch xii,
sect  6-8 360a-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  39c-41c  esp  40c-d;  Sld52b 53 James: Psychology,
174b-176a;  302b-304b;  638b;  869a-873a  esp 870b-871a, 872b; 878a879b;
889a-b  6.  The  division  of  theoretic  judgments  according to formal
criteria 6a. The division of judgments according to quantity: universal,
particular,   singular,   and   indefinite   propositions  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 2 5b-c / Interpretation, CH 7 [17^37-^16] 26d-27a / Prior
Analytics,  BK  I,  CH  I  [24^16-21]  39a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
55b-56a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch v, SECT 10 331a; ch vi
331b-336d  passim;  ch  ix,  SECT I 349a; ch xi, sect 13-14 357d-358c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  39c-41c  esp 39d-40a 6b. The division of judgments
according  to  quality:  positive, negative, and infinite propositions 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[12^6-15] 17d18a /
Interpretation, ch 5
[17^8-9] 26b; ch 6
26c-d; CH 10 29d-31c / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 3 [25^19-26] 40c; CH 46
70b-71d  /  Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 25 [86^30-38] 118d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  A  12, ANS 74c-75b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii, aph 33 161b-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch
vii, SECT I 283a-b; bk iv, ch v, sect 5-6 329d330b passim

[904b]
5c  to  7c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 39c-41c esp 40a-c; 210c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 53 25c-d 6c. The division of judgments
according   to   modality:   necessary   and   contingent  propositions;
problematic,   assertoric,   and   apodictic   judgments   8  Aristotle:
Interpretation,  ch 12-13 32d-35c / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 3 40a-c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 13, rep 2 86d-88c; q 19, a 3,
ans  llOb-lllc;  A  8,  rep  1,3 116a-d 31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 22a-b;
23a-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14c-15c; 39c-41c esp 40d41c; 179c-180c;
193a-200c   esp  194b-d;  217c-d  /  Judgement,  491c-495a,c  53  James:
Psychology,  851a  6d.  The  classification of judgments by reference to
relation:  simple and composite propositions; categorical, hypothetical,
and disjunctive judgments 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 5
[17*20-24]
26c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A 13, REP 2 86d-88c; q
19,  a 8, rep 1,3 116a-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39c-41c esp 40c-d; 44a-b;
llOd-lllc esp 111b; l9Ah-c/ Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 265c-266d /
Practical Reason^ 297a-298a / Judgement, 483d-491c 53 James: Psychology,
859b  7. The order and connection of judgments la. The formal opposition
of judgments: the square of opposition 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[13^1-35] 19a-c
/  Interpretation,  ch  6-7  26c-27d;  ch  10 29d31c; CH 12-14 32d-36d /
Posterior   Analytics,  BK  I,  CH  2  [72*13]  98c  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 64, A 3, REP 3 68b-69b 42 Kant: Pure Reason^
64d-65c;  156d-157b;  174b-d  lb.  The  conversion  of propositions: the
problem of immediate inference 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 7
[17^23-37]
27b-c;  CH 10 [20*16-37] 30d-31b/ Prior Analytics, BK I, CH 2-3 39d-40c;
bk  ii, ch 8-10 79b-81b; ch 22 [67^26-68*24] 89b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
17d-18a;  109d-lllc esp 109d-110a, llOd-lllc Ic. Reasoning as a sequence
of  judgments:  the  chain  of  reasoning  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 3
[1^10-16] 5c-d / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 1-3 39a-40c; ch 23
[40^30-41*7] 57c-d / Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 1-2 97a-99a

[905a]
:  18  to 9 Cha!>tlr 41 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologiai, part i, g 14, A 7,
ANs  81d-82b;  g  58,  a  3 301ci 302d; a 4, ANS 302d-303c; y 79, aa 8-9
421c-423d;  q  85,  A  5,  ANS  457d-458d 23 HoBBEs: Lei'tathan, part i,
58a-c;  60a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 59c -60a 31 Descartes:
Rules, xiv, 28b c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, cii 11, SECT 2-8
309d-311a; cii xv, sect i 365a-c; CH xvn, sect 4, 373a-375a passim; sect
1517  378d-379c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 110d-112d; 115d 119a / Practical
Reason,  329a-d  53  ]\MY.s\  Psychology,  313b; 666b-674b esp 667b668a,
672b; 868b-879b esp 870b-873a, 878a 8. The diflferentiation of judgments
according to origin, ground, or import Sa. Self-evident and demonstrable
propositions: immediate and mediated, intuitive and reasoned judgments 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch i 97a-d; ch 3 99b-100a: ch 15
109a-b; ch 19-22 lllc-115b; CH 23
[84^19-85^1] 115c-116a; ch
31
[88'*5-i7] 120b-c; bk
ii, ch 9 128a-b; ch 19 136a-137a,c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[11:59^25-34]
388c; ch 6 389d; ch 8
[1142^25-29] 391b-c;
CH II
[ii43''32-^5] 392dCH 2 [1356^26-27] 596b
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a I lOd-lld; Q 14, A I, rep 2
75d-76c;  a  7, ANS 81d-82b; q 17, a 3, rep 2 102d-103c; Q 79, A 12, ANS
425c-426b;  q 84, a 3, rep 3 443d-444d; q 85, a 6, ans 458d-459c; q 117,
A  I  595d-597c;  part  i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 2 612a613a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, A 2 36a-37b; q 94, a 2, ans 221d-223a; a 4,
ANS  223d-224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a 4, ans 382c383b; Q 8, A I, rep 2
417a-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 259d-261a; 272a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  59c  d;  97a  31  Descartes: Rules, iii, 4a-d; xii, 20d-25a /
Objections  and  Replies, 123a-b; 125a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, i 171a-172a
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15-16 98d-99c; sect 18
99d-100b;  sncT 23 101b-102a; ch ii, sect i 103d-104a; sect 4 104d-105a;
ch  hi,  sect  23  119b-120a;  bk iv, ch I, SECT 9 308c-309b passim, esp
309b;  ch  II  309b-313a;  ch  hi,  sect  2-4  313a-c; ch vii, SECT i-ii
337a-342d passim; ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c; ch xv, sect i 365a-c; ch xvii,
sect  2-3  371d-372b;  sect 14-17 378c-379c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39a-c;
99a-c; llOd 111c; 211c-218d / Judgement, 542d-543a 43 Federalist: number
31, 103c-d; number 83, 244b-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 446a-447a

[905b]
JUDGMENT   847  8A.  Analytic  and  synthetic  judgments:  trifling  and
instructive  propositions  35 LocKi : Human Understanding, 11 k iv, ( ii
v, SECT (•), 330b; cu vm 345a 348d 42 Kam: Pure Reason , 16d 19a; 31a-d;
64d  66d;  179c  182b / Practical Reason, 339a; 351c / Science of Right,
405b c / Judgement. 516b d 53 James: Psychology, 879b 880b
[in 2]
8c.   A  priori  and  a  poster/or/',  non-existential  and  existential
judgments:  the  problem of a priori synthetic judgments 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk i, ch i, SECT 15-16 98d-99c; sect 23 101b 102a; bk iv,
ch  i,  SECT  1-7  307a-308a;  ch mi, sect 7-21 315b-319c; ch ix, sect i
349a;  ch XI, sect 13-14 357d-358c; ch xvii, sect 2, 371d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  iv 458a463d passim, esp div 20-21 458a-c, div :^o,
462a; sect v, div 34-38, 464b-466c; sect x, div 89 490b-c; sect xii, div
131-132  508d509d  passim  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 5a-8b; 14a-108a,c esp
14a20c,  23a-24a,  25b-26b, 27b-28b, 29d 33d, 35b-36a, 41c-42b, 46a-48d,
57d-59b,  64b66d,  85d-88a;  108b d; 110a-113b; 134c d; 146a; 179c-182b;
192a-b;  211c 218d; 224a227a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 268b-d;
280a-b;  283b  /  Practical  Reason,  309b-d;  329d-330c;  351c  /  Pref
Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 367d-368a / Science of Right, 405b-407a
esp   405b-d   /   Judgement,  467a-475d;  570b-572d;  603a-b  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445d-446d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
156d158a;   182d-183c   53   James:   Psychology,  639a-641a  esp  640b;
659a-660a;'   851a-890a   esp  851a  852a,  859a861b,  867a-869a,  879b,
880b-881a,  884b885a,  889b-890a;  897a-b  Sd. The division of judgments
into the determinant and the reflective: judgments as constitutive or as
regulative 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 72c- 74b; 193a-200c esp 193c-d, 194b-c;
201d-202a;  206a-207b  / Judgement, 461a-475d esp 471b-474b; 550a551a,c;
558a;  559a-560c; 562a-d; 564a c; 567b-568c; 570b-572c; 577b; 584d-585a;
588c; 597b-599b; 601 d 9. Degrees of assent: certainty and probability 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d / Topics, BK V, CH 3
[131^19-30]
182b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [1074*14-16] 604c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^11-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098*25-35] 343d;
bk ii, ch 2 [1103^27-1104*9] 349b-c / RJietoric, v.k i, ch 2
[1357*23-^24] 596d-597c; bk
ii, cm 25
[1402^13-1403*1] 652b-d

[906a]
(9.  Degrees  of  assent:  certainty  and  probability.)  16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  505a-506a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 14, A 13 86d-88c; q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; Q 58,
a  7,  REP  3 305c-306b; q 86, a 4, ans 463d-464d; part i-ii, q 17, a 6,
ans  690b-d 20 Aquinas: Sum7na Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A 3 14b-15a;
q  67,  a  3,  ans  83b-84d; part ii-ii, q i, aa 4-5 382c-384b; q 4, a 8
409ad;  q 9, A I, ans and rep i 423c-424b; a 2, ans 424b-425a; q 18, a 4
464c-465a;  part  III,  q  7, a 3, rep 3 747b-748a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part i, 65b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 240c-242a; 272a-d; 292a-d; 499c-d 31
Descartes:  Rules,  i-ii  la-3b; xii, 23a-c / Discourse, part iv, 53c-d;
part  vi,  63c-64d  /  Meditations,  74a,c; iv, 92c-93a / Objections and
Replies,  125b-126b  35  Locke:  Human  Understandi?tg,  intro, sect 2-6
93b-95a;  bk iv, ch vi 331b-336d passim, esp sect 13 335c-d; ch xi, sect
3  355a-b;  sect  8-12  356b-357d;  ch xiv-xvi 364b371c; CH XVII, SECT 2
371d-372b;  sect  14-17  378c-379c; ch xix, sect i 384c-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect vi 469d470d; sect x, div 86-91 488d-491c passim, esp
DIV  87  489b-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 348a,c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
194b-c; 228c-d; 240b243c / Judganent, 600d-604b passim 43 Mill: Liberty,
275a-277b  53  James: Psychology, 636a-638b; 659a-660b 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  463d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure Principle, 661c-662a / New
Introductory  Lectures, 818c-819b 10. The truth and falsity of judgments
7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  71c-74a / Cratylus, 85d86d; 109a-b / Theaetetus,
541a-544a / Sophist, 561d-577b esp 575a-577b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch
4 [2^4-10] 6a; ch 5
[4*10-^19] 8b-9a /
Interpretation, ch i
[16^9CROSS-REFERENCES
ie-ie(3).

[906b]
848 THE GREAT IDEAS f 10 18] 25a-b; ch 4-14 26a-36d passim, esp ch 4
[17^1-4]
26b,  ch 7 26d-27d, ch 9 28a-29d, CH 14 35c-36d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch
7
[1011^25-29]
531c;
[1012^1-17]
531d-532a; CH 8
[1012^29-^22]
532b-d; bk vi, ch 4 550a,c; bk ix, ch id
[1051*34-^18]
577c-d / Soul, bk III, ch 3
[427^15-25] 660a; ch 6
662d-663c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk ii, ch 7 [1107*27-32] 352d-353a; bk
vi, ch 2
[1139*21-31] 387d388a; ch 3 [1139^14-18] 388b
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk iv [353-521] 48d-51a esp [469-521]
50b-51a  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 31-34 651d-653b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  3,  a  4,  REP  2  16d-17c; Q 13, A 12 74c-75b; q 14, A 15, REP 3
89b-90b;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  a 7, ans and rep 4 99a-d; a 8, rep 3-4
99d-100d;  Q  17,  AA  3-4  102d-104b;  q  58, a 4, rep 2 302d-303c; a 5
303c-304c;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  i  451c-453c;  a 5, rep 3 457d-458d; a 6
458d459c; q 94, A 4 505a-506a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
57,  A  5, REP 3 39a-40a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 57c; 59a60a;
65b-c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 240c-242a; 259d-261a; 271b-272c; 292a-d 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii  18b-25a  passim  /  Discourse,  part  iv, 52a /
Meditations,  iii,  83a;  85c;  IV  89a-93a esp 90b-91b / Objections and
Replies,  124b-c;  125b-126b;  def  ix  130d;  141a;  156d-158a; i68b-d;
215d-216c;  229d230d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 49 391c-334d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxii 243c-248b passim, esp sect
1-3  243c-244a,  SECT  19-26 247a-248b; bk hi, ch vii, sect i 283a-b; bk
iv,  ch  v  329a-331b;  ch vi, sect 3 331c-d; SECT 16 336d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  99a-100a;  108a-d;  193a-c;  240b-243c  53  James:  Psychology,
460a-469b  esp  462b-465a,  468b-469a;  508a; 638a-b; 879a-881a For: The
comparison  of  judgment  with  other acts of the mind, see Idea 2g, 5a;
Know^ledge  6h(^);  Reasoning  i  ;  and for the relation of judgment to
other  faculties  of  the  mind,  see  Mind  Discussions relevant to the
distinction  between  theoretic  and  practical judgments, see Knowledge
6efi);  Philosophy  2a;  Prudence  2a;  Reasoning 5e-5e(i); Theology 4d;
Truth  2c;  Wisdom  ib.  Other  considerations  of  practical  or  moral
judgments,  and  of  judgment in relation to prudence, see Good and Evil
5b-5c;  Knowledge  6e(2);  Prudence  5a;  and  for  the  theory  of  the
categorical  imperative,  see  Duty  5; Necessity and Contingency 5a(2).
Other  treatments  of  language  in  relation  to  thought, see Idea 4a;
Language 7. I

[907a]
For:  Tlie  theoryof  predication  and  i  lie  analysis of subjects and
predicates,  sccIdea  5a;  Universal  AND PaRTICI'LAR 5c. The relational
theory  of  propositions, sec Relation 4I). Other discussions bearing on
the  quantity, quality, and nKxiality of projxjsitions, sec Infinity 2b;
Necessity and Contingency 4e(i); Universal and i^AimcuLAR 5c-5d; and for
other  considerations of the distinction between the categorical and the
hypothetical  in judgment and reasoning, see Hypothesis 5; Reasoning 2b.
Another   treatment   of   the  square  of  opposition,  see  Opposition
id(i)-id(2).  The  relation  of  judgments  to  one another in immediate
inference   or   in  reasoning,  see  Reasoning  4a;  Relation  4b.  The
distinction  between self-evident and demonstrable judgments, see Indlci
ion y. Knowledge 6c(2); Principle 2b(2); and for other treatments of the
a  priori  and  the  ii  posteriori, see Experience 2d; Knowledge 6c(4);
Reasoning  5b(3).  A  discussion  relevant  to  the  distinction between
existential  and  non-existential  judgments,  see Knowledge 6a (3). The
problem  of  the  truth and falsity of judgments, or their certainty and
probability,  see  Knowledge  6d(i)-6d('2);  Opinion  3a-3b;  Truth  2e,
3b(2)-3c,  7a.  Another  consideration  of  the aesthetic judgment, yf<f
Beauty  5; Unixersal and Particular 7c. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below
are  works  not  included  in  Great  BooJ{s  of  the Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of the works cited, consult the Bibliography of .additional
Readings  which  follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. ^' Jevons.
Pure  Logic,  en  2,  7,  10, 12 Aquinas. De Propositionibus Modalibus .
Studies  in Deductive Logic, ch t^-6 HoBBEs. Concerning Body, part i, ch
3  Lotze.  Logic, bk i, ch 2 Kant. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic,
par  .  Outlines of Logic, i, ch 2 2-3 Bradley. The Principles of Logic,
bk i; Terminal Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect i, ch 2 Essays, ii-
iii,  vi  J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of Logic, bk i, ch 4-6 }. N. Keynes.
Studies  and  Exercises  in  Formal Logic, Cicero. Academics, 11 (xlvii)
Venn. Symbolic Logic, ch 6-8 Sextus Empiricus. Against the Logicians • .
Principles   of   Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic,  John  of  Salisbury.
Metalogicon  ch  8-10  Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, viii-ix J. C.
Wilson.  Statement  and  Inference, part ii John of Saint Thomas. Cursus
Philosophicus ThoWhitehead and Russell. Pnncipta Xfathematica, misticus,
Ars  Logica, part i, qq 5-7 part i, sect c, d; part ii, sect b. c, d, e;
part Arnauld. Logic or the Art of Thinking, part ii iv-v Leibnitz. ISlew
Essays Concerning Human UnderRoyce. The Principles of Logic standing, bk
iv,  ch  5 W. E. Johnson. Logic, part i, ch 1-5, 9-10 T. Reid. Essays on
the  Intellectual  Powers of Man, vi Maritain. An Introduction to Logic,
ch  2 W. Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, Whitehead. Process
and  Reality,  part  ii,  ch  9  VOL  II (13-14) Dewey et al. Studies in
Logical  Theory, i-iv Boole. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, ch
Dewey.  Essays in Experimental Logic, ii-vi, xii-xiv 21 J. H. Newman. An
Essay  in  Aid  of  a Grammar of Assent M. R- Cohen. A Preface to Logic,
n-iii

[907b]
Chaptik  41  :  jUlXiMHNT  849  SiGWART.  Logic,  part  i-ii  part  II .
Reconstruction  in  Philosophy,  ch 6 . Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, ch
6-14

[908a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  discussion  of  justice  is  the central theme in two
dialogues  of  Plato—  the Republic and the Gorgias. The dispute between
Socrates  and Thrasymachus in the one and between Socrates and Callicles
in  the  other is of such universal scope and fundamental character that
it  recurs  again and again in the great books with little change except
in  the  personalities  and  vocabularies  of  the  disputants.  It is a
conflict  of  such polar opposites that all other differences of opinion
about  justice  became  arguable  only after one or the other of the two
extreme positions is abandoned. It is the conflict between the exponents
of  might  and the exponents of right—between those who think that might
maJ^es  right  and  that justice is expediency, and those who think that
power  can be wrongly as well as rightly exercised and that justice, the
measure  of  men and states, cannot be measured by utility. Though Plato
gives  us  the first full-fashioned statement of this issue, he does not
fashion  it  out  of  whole  cloth. The issue runs through the fabric of
Greek life and thought in the age of the imperialistic city-states which
played  the game of power politics culminating in the Peloponnesian War.
In  his history of that war, Thucydides highlights the Melian episode by
dramatically constructing a conversation between the Athenian envoys and
the representatives of Melos, a little island colony of Sparta which had
refused  to  knuckle  under  to  Athenian  aggression.  Recognizing  the
superior  force of the aggressors, the Melians enter the conference with
a  sense  of  its  futility, for, as they point out, if they insist upon
their  rights  and  refuse to submit, they can expect nothing from these
negotiations  except  war  and, in the end, slavery. The Athenians reply
with a frankness that is seldom found in the diplomatic exchanges of our
own

[908b]
{  Chapter  ^2.:  JUSTICE  day,  though  in  their  real contentions the
conferences  which  have  preceded  or  followed  the  world wars of our
century  repeat  what  happened,  if  not  what  was said, at Melos. The
Athenians  tell  the  MeHans that they will not waste time with specious
pretences  "either of how we have a right to our empire . . . or are now
attacking  you  because  of  a  wrong you have done us." Why make a long
speech,  they  say,  which  would  not  be  believed?  Instead they come
directly  to  the  point  and  put  the matter simply or, as we now say,
realistically. "You know as well as we do," they tell the Melians, "that
right,  as  the world goes, is only in question between equals in power,
whereas the stronger do whatever they can and the weaker suffer whatever
they  must."  There  is nothing left for the Melians except an appeal to
expediency.  "You  debar  us from talking about justice and invite us to
obey  your  interest,"  they  reply  to  the Athenians, before trying to
persuade  them  that  their  policy will end in disaster for Athens. The
language  of Thrasymachus in the Republic resembles that of the Athenian
envoys.  "I  proclaim,"  he says, "that justice is nothing else than the
interest  of  the stronger. . . . The different forms of government make
laws  democratical,  aristocratical,  tyrannical,  with  a view to their
several  interests; and these laws, which are made by them for their own
interests, are the justice which they deliver to their subjects, and him
who  transgresses  them they punish as a breaker of the law, and unjust.
And  this is what I mean when I say that in all states there is the same
principle of justice which is the interest of the government; and as the
government   must  be  supposed  to  have  power,  the  only  reasonable
conclusion is that everywhere there is one principle of justice which is
the interest of the stronger." 850

[909a]
The  thesis  seems  to  have two appHcations. For the stronger, it means
that  they  have the right, as far as they have the might, to exact from
the weaker whatever serves their interests. Their laws or demands cannot
be  unjust.  They  cannot  do  injustice.  They  can  only fail to exert
sufficient  might  to  hold  on to tlie power which can secure them, not
from the charge of injustice, but from reprisals by those whom they have
oppressed  or  injured. The thesis also means, for the weaker, that they
can  only  do  injustice  but  not  suffer  it.  Injustice on their part
consists  in  disobeying  the  law of their rulers. Hence for them, too,
justice  is  expediency,  only  now in the sense that they are likely to
suffer  if  they  try  to  follow  their  own  interests rather than the
interests  of  the  stronger.  This  thesis  appears  to  be repeated in
somewhat  different  language  by Hobbes and Spinoza. To men living in a
purely  natural  condition,  the notions of justice and injustice do not
apply.  They  apply only to men living in civil society. "Where there is
no  Commonwealth,"  Hobbes writes, "there is nothing unjust. So that the
nature  of  justice  consists in the keeping of valid covenants; but the
validity  of  covenants  begins not but with the constitution of a civil
power  sufficient  to compel men to keep them." The breach of civil laws
or  covenants  "may  be  called  injustice,  and  the observance of them
justice." It is Spinoza's opinion that "everything has bv nature as much
right as it has power to exist and operate." It follows, therefore, that
"in a natural state there is nothing which can be called just or unjust,
but  only  in  a  civil  state."  Here  as  before  justice  consists in
obedience, injustice in disobedience, to whatever laws the state has the
power  to enforce, the laws themselves being formulated not by reference
to  justice,  but  to the interests of the state which must seek its own
preservation  and  has  the right to do so, so long as it has the power.
Those  who take the opposite view agree that justice is political in the
sense  that  the  state,  in  organization  and  operation, is a work of
justice. Wisdom is the virtue of the rulers in the Republic, but justice
is the organizing principle of Plato's ideal state.

[909b]
Chapti:r  42:  JUSTICE  851  Aristotle maintains that man is a political
animal,  whereas  other animals are merely gregarious. He cites the fact
that  man alone has a power of speech able to communicate opinions about
the  expedient  and the just. "Justice is the bond of men in states, for
the  administration  of  justice,  which is the determination of what is
just,  is  the  principle  of  order  in  political  society." Aristotle
describes  man  "when  separated  from  law and justice" as the worst of
animals.  Augustine  describes  the  state without justice as "no better
than  a  band  of  robber  thieves."  Those  who  agree  that  political
institutions  involve  justice  are  confronted  by  these alternatives:
either  the  principle  of  justice  is  antecedent  to  the  state, its
constitution,  covenants, and laws, or the determination of what is just
and  unjust  is  entirely  relative  to  the  constitution  of  a state,
dependent  upon  its  power, and consequent to its laws. When the second
alternative  is  chosen,  the  proposition  that justice is political is
seriously qualified. It is merely poUtical. There is no natural justice,
no  justice  apart from man-made laws, nothing that is just or unjust in
the very nature of the case and without reference to civil institutions.
On  this theory, only the individual who is subject to government can be
judged  just  or  unjust. The government itself cannot be so judged, nor
can  its constitution, its laws, or its acts; for, since these determine
what  is  just  and  unjust,  they cannot themselves be judged for their
justice.   The   opposite  answ^er  conceives  political  justice  as  a
determination   of   natural  justice.  "Political  justice,"  Aristotle
remarks,  "is partly natural and partly conventional or legal." The fact
that  there  is  a  sense  in which just action on the part of a citizen
consists in law-abiding conduct, does not exclude another sense in which
the laws themselves can be called just or unjust, not only the laws, but
the  constitution  of the state itself. Though the justice of civil laws
is  partly  relative  to  the constitution under which they are made and
administered,  there  are  some  enactments  which,  since  they violate
natural  justice,  cannot  be  justified  under  any  constitution.  The
constitution,  moreover,  cannot be regarded as the ultimate standard of
justice  by  those  who  compare  the  justice  of  different  forms  of
government or diverse constitutions. On

[910a]
852  THE  GREAT IDEAS their view, the ultimate measure of justice in all
human institutions and acts, as well as in the characters of men, is not
itself  a  man-made standard, but rather a natural principle of justice,
holding  for  all men at all times everywhere. The issue joined by these
two  theories  of  justice  extends  by  implication  into  many related
matters.  The  opposition,  for  example,  between  those who affirm the
reality  of  natural  law  as  the  source  of  legality  in  all  civil
regulations  and those who derive the legality of positive laws from the
will  of  the  sovereign alone, is considered in the chapter on Law, but
its  parallelism  with  the  issue  of  natural and conventional justice
should  be  noted  here.  Those who deny natural justice and natural law
also  tend  to  deny natural rights, which, unlike civil rights, are not
conferred  on the individual by the state, but are inherent in his human
personality.  They  are,  according  to the Declaration of Independence,
"unalienable"  in the sense that the state cannot rescind them. What the
state  does  not create, it cannot destroy. If a government transgresses
natural  rights,  it  negates  its own reason for being, since it is "to
secure  these rights [that] governments are instituted among men." Those
who  deny  natural  rights,  among which the right to liberty is usually
included,  do  not  have a standard for judging when governments violate
the rights and invade the liberties of men. When men are thought to have
no rights except those granted by their rulers, the absolute power which
the  rulers  exercise  cannot  be  criticized as tyrannical or despotic.
Considering  the  situation  of men in what he calls "a state of perfect
freedom"—apart from government and civil institutions—Locke says of this
state of nature that it "has a law of nature to govern it, which obliges
everyone;  and  reason,  which is that law, teaches all mankind who will
but  consult  it, that, being all equal and independent, no one ought to
harm  another  in his life, health, liberty, or possessions Everyone, as
he is bound to preserve himself, and not quit his station willfully, so,
by  the like reason, when his own preservation comes not in competition,
ought  he,  as much as he can, to preserve the rest of mankind, and not,
unless it be to do justice on an offender, take away or

[910b]
impair  the  life,  or  what  tends to the preservation of the life, the
liberty,  health,  limb, or goods of another." Since this law of nature,
and  its  impUed principle of just dealing between men, is not abolished
when  men  associate  in  the  common  life  of a civil society, natural
justice  and  natural  rights  remain, according to Locke and others, to
limit  the  powers of government and to measure the justice of its laws.
The  principle  of  natural  justice  is  sometimes not accompanied by a
doctrine  of  natural  law  and  natural rights, as for example in Greek
thought.  Their  connection  first seems to occur in Roman jurisprudence
and mediaeval theory. Not all the opponents of natural justice avoid the
use  of  the words "natural law" and "natural rights." Using these words
in  a  different  sense,  Hobbes, for example, speaks of men Uving under
natural  law in a state of nature, which is "a condition of war of every
one  against every one," and "in such condition every man has a right to
everything,  even  to  another's  body."  Only  when  men  abandon  this
unlimited  right  in  order  to  form a commonwealth, do they acquire in
recompense certain civil rights or, as Hobbes says, "proprieties." Then,
and  only then, can there be any meaning to justice, conceived according
to the ancient maxim which Hobbes accepts, that justice is "the constant
will  to render to each man what is his due." Both Spinoza and Hume make
the  same  point.  Where  there  is  no recognized title to property, or
legally established right, there can be no justice—no respecting of what
is a man's own or giving him what belongs to him. The difference between
Locke  and these others seems to lie in his conception oiproperty as the
natural  right  which a man has to the preservation of his hfe, liberty,
and  estate.  There can be justice, therefore, between men in a state of
nature,  for  even then each has some property that the others are bound
to  respect.  The  meaning of natural justice can be examined apart from
these  different  interpretations  of  the  so-called "state of nature."
Those  who,  like  Aristotle  and Aquinas, do not conceive the origin of
political  society  as  a  transition  from  the  "state  of nature" do,
nevertheless,  appeal  to  a  principle of natural justice. For Aquinas,
this principle seems to be an integral

[911a]
part of the natural law. Sometimes the statement of the first precept of
the  natural law is Seek the good; avoid evil." Sometimes it is "Do good
to  others,  injure  no  one,  and render to every man his own." In this
second  formulation,  the  natural  law  seems  to be identical with the
precept  of  justice.  The essential content of this precept seems to be
present—separate  from  any  doctrine  of  natural  law—  in Aristotle's
analysis  of  the nature of justice both as a virtue and as a quality of
human  acts.  "The  just," Aristotle says, "is the lawful and the fair."
What  he  means by the word "lawful" in this context does not seem to be
simply the law-abiding, in the sense of conforming to the actual laws of
a  particular  society.  He  thinks  of  law  as  aiming  "at the common
advantage.  .  .  . VV'e call those acts just," he writes, "that tend to
produce  and  preserve  happiness  and  its components for the political
society."  Lawful  (or  just)  actions  thus are those which are for the
common  good  or the good of others; unlawful (or unjust) actions, those
which do injury to others or despoil the society. It is in this sense of
justice that both Plato and Aristotle lay down the primary criterion for
differentiating between good and bad governments. Those which are lawful
and  serve  the  common good are just; those which are lawless and serve
the  private interests of the rulers are unjust. This meaning of justice
applies  as  readily  to all citizens— to all members of a society—as it
does  to those who have the special duties or occupy the special offices
of  government.  Whether  it  is  stated  in  terms of the good of other
individuals  or  in terms of the common good of a community (domestic or
poUtical),  this  understanding of justice seems to consider the actions
of  a  man  as they affect the wellbeing, not of himself, but of others.
"Justice,  alone  of  the  virtues,"  says  Aristotle, "is thought to be
'another's good,' because it is related to our neighbor." Concerned with
what is due another, justice involves the element of duty or obligation.
"To  each  one,"  Aquinas  writes,  "is  due  what  is his own," and "it
evidently  pertains  to  justice," he adds, "that a man give another his
due." That is why "justice alone, of all the virtues, implies the notion
of duty." Doing good to others or not injuring them, when

[911b]
Chaptkr42:IUSTICE  853 undertaken as a matter of strict justice, goes no
further  than  to discharge the debt which each man owes every other. In
consequence,  a  difference of opinion arises concerning the adequacy of
justice  to  establish the peace and harmony of a society. Some writers,
Hke Kant, seem to think that if perfect justice obtained, a multitude of
individual  wills  would be perfectly harmonized in free action. Others,
like Aquinas, think justice necessary but insufficient precisely because
it  is  a  matter  of  duty and debt. "Peace," he v/rites, "is the wor]^
ofjustice  indirectly,  in  so  far  as justice removes the obstacles to
peace; but it is the worl^ of charity directly, since charity, according
to its very nature, causes peace; for love is a unitive forcer The bonds
of  love  and  friendship  unite  men where justice merely governs their
interaction.  What  men do for one another out of the generosity of love
far  exceeds  the commands of justice. That is why mercy and charity are
called upon to quality justice or even to set it aside. "Earthly power,"
Portia  declares in the Merchant of Venice, "doth then show likest God's
when  mercy seasons justice." The precept "to render unto others what is
their  due" is read in a different hght when the other aspect of justice
is  considered.  W^hen  the  just is conceived as the fair, the fairness
which  is  due  ourselves  or  others applies, not to benefit and injury
generally,  but  to  the  exchange and distribution of goods or burdens.
What  is  the  principle  of  a  fair  exchange or a fair distribution.?
Aristotle's  answer  to  this  question  is in terms of equality. In the
transactions  of  commerce,  fairness  seems  to require the exchange of
things equivalent in value. The rule of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth,  is  another  expression  of  the  principle  of  equaUty  as the
criterion of a fair penalty or a just compensation. If honors or rewards
are to be distributed, equals should in fairness be treated equally, and
those who are unequal in merit should receive unequal shares. For all to
share  alike is not a just distribution of deserts if all do not deserve
aUke.  "Awards  should  be  'according to merit,' " Aristotle writes. He
claims  that  "all men agree" with this, "though they do not all specify
the same sort of merit, but democrats identify it with

[912a]
854  THE GREAT IDEAS the status of freeman, supporters of oligarchy with
wealth   or  with  noble  birth,  and  supporters  of  aristocracy  with
excellence."  The  unequal treatment of unequals, however, still derives
its fairness from the principle of equality, for there is an equivalence
of  ratios  in  the  proportion of giving more to the more deserving and
less  to the less. Aristotle employs the distinction between these modes
of  equality—arithmetic  and  geometric,  or  simple  and  proportional,
equality  to  define  the  difference  between  fairness in exchange and
fairness  in  distribution.  The  one  is  the  type of justice which is
traditionally  called  "commutative,"  "corrective,"  or "remedial," the
other "distributive." The type of justice "which plays a rectifying part
in transactions between man and man," Aristotle further divides into two
kinds.  "Of  transactions,"  he  writes, "(i) some are voluntary and (2)
others  involuntary—voluntary  such transactions as sale, purchase, loan
for consumption, pledging, loan for use, depositing, letting . . . while
of  the  involuntary  (a) some are clandestine, such as theft, adultery,
poisoning,   procuring,   enticement  of  slaves,  assassination,  false
witness,  and  (b)  others  are  violent, such as assault, imprisonment,
murder,  robbery  with  violence, mutilation, abuse, insult." The sphere
which  Aristotle  assigns  to  commutative  or  corrective  justice thus
appears  to cover both criminal acts and civil injuries. But, as applied
to  civil  injuries,  the  principle  of  fairness  in  exchange usually
involves  a  payment  for damages, restitution, or compensation in kind;
whereas  the  principle  of  commutative  justice as applied to criminal
wrongdoing  usually calls for a punishment somehow equalized in severity
to  the  gravity  of  the offense. This last is the principle of the lex
talionis—an  eye  for an eye, a life for a life. The problems of justice
which  It raises are considered in the chapter on Punishment. Justice is
sometimes  divided  into  economic and poHtical according as, on the one
hand,  fairness  or  equalization  concerns  the  kind  of  goods  which
originate  with  the  expenditure of labor, or as, on the other hand, it
involves  the  status  of men in the state. The difference between these
two modes of justice seems to be largely

[912b]
dependent upon the kind of transaction to which the principle of justice
is  applied.  The  forms  of  justice—  the  two  modes  of  equality or
fairness—appear  to  remain  the  same. The special problems of economic
justice  are more fully examined in the chapters on Labor and Wealth, as
the  special problems of political justice are treated in greater detail
in  all the chapters dealing with the state, government, and the several
forms of government. Here we I shall consider only the generalities, and
especially  those  which touch the main issues in the theory of justice.
Though  Karl  Marx  does  not  engage  in  the  controversy over natural
justice,  he seems to take the side which looks upon justice as a uni- '
versal  standard  that  does not derive from, but rather measures, human
institutions.  Something  like  'from  each according to his ability, to
each  according  to his needs'— or, in another variant of the maxim, 'to
each  according  to  his  deserts'—seems to be for Marx the maxim of a '
just  economy, stated without argument as if a principle self-evident in
the  very  nature  of  the  case.  So,  too, in his consideration of the
exploitation  of labor in its various historic forms— ' chattel slavery,
feudal  serfdom  or  agrarian  peonage, and what he calls "wage slavery"
under industrial capitalism—Marx assumes that a clear and unquestionable
principle  of  justice  is being violated when the goods produced by the
labor  of  one man enrich another dispropor- ' tionately to that other's
contribution  or desert. Such basic words in Capital zs "expropriation,'
"exploitation,"  and  "unearned increment" seem never to be simply terms
of  description,  but  of evaluation. Each implies a specific injustice.
The  labor  theory  of  value, the origin of which he attributes to Adam
Smith,  Marx  conceives  as solving a problem in justice which Aristotle
stated  but  did  not  solve.  He  refers  to the chapter in the book on
justice  in  Aristotle's Ethics, in which Aristotle discusses money as a
medium  to facilitate the exchange of commodities. Money permits so many
units  of one commodity to be equated with so many units of another. But
the  problem  is  how to determine equivalents in the exchange of unlike
things,  apparently  incommensurable  in  value.  How can the value of a
house be commensurated with the

[913a]
value  of  a  bed,  so that an equality in value can be set up between a
house   and   a  certain  number  of  beds?  Abstracting  entirely  from
considerations  of  supply  and  demand,  the  determination  ftf a just
exchange  or a fair price requires an equation of comparable quantities.
Aristotle tells us, Marx points out, why he found the problem insoluble.
"It  was  the  absence  of  any  concept  of  value.  What is that equal
something,  that  common  substance,  which  admits of the value of beds
being  expressed by a house ? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says
Aristotle.  And  why not.f^ Compared with beds, the house does represent
something  equal  to  them,  in  so  far as it represents what is really
equal,  both  in  the beds and the house. And that is—human labor. . . .
The  brilliancy  of  Aristotle's  genius is shown by this alone, that he
discovered,  in the expression of the value of ' commodities, a relation
of  equality.  The  peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived
alone prevented him from discovering what, 'in truth,' was at the bottom
of  this  equality."  We  cannot  help noting the character of the labor
theory of value as an analysis not only of justice in exchange, but also
of  just  compensation  to  labor for its productivity. The principle of
justice  here  employed  seems  to  be  the  same as that underlying the
mediaeval  condemnation  of interest as unjust or usurious, or the later
effort  to  discriminate  between  just  and  unjust interest rates. The
principle   even  seems  to  be  implicitly  involved  in  Adam  Smith's
distinction  between  real  or  natural price and the market price which
fluctuates  with  variations  in  supply  and  demand. When the economic
problem is one of distribution rather than exchange, another standard of
fairness—  the  proportional  equality  of  distributive justice—becomes
relevant.  The  assumption  of  a  primitive possession of all things in
common,  especially  land  and  its resources, is the background against
which   such  thinkers  as  Aquinas  and  Hobbes,  Locke  and  Rousseau,
Montesquieu  and  Hegel, Adam Smith and Karl Marx consider the origin or
justification  of  private  property.  Insofar as the question is one of
justification,  rather  than  of actual historic origin, the division of
common  holdings  into  privately  held shares is a matter of justice in
distribution. In the opinion of many, a just

[913b]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  855 distribution would recognize that labor alone
entitles  a man to claim possession of the raw materials improved by his
work  and  of  the finished products of that work. The other face of the
problem  assumes  an existing inequitable distribution. It is then asked
how  this  can be rectified by some method of redistributing wealth more
justly;  or  it is proposed that the whole system of private property be
reformed   in  the  direction  of  public  ownership  of  the  means  of
production,  as the basis for a just distribution of the fruits of human
proThe  connection  which  has  become  evident between justice and both
liberty  and  equality does not imply that these three basic notions are
simply  coordinate  with one another. On the contrary, equality seems to
be  the  root  of  justice,  at  least  insofar as it is identified with
fairness  in  exchange  or distribution; and justice in turn seems to be
the  foundation,  not  the  consequence  of liberty. The condemnation of
slavery confirms this observation. If slavery were not unjust, the slave
would  have  no  right  to be free. The injustice of treating a man as a
chattel  ultimately  rests on the equality between him and his master as
human  beings.  His  right  to  the same liberty which his master enjoys
stems  from  that  equaUty.  The  justice  of equal treatment for equals
recognizes  that  right and sets him free. Aristotle's theory of natural
slavery is based on a supposition of natural inequality which is thought
to  justify  the  enslavement  of  some  men  and the freedom of others.
Whenever  slavery  is  justified  or  a  criminal  is justly imprisoned,
neither  the  slave  nor  the  criminal  is  regarded as deprived of any
liberty  to  which  he  It  would seem to follow that if a man is justly
treated,  he  has  all  the fiberty which he deserves. From the opposite
angle.  Mill argues that a man is entitled to all the Uberty that he can
use  justly,  that is, use without injuring his fellow man or the common
good.  More  liberty than this would be license. When one man encroaches
on  the  rights  of  others, or inflicts on them "any loss or damage not
justified  by  his own rights," he is overstepping the bounds of liberty
and is, according to Mill, a fit object "of

[914a]
856  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  moral reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral
retribution  and  punishment."  The  various  relations  of  liberty  to
justice,  and  of both to law, are considered in the chapters on Liberty
and  Law. All the writers who make the distinction between government by
law  and  government  by  men fundamental in their political theory also
plainly  express  a preference for the former on grounds both of justice
and  liberty.  Absolute  government, which violates the equality of men,
unjustly  subjects  them,  even when it does not through tyranny enslave
them.  The  benevolence of the despot ruling for the common good has one
aspect  of  justice,  but  there  are other aspects of political justice
which  can  be achieved, as Mill points out, only if "despotism consents
not  to be despotism . . . and allows the general business of government
to  go  on  as  if  the  people really governed themselves." The greater
justice of constitutional government consists in its granting to men who
deserve  the  equal  freedom  of  equals,  the equahty of citizenship—an
equality  under  the  law which levels those citizens who happen to hold
public office with those in private life. The major controversy over the
several  forms  of  constitutional  government turns on a third point of
justice.  The  defenders  of  democracy  and  ohgarchy each contend that
equalities  or  inequalities  in  birth or wealth justify a broader or a
narrower  franchise. It is Mill again who insists that nothing less than
universal  suffrage provides a just distribution of the political status
of  citizenship,  and  that "it is a personal injustice to withhold from
anyone,  unless  for  the  prevention  of  greater  evils,  the ordinary
privilege  of  having  his  voice reckoned in the disposal of affairs in
which  he has the same interest as other people." Of the three points of
justice  which  seem  to  be  involved  in  the  comparison  of forms of
government,  only  the  first (concerned with whether political power is
exercised  for  the common good or the ruler's private interests) is not
recognizable  as  a  matter  of  distributive justice. Yet even here the
requirement that the ruler should treat the ruled as ends rather than as
means  derives  from a fundamental equality between ruler and ruled. The
injustice of tyranny lies in a violation of this equality.

[914b]
One  meaning  of  justice remains to be considered. It is related to all
the  foregoing considerations of economic and political justice, of just
constitutions,  just  laws, and just acts. It is that meaning of justice
in  which  a man is saiel to be just— to possess a just will, to be just
in  character,  to have the virtue of justice. Here difference in theory
reflects  the  difference  between those morahsts for whom virtue is the
basic  conception,  and those who, like Kant, emphasize duty or who, Hke
Mill,  reduce  the propensity for justice to a moral sentiment. But even
among  those who treat justice as a virtue, there seems to be a profound
difference in analysis. For Aristotle, the virtue of justice, like other
moral  virtues,  is  a  habit  of  conduct.  It differs from courage and
temperance  in  that it is a habit of action, not of the passions. It is
not  a  rationally  moderated  tendency  of  the emotions with regard to
things  pleasant and painful. It is that settled inclination of the will
"in  virtue  of  which  the just man is said to be a doer, by choice, of
that  which  is just, and one who will distribute either between himself
and  another  or  between  two  others not so as to give more of what is
desirable  to himself and less to his neighbor (and conversely with what
is  harmful),  but  so  as  to  give  what  is  equal in accordance with
proportion."  Another  difference  between  justice  and the other moral
virtues  is  that  courageous  and  temperate acts are performed only by
courageous and temperate men, whereas an act which is outwardly just can
be  done  by an unjust man as well as by a just one. Fair dealing in the
exchange  or distribution of goods, determined by objective relations of
equality,  is the substance of justice as a special virtue; but there is
in  addition  what  Aristotle  calls  "general"  as opposed to "special"
justice.  Aristotle  calls  the  general  virtue  of  justice  "complete
virtue,"  because  "he who possesses it can exercise his virtue not only
in  himself  but  towards  his neighbor also." It embraces all the moral
virtues  insofar  as  their  acts  are  directed  to the good of others.
"Justice  in  this  sense," he goes on to say, "is not a part of virtue,
but   virtue   entire";   whereas   special   justice—  the  justice  of
distributions and exchanges— is merely a part of moral virtue,

[915a]
merely  one particular virtue. Yet special justice, no less than general
justice, is a social virtue. The difference between the way each directs
actions  toward  the  good  of  others  seems  to be like the difference
between  the  lawful  and the fair, or the difference between the common
good  of  society  as  a  whole  and  the good of other individuals. The
thoroughly  social  conception  of  justice  in  Aristotle may have some
parallel  in  the  meaning  of  justice  in  Plato's  Gorgias (where the
question  is  whether  it is better to suffer than to do injustice), but
the  definition  of justice as a virtue in the Republic does not express
or develop the social reference. In the state as in the soul, justice is
a  fitting disposition or harmonious order—of the several classes of men
in  the state, of the several virtues in the soul. The just state is not
described  as  acting  justly  toward  other states, nor is the just man
pictured  as  a  doer  of  good deeds. Rather the picture of the soul in
which  justice resides is one of interior peace or spiritual health— the
well-being of happiness. "Justice," Socrates declares, is concerned "not
with  the  outward  man, but with the inward, which is the true self and
concernment  of  man:  for  the  just  man  does  not permit the several
elements  within  him to interfere with one OUTLINE OF TOPICS 1. Diverse
conceptions  of  justice I a. Justice as the interest of the stronger or
conformity  to the will of the sovereign lb. Justice as harmony or right
order  in  the  soul:  original  justice  ir.  Justice as a moral virtue
directing  activity  in  relation  to  others  and to the community: the
distinction  between  the  just  man and the just act id. Justice as the
whole  of virtue and as a particular virtue: the distinction between the
lawful  and  the  fair  le. Justice as an act of will or duty fulfilling
obligations  to  the  common  good:  the harmonious action of individual
wills  under a universal law of freedom if. Justice as a custom or moral
sentiment based on considerations of utility 2. The precepts of justice:
doing  good, harming no one, rendering to each his owfi, treating equals
equally  3.  The  duties of justice compared with the generosity of love
and  friendship  4. The comparison of justice and expediency: the choice
between  doing  and  suffering  injustice;  the  relation  of justice to
happiness

[915b]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  857  another,  or  any  of them to do the work of
others—he sets in order his own inner Ufe, and is his own master and his
own  law, and at peace with himself." His is "one entirely temperate and
perfectly  adjusted  nature." This conception of justice bears a certain
resemblance   to  what  the  Christian  theologians  mean  by  "original
justice."  The  perfect  disposition  of  Adam's  soul  in  a  state  of
supernatural grace consisted, according to Aquinas, in "his reason being
subject to God, the lower powers to reason, and the body to the soul the
first subjection being the cause of both the second and the third, since
while  reason  was  subject to God, the lower powers remained subject to
reason."  The  justice of man's obedience to God seems to be inseparable
from the injustice internal to his own members. The way in which justice
is discussed in the Gorgias may similarly be inseparable from the way it
is  defined  in  the Republic. Certainly Callicles will never understand
why  it  is  always  better  to  suffer  injustice than to do it, unless
Socrates  succeeds  in  explaining  to  him  that the man who is wronged
suffers  injury  in  body  or in external things, while the man who does
wrong  injures  his  own  soul  by  destroying what, to Socrates, is its
greatest  good— that equable temper from which all fitting actions flow.
PAGE 859 860 86] 862

[916a]
858 THE GRR\T IDEAS vate and public rights: their correlative duties 6e.
Justice and natural rights as the source of civil liberty (2) Profit and
unearned  increment Sd. Justice and the use of money: usury and interest
rates subject or citizen 10. Justice and law standards and vengeance

[916b]
PAGE  5.  Justice  and equality: the kinds of justice in relation to the
measure and modes of equality and inequality 862 6. Justice and liberty:
the  theory  of  human  rights  863 6b. The relation between natural and
positive  rights,  innate and acquired rights, pri6c. The inalienability
of  natural  rights:  their  violation  by  tyranny and despotism 864 7.
Domestic  justice:  the  problems of right and duty in the family 865 8.
Economic  justice: justice in production, distribution, and exchange 866
8^.  Fair  wages and prices: the just exchange of goods and services 867
8f.  Justice in the organization of production 868 9. Political justice:
justice  in  government  869  ga.  The  natural  and the conventional in
political  justice:  natural law and the general will gb. Justice as the
moral principle of political organization: the bond of men in states gc.
The  criteria  of  justice  in  various  forms of government and diverse
constitutions  870  gd.  The relation of ruler and ruled: the justice of
the  prince or statesman and of the ge. The just distribution of honors,
ranks,  offices, suffrage 871 gf. Justice between states: the problem of
right  and might in the making of war and peace 872 gg. The tempering of
political  justice by clemency: amnesty, asylum, and pardon 873 10^. The
measure of justice in laws made by the state: natural and constitutional
10^.  The  legality  of unjust laws: the extent of obedience required of
the  just  man  in the unjust society 874 IOC. The justice of punishment
for unjust acts: the distinction between retribution lod. The correction
of  legal justice: equity in the application of human law 875 11. Divine
justice:  the  relation  of  God or the gods to man 876 11 a. The divine
government  of  man: the justice and mercy of God or the gods 11^. Man's
debt to God or the gods: the religious acts of piety and worship 877

[917a]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the
numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are the volume and page numbers of the
passages  referred  to.  For example, in 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [265-283]
12d, the number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the number 12d
indicates  that  the  passage is in section d of page 12. Page Sections:
When the text is printed in one column, the letters a and b refer to the
upperand    lower    halvesof    the    page.    Forexample,in53   James
:Pi;yr/io/o^j',116a-119b,  the  passage begins in the upper half of page
116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is prmted in
two  columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of
the  lefthand  sideof the page, thelettersc and d to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  right-hand  sideof  the  page. For example, in 7 Plato:
Symposium,  163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-
hand  side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side
of  page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a
work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included in the
reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are given in certain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d.  Bible References: The references are to
book,  chapter, and verse. When the King James and Douay versions differ
in  title  of  books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated by a (£>),
follows;  e.g..  Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D) // Esdras, 7:46.
Symbols:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's attention to one or
more  especially relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies
that  the  topic is discussed intermittently rather than continuously in
the  work  or  passage  cited. For additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1.
Diverse  conceptions  of  justice  la.  Justice  as  the interest of the
stronger  or  conformity  to  the  will  of  the  sovereign 5 Sophocles:
Antigone   [631-765]   136c-137d   /   Ajax  [1047-1393]  152a-155a,c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  504c508a,c  7  Plato: Gorgias,
271b-275d / Republic, bk i-ii, 300b-315c / Laws, bk iv, 681d-682c; bk X,
760c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 6
[1255*3-20]
448c-d; bk hi, ch 13 [1283^23-26] 481d; bk VI, CH 3
[i3i8''i-5] 521d-522a; bk
vii, ch 2
[1324^22-41] 528d-529a
14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  2c-d  / Camillus, 108b-c / Alexander, 566a-b 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk xix, ch 21 524a525a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  86b;  91a-b;  part  II, 99b; 101a-102c; 103a; 124d-125a; 130c;
132a;  140b;  149b-c; 157b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 281a-282a; 519c-520b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
291-338 225a-233a; 878 345a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 13

[917b]
859  28a-b;  ch  hi  28d-29d; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch xvi 65d-70c
passim  /  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect 5 105a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  333c-d;  347b-d;  353c355d  passim;  361c-362a  / Political
Economy  368d-369b  / Social Contract, bk i, 388d-389a; 393b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 219 72d-73a; par 258, 81c-82d [fni];
additions, 155 142a-b / Philosophy of History, intro, 171c-172b; part i,
207b-c;  part  ii,  277d278a;  part  hi,  299a-c; part iv, 327d-330b esp
328c-d,  330b;  344a-c  47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,171-188] 272a-b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic^,  292a-297a  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
428b-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 547a-549d esp 547c; epilogue
i,  647b-649d  54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 780b-d \h.
Justice as harmony or right order in the soul: original justice 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  99d-100c  / Gorgias, 282c285a esp 282c-283a / Republic, bk i,
309b310b;  BK  IV,  346a-355a; bk ix, 425c-427b / Statesman, 586d-589c /
Laws, bk iv, 681 b-d; BK IX, 748b-c

[918a]
860  Diverse  conceptions  of  justice,  lb. Justice as harmony or right
order  in  the soul: original (1 justice,) 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch
ii
[1138^5-13]
387a,c 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi,
ch  2,  107a-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiv, ch io-ii 385b-387a; ch
19  391c-392a; ch 26, 395d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 9596
506b-513c;  q  100 520d-522b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq
81-83  162d-174b;  q 85, a i, ans 178b-179b; Q 91, A 6, ANS 212c-213c; q
100, a 2, rep 2 252b-253a; q 113, a i, ans and rep i 360d361d 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [288-294]  158b;  BK XII [63-110] 320b-321b Ic.
Justice  as  a moral virtue directing activity in relation to others and
to  the community: the distinction between the just man and the just act
7  Plato: Crito, 216d-219a,c / Republic, bk iv 342a-356a esp 348d-350a 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 15
[106*2-8]
149d; bk III, CH i
[116^11-13]
163a; bk iv, ch 2 [121^24-30] 169d; bk vi, ch 5 [143*15-19] 196c-d; ch 7
[145^34-146*3] 199d 9 Aristotle : Ethics, bk v, ch i 1130*13] 377b-c; ch
5
[1133^16-23] 381b-c;
[1133^30-1134*15] 381c-d; ch 8-9 383a-385c;
bk VI, ch 12 [1144*11-20] 393d; bk x, ch 8
[1178*8-22]
432d / Politics, bk hi, ch 12
[1282^15-22] 480c; CH
13
[1283*37-40] 481c;
bk VII, CH 2
[1324^32-40]
528d-529a   /   Rhetoric,   bk   i,  ch  6  [1362^10-28]  603b-c;  ch  9
[1366*33-1367*22]  608d-609d  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk hi, sect 4
260b261a;  sect 6 261a-c; bk iv, sect id 264c; bk V, sect 6 269b-d; sect
34  273c; bk vi, sect 2 274a; sect 22-23 276a-b; sect 26 276b-c; bk vii,
SECT44  282b-c;  bk viii, sect 32 287d-288a; bk ix, sect i 291a-c; bk x,
sect  ii  298b-c; bk xi, sect 10 303b-c 14 Plutarch: Aristides, 265c-d /
Agesilaus,   491a-b   /   Cato  the  Younger;  636d-637c  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13-15  16c-17b/  City  ofGod,  bk  ii, ch 21
161b-162d; BK xix, CH 21 524a-525a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  21,  a  i 124b-125b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 59, aa
4-5  48c-49d; q 60, aa 2-3 50d-52b; q 99, a 5, rep I 249a-250a; q 100, a
2,  rep  2  252b253a;  a  3,  rep  3  253a-d; a 12 264d-265d; q 113, A I
360d-361d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  92c-93c;  96a-b  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part ii, 272a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
214c-216d

[918b]
y  ^ THE GREAT IDEAS I \cto2 Id. Justice as the whole of virtue and as a
particular  virtue:  the  distinction  between the lawful and the fair 7
Plato:  Meno,  178c-179a  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  349a-350a / Laws, bk i,
642d-643b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 13
[150*1-15]
204c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[i 129*3 i]-ch 2
[1131*9]
376d-378c / Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[1283*37-40]
481c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1366*33-1367*22] 608d-609d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect  10 303 b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55,  A  4,  rep 4 28c-29d; q 57, a 3, rep 2
37b-38a;  Q  60,  A  3  51c-52b;  q  66,  a  4 78c-79b; q 99, A 5, rep i
249a-250a;  q 100, a 2, rep 2 252b253a; a 12, ans 264d-265d; q 113, a i,
ans  and  REP  2 360d-361d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 301d-302b 42 Kant: Pref
Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics 368c-d; 377a-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
468b-469b  le.  Justice as an act of will or duty fulfilling obligations
to  the  common  good: the harmonious action of individual wills under a
universal  law  of  freedom  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114d-115a  / Pref
Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 366d-367a; 368b369a; 371b-372a / Intro.
Metaphysic  ofMorals  383a-394a,c  esp  383a-d, 386b-387a,c, 389a390a,c,
391a-c, 392d-393c / Science of Right, 397a-402a,c esp 397c-399c; 435a-b;
438d-439a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 29 19a-b; part hi,
par  219  72d-73a; par 261 83a-d; par 278 92c-93a; additions, 177 147d /
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 199b-c; PART I, 207b-c; PART II, 272a-d;
part  iv,  333c-d;  363c-d;  365b-c  53 James: Psychology, 886b-888a If.
Justice  as  a  custom  or  moral  sentiment  based on considerations of
utility 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 310c-315c / Theaetetus, 528b-c; 531a-b
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 46b-47c; 281a-283c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 309 228b;
312  229a  35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect 2 104a-b 43
Mill:  Liberty, 300d-301a / Utilitarianism 464d-476a,c esp 476a,c 2. The
precepts  of  justice: doing good, harming no one, rendering to each his
own, treating equals equally Old Testament: Exodus, 20:1-17; 21:1-23:9 /
Leviticus,   19:9-18,32-37  /  Deuteronomy,  5:621;  15:7-18;  16:18-20;
19:11-21;  20:1012;  21:15-17; 22:1-4,13-29; 23:15-16,24-25; 24:6,10-22;
25:1-3,13-16  /  /  Kings,  3:16-28 — (D) III Kings, 3:16-28 / Proverbs,
3:27-30;

[919a]
2/0  3  Chapter  42:  20:22;  24:23-25,29;  25:21  / Isaiah, 1:10-20 esp
1:16-17;  56:1-2—  (D)  Isaias,  1:10-20 esp 1:16-17; 56:1-2 / Jeraniah,
5:21-29  esp  5:26-28—  (D)  Jeremias,  5:21-29  esp  5:26-28 / Ezekjel,
45:9-11  — (D) Ezechiel, 45:9-11 / Hosea, 4:1-3— (D) Osee, 4:1-3 / Amos,
5:7-27  /  Mtcah,  6:8—  (D)  Micheas,  6:8  /  Zechariah,  7:8-14—  (D)
Zacharias,  7:8-14  /  Malachi,  2:9—  (D) Malachias, 2:9 New Testament:
Matthew,  5:38-48;  19:16-24  /  L«/(dS  6:27-38;  iS-.iS-iy  /  Romans,
12:17-21;  15:1-2  /  //  Corinthians,  8:9-15  5  Aeschylus : Suppliant
Maidens  [338-394]  5a-d  / Eumenides [544-565] 87a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the  King [863-910] 107b-c / Ajax [1047-1421] 152a-155a,c iv5 Euripides:
Suppliants [286-380] 260d-261c;
[513-584] 262d-263c / Helen [865-1031] 306c308a / Hecuba [239-331] 354d-355c / Phoenician Maidens [528-585] 382c-383a
5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [676-718]  463a-c / Wasps [725-726] 516d 6
Herodotus:  History, bk vi, 201d-202c 7 Plato: Crito, 216a-d / Republic,
bk i, 297b300b; BK IV, 349a-350a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^19-24]
377a; ch 5
[ii33^3o-ii34''i4] 381c-d; en
11
[1138*4-13]
386b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1366*33-^11] 608d-609a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16, 158c-d; CH 22 167d-170a; bk iv,
ch  i, 220c-223d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; BK IV,
SECT  10 264c; bk V, SECT 6 269b-d; BK vii, SECT 44 282b-c 20 AquixMas :
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, A 2 214d-215a,c; q 94, a 2 221d-223a;
q 99, A 4 248a-d; qq 104-105 304a-321a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida,
bk ii, stanza 50 28a / Reeve's Tale 225a-232a esp
[4311-4322]
231b-232a  / Tale of Melibeus, par 30-31, 413b-414a 23Hobbes: Leviathan,
part i, 86d-87b; 91b; part II, 155b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc
ii [552-558] 46a / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii [163188] 115b-c /
Macbeth, act i, sc vii
[1-28]
289b-c  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 145d; PART II, 332d-333b 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 878-879 345a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect
5-6  26a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv, 165b-166a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  257a-263a  '-'  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk i, Ic-d 42
Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 264b
[fni]
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 375d-376b / Science of Right,
400b,d-401b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a / Representative Government,
414a-b / Utilitarianism, 464d476a,c passim

[919b]
JUSTICE 861 46 1 1 EC el: Philosophy of Right, part 1, par 36 21b-c; par
49  24c-25a; par 85 35a-b; additions, 29 121c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  v,  202d;  214c216d;  bk  viii,  304c-305a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  hi,  73a;  bk  v, 123c-127b; bk vi, 166c-167a; 168c-d 53
James:  Psychology, 211a-b; 886b-888a 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 686a-b
3.  The  duties  of  justice  compared  with  the generosity of love and
friendship  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  23:4-5  /  Leviticus,  19:17-18  /
Deuteronomy,  13:6-11;  21:18-21  /  Judges, 11:28-40 / Proverbs, 20:22;
24:29;  25:21  /  Zechariah,  13:3—  (D)  Zacharias, 13:3 New Testament:
Matthew,  5:38-48 / Lul^e, 6:27-38 / Rofnans, 12:17-21 / I Peter, 3:8-18
6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 83d-84a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch i
[116*31-39]
162d;  CH2  [118*1-7]  164d  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 6 373d-374b
passim; bk viii, ch i [1155*22-28] 406d; ch 7
[1158^12-1159*13] 410c-411a; ch 9 411d-412c;
CH II 413b-d; ch 12 [1162*29-33] 414d;cH 13
[1162^17-1163*23] 415b-d; bk ix, ch 2 417c418b; ch 6 420c-421a esp [1167^5-15] 420d421a
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[333-387]  176a-177b  14  Plutarch:  Marcus Cato, 278d-279c / Agesilaus,
482b-c;  486c / Marcus Brutus, 816c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 23, A 5, REP 3 135d-137d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
66,  A 4, REP I 78c-79b; q 114, a 4 373a-d; part ii-ii, q 23, A 3, REP I
485a-d;  q 29, a 3 531d532c; Q 31, A I, REP 3 536d-537c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,   purgatory,  xv  [85114]  76b-c  22  Chaucer:  FranJ^in's  Tale
[11,830-928]   364b366a   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  86a-d;  467b-470a  29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  71b-c;  108c-109b; 177a-b; part ii,
332d-333b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 24b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
27b-30a  38  Rousseau:  Political Economy, 373a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  233c  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 259a / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  ofEthics,  368c-d; 371b'372a; 375d-376b 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  466c-467a;  468b-469b;  474b-c  44  B0SWEL.1.: Johnson,
392b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 23 120d 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk vi, 271d; bk XII, 548d-549c; epilogue i, 655b-c

[920a]
4.  The  comparison  of justice and expediency: the choice between doing
and  suflFering  injustice;  the  relation  of  justice to happiness Old
Testament:   Leviticus,   19:17-18   /  Proverbs^  20:22;  24:29;  25:21
Apocrypha: Susanna— (D) OT, Daniel, 13 New Testament: Matthew, 5:38-48 /
Lu\e, 6:27-38 / Romans, i2.'.iy-2.i / I Corinthians, 4:10-14; 6:1-11 / I
Peter, 2:19-21; 3:8-18 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[944-1093]
50b-51d  /  Eumenides  [490-565] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Antigone [631-765]
136c-137d 5 Euripides : Medea 212a-224a,c / A Icestis 231a247a,c / Helen
[998-1031] 307d-308a / Hecuba
[239-331} 354d-355c / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a439d
5 Aristophanes : Clouds
[886-1104]
499b502a  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 105c-d; bk vii, 218a-b; 238c 6
Thucydides  : Peloponnesian War, bk v, 504d508a passim 7 Plato: Apology,
206d / Crito 213a-219a,c / Gorgias, 263d-267c / Republic 295a-441a,c esp
BK  i-ii,  300b-315a,  bk  x, 436c-437c / Laws, bk II, 656d-658b; bk ix,
746a- 747c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 3
[141*15-18]
194b  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  25  [180^2132] 249a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk v, ch 8-9 383a-385c esp CH 9
[1136*10-^14] 384a-d; ch
ii 386b387a,c esp [1138*28-^4] 386d-387a / Politics, BK I, CH 2
[1253*14-15] 446c; BK
V, ch 8
[1308*2-17]
510a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 7
[1364^21-24] 606c; BK
II,  ch  23  [1397*19-22]  645b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 22
127c-128c;  BK  II,  CH 10, 149c-150a; bk hi, ch 18 192a-c; BK IV, ch I,
222c-223d; ch 5 228a-230b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 10 264c;
BK  VII,  sect  36  282b  14  Plutarch:  Themistocles, 96c-d / Camillus,
106b-107a  /  Aristides,  265c-d; 274d-275a / Pyrrhus, 319b-d/ Lysander,
357a-b / Sertorius, 468b-469a / Agesilaus, 490d-491b / Cato the Younger,
636d-637c  /  Dion, 784d-785a / Marcus Brutus, 816c-d 18 Augustine: City
of God, bk xii, ch 3 343d344b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 36 634d635b
22  Chaucer:  Tale ofMelibeus, par 30-31, 413b414a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  86b;  91b-92b;  95d;  PART  II,  140b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
301d-302b; 519a-c 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act hi, sc i
[223-237] 49c / King John, act
ii,  sc  i  [561598]  385c-386a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 37a-b 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 387b

[920b]
d  862  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4/0 5 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 464d-476a,c esp
473c476a,c  44  B0SWEL.1.: Johnson, 261c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  9c-10d;  40b41a; BK HI, 123d-124a; bk v, 216b-d; bk viii, 304d-305a;
bk  xiv,  598d-599a;  epilogue i, 656d-657a 5. Justice and equality: the
kinds  of  justice  in relation to the measure and modes of equality and
inequality 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[528-558]
382c-d  6  Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk v, 505b 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  viii, 411d-413a / Laws, BK VI, 699d-700b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi,
ch 5
[143*15-19]
196c-d; CH 7 [i45''33-i46*3] 199d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 2
[1130^30-34]
378b;  CH3-5 378c-381d; ch 6 [1134*25-^17] 382a-c; ch 9 [1136^15-1137*4]
384d-385a;  bk  VIII, CH 7 [1158^12-33] 410c-d; CH 11 413b-d / Politics,
bk  I,  CH  12-13  453d-455a,c;  bk  ii,  ch 2 [1261*23-^6] 456a-b; ch 7
461d-463c; bk hi, CH 9 477c-478d esp
[1280*8-31] 477c-d; ch
12-13  480c-483a;  ch 16 [1287*10-23] 485c; bk IV, ch 4 [1291^30-1292*7]
491a-b; bk v, ch i
[1301*25-^4] 502b-c; [1301^29-1302*8] 503a-b;
CH 8
[1308*2-17] 510a-b; ch 9
[1310*25-36]
512c; BK VI, CH 2 520d-521b esp [1317*40-^16] 520d, [1318*4-10] 521b; ch
3  521c-522a; bk VII, CH 14 537b-538d esp [1332^13-41] 537b-d / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  12  557b-558a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14
254b-c  14  Plutarch: Poplicola-Solon, 87a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 21, A I, ANs and rep 3 124b-125b; q 65, a 2, rep 3 340b-341b
20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, A 3, ANS 51c-52b; q 64,
a  2  67d-68b;  q  114, A I, ANs 370c-371c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
93b-c;   94b-95c;   PART   II,  156b-157a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk hi, 134b-c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii 25d-28c; ch
VI,  sect  54  36c;  ch  vii,  sect 90-94 44d-46c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  viii,  52a-b;  BK  XI,  71d;  bk  xiii, 96a-b 38 Rousseau :
Inequality, 333a-d; 359c-d ; 360b,
[fni];
361c-362a;  362d-363a,c  /  Social Contract, BK II, 397a-398a; 405b-c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  284d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
617c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 401 b-c; 419c-420a; 431a-432c; 433c-d;
435c-437c  esp  436d  43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15]  lab 43
Articles  of Confederation: iv [17-36] 5b-c 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article iv, sect 2
[519-521]
16a;  amendments,  xiii,  sect  iXIV,  SECT  I  18c;  XV 19b; xix 19d 43
Federalist: number 80, 236a-b

[921a]
5/0   6^   43   Mill:  Representative  Government,  370a-389b  passim  /
Utilitarianism,  460a-461a;  467a-  b;  472d-473a;  474d-476a  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 49 24c-25a; part hi, par 200 67c-68a;
par  209 69d; ADDITIONS, 29 121c; 177 147d / Philosophy of History, part
iv, 362d-363a 50 Marx: Capital, 25a-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  iv,  104b-107a  54 Freud: Group Psychology, 685d-686c / Civilization
and Its Discontents, 787d-788b [fn 3] 6. Justice and liberty: the theory
of  human  rights  5  Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c 5 Sophocles:
Antigone
[441-525]
134d-135c;
[891-943] 138d-139a / Ajax [1047-1421] 152a155a,c
5 Euripides: Suppliants
[513-565]
262d-263b / Bacchantes
[878-911] 347b-c
/ Phoenician Maidens
[1625-1682] 392b-d
/ Orestes
[491604] 399a-400a
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  411d-413a  /  Lau^s, BK IV, 682a-683d 8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 12
[173V31] 238b-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[11 34*^24-^ 17]
382a-c  /  Politics, bk v, ch 9 [1310*25-36] 512c; bk VI, cH 2 520d-521b
esp
[1317*40-^16]
520d/  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 [1368*^7-10] 611d; CH 13 [1373^1-17] 617c-d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c; bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk
vii,  sect  55  283b-c  15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 271b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  15 17a-b / City of God, bk iv, ch 4 190d; bk
xix, ch 21 524a-525a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, A 2,
ANS  221d-223a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part h, 112d-117b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  71b-c;  108c-109b;  177a-b  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  20c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, appendix, viii 447d 35
Locke:  Civil  Government  25a-81d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
la-3a;  BK  VI,  34b-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 356b-358d; 361c-362a /
Political  Economy,  370b-d  /  Social  Contract,  BK  I 387b,d-394d esp
388d-390d,  393b-394d;  BK II, 398b-399a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i,  61b;  bk  ii, 140b; bk IV, 228a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 237c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a; 222b-c / Science of Right, 400b,d-402a;
421c-422d  / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Declaration of Independence: [7-28]
la-b  43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: amendments, i-ix 17a-d; xiii, sect
i-xiv, sect i 18c-d

[921b]
c  Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 863 43 Federalist: number 51, 164a-165a; number
84,   251a-253d   43   Mill:   Liberty   267a-323a,c   esp  271c-273b  /
Utilitarianism , 464d -476a , 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par
44 23c; PART HI, par 2:50 75c; par 261 83a-ci; additions, 81 128d-129a /
Philosophy    of   History,   intro,   199b-c;   part   iv,   345a-   b;
362d-363a;364a-365c  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 292a-297a 50 Marx: Capital,
83d-84a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 780c781a 6a. The
relation  of  natural  rights  to  natural  law  and  natural  justice 5
Sophocles:  Antigone [441-525] 134d-135c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch
13  [1373*^1-17] 617c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4 264a; BK
VII, SECT 55 283b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 21 524a525a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, A I 510b-511b; a 4 512d-513c 20
Aquinas:  Sum?na  Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, a 2 208d-209d; q 94, a 2,
ans  221d-223a; Q 95, A 2 227c-228c; a 4 229b-230c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  86c-87d;  part  ii,  131a-c;  138c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  II  [163-188]  115b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  94d-95b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol 2
435b-436a;  appendix,  viii  447d  32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [888-902]
359a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch ii-ix 25d-54d passim; ch xi, sect
135-137  55d-57b;  ch  xv, sect lyi-ijT. 65a-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  i, Ic-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330a-331b; 333c-d; 342c-347d
39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 61b; bk ii, 140b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  86d-87a 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 392b / Science
of  Right,  397a-b;  400b,d-402a;  421c422d;  429a-c;  430a-432c;  434a;
435a-457b   esp  436c,  437c-d,  447b-450b,  451c-d  43  Declaration  of
Independence:   [1-28]   lab  43  Mill:  Liberty,  272d-273b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, intro, 171c172b 6b. The relation between natural
and  positive  rights,  innate  and  acquired rights, private and public
rights: their correlative duties 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c
5 Sophocles: Antigone
[441-525]
134d-135c;
[891-943] 138d-139a/ Ajax [i047-i42i]152a155a,c

[922a]
864 THE GREAT IDEAS (6. Justice and liberty: the theory of human rights.
6b. The relation between natural andpositive rights, innate and acquired
rights,   private  and  public  rights:  their  correlative  duties.)  5
Euripides: Suppliants
[513-565]
262d-263b / Bacchantes
[878-911] 347b-c
/ Phoenician Maidens
[i 625-1 682] 392b-d
/ Orestes
[491604] 399a-400a
7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 682a-683d 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch
12
[173-7-31] 238b-c
9  Aristotle: EJietoric, bk i, ch 10 [1368^7-10] 611d; CH 13 [1373^1-17]
617c-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 13-15 16c-17b; par 17
17d-18a  /  City  ofGod,  bk  xix,  CH  17  522b-523a  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 100, A I 251b-252a 23 HoBBEs : Leviathan, part
ii,  113c-116c;  131a-c;  136d-137b;  138c; ISla-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
281a-283c;  519a-520b  27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear, act i, sc ii [1-22]
247d-248a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, lOOd 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii
25d-28c  passim;  ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch v, sect 45 34d-35a; ch vi, sect
56-63  36d-38c;  ch  vii, sect 87-89 44a-d; sect 91 45a-c; ch viii, sect
95-99 46c-47c; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi 55b-58b / Human Understanding, bk i,
ch ii, sect 13 107d-108c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-3a; bk
viii,  52a-b;  bk xxvi, 215b-216c; 217b; 221c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
333a-d;  342c-347d;  362d-363a,c  /  Political  Economy, 370b-d / Social
Contract,  bk  i, 393b-c; bk ii, 396d398b; 399b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  82b-83c;  86d-89b  passim;  404a  42  Kant:  hitro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  392b / Science of Right 397a-458a,c esp 401b-402a,c, 410d-415d,
418c-422d, 429a-433c, 435c-436b, 436d 43 Declaration of IndepexNdence:
[1-28]
lab 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 221d-224a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i, par 38 21d; par 40 21d-22c; part hi, par 155 57c; par 210-228 69d-75b
esp  par  210-211  69d-70c,  par  217 72b-c; additions, i 115a-d 6c. The
inalienability  of  natural  rights:  their  violation  by  tyranny  and
despotism   15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  271b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 94, AA 5-6 224d-226b; q 96, a 6 235a-d; q 97
235d-239b

[922b]
6c  to  6e  90a-b;  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 87c-d; 94b-d; part ii,
115a-116a;  142b-c  35 Locke: Toleration, 20d-21a / Civil Government, CH
II,  SECT lo-ii 27b-d; ch hi, sect 16-19 28d-29c; ch iv 29d-30b; ch vii,
sect 87-94 44a-46c; ch ix, sect 131 54d; ch xi, SECT 135-140 55d-58a; ch
xiv,  sect  168  64b-c;  CH XV, sect 171-172 65a-c; ch xviXIX 65d-81d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv,  109a110a  38 RoussEAv : Social
Contract,  bk  i, 388a-c; 389a390d; BK II, 396d-398b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  61b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 33c-34a,c 42 Kant:
Science  ofRight,  401b-402a; 421c-422d; 445c-446a; 451d-452a; 454d-455c
43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43  Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments,  ix  17d 43 Federalist: number 28, 97c; number 84, 251d-252a
43  Mill:  Liberty,  270d;  316b-d  44  BoswEi-i^: Johnson, 363c-364a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 57 26b-27a; par 66 29a-c /
Philosophy  ofHistory,  PART  HI, 310d-311a 6d. Justice as the basis for
the   distinction   between   liberty   and   license   6  Thucydides  :
PeloponnesianWar,  bk  ii,  396c-d  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk hi, 674d-676c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 9 [1310^25-36] 512c; BK VI, ch 4
[1318^33-1319^4] 522b-c;
[1319^27-32] 523b
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 12, 119a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
57b-58d  20  Aquinas:  Su?nma  Theologica,  part  ii-ii, q 183, a 4, ANS
627d-628d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  114c-115b 27 Shakespeare:
Measure for Measure, act i, SC III 177b-d 32 Milton: Sonnets, xii 65a- b
/  Areopagitica  381a-412b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 4-6
25d-26c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; BK VIII, 51a-52c; bk
xi,  69a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b  / Social Contract, bk I,
393b-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 622d-623c; 653a 43 Mill: Liberty,
271c-273b;  302d-323a,c  passim  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  319  105b-106c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 342b-d 6e. Justice
and  natural  rights  as  the  source of civil liberty 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 96, a 4 512d-513c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
138c

[923a]
;  32 Milton: Areopagitica, 381a-382a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv,
sect  21  29d;  CH  VI, SECT 57-63 36d-38c passim; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi,
sect  135-138  55d-57c;  ch  XV,  SECT  171  65a-b  38  Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk i, 393b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 96a-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  114b-d / Science of Right, 398c-399c; 400b,d-402a,c; ^S06.AS2si
/  Judgement,  586a-587a  43  Declaration of Independence: [1-28] lab 43
Federalist: number 44, 144d-145a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  270  84d-89c  passim  /  Philosophy  of History, part IV, 345a-b 54
Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 780c781a 7. Domestic justice:
the  problems  of  right  and  duty in the family Old Testament: Exodus,
20:12;  21:1-11,2627,32  /  Leviticus, 19:20-22; 25:39-55 / Deuteronomy,
5:16;  15:12-18;  21:15-21  /  Proverbs, 28:24; 30:17 / Zechariah, 13:3—
(Z)) Zacharias, 13:3 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 3:2-18; 4:30:7:20-21; 33
:30-3 1 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 3 :2-i 8 ; 4 :35 7:22-23; 33:31-33 New
Testament:  Matthetv,  5:4  /  Mar\,  7:10  /  /  Corinthians,  y  /  II
Corinthians,  12:14  /  Ephesians,  6:1-9  /  Colossians,  3:18-4:1  / /
Timothy, 5:8 / Titus, 2:g~ii / I Peter, 3:1-7 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against
Thebes   [1011-1084]   38b-39a,c   /  Agamemnon  [1372-1673]  66d-69d  5
Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[311-460]
117a-118b,
[1181-1447]
125a127b / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[1-99]
131a132a, [631-765] 136c-137d / Electra [516-633] 160a-161a 5 Euripides:
Medea 212a-224a,c / Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[614-733] 242c-243c /
Orestes [356-724] 397b-401b 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [1321-1452] 504c-506b
/  Birds  [1337-137  1  ] 558d-559b 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 356b-368c /
Lau^s,  BK  IV,  683b-d;  bk  vii, 722b-723d; bk viii, 736d-737a; bk xi,
779b-781c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1134^7-17]
382b-c; ch ii
[1138^5-13]
387a,c; bk viii, CH 9
[1159^35-1 i6o''6]
412a-b; ch 10
[1160*^
23] CH II
[1161^11]
413a-d;  bk ix, ch 2 417c-418b / Politics, bk i, ch 12-13 453d455a,c; bk
hi, ch 6
[i278''37-i279"8] 476b;
bk  VII,  CH  14  [1332^36-41]  537c-d  14  Plutarch:  Fabius,  152b-d /
Coriolanus,  189d-191d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 17 5b-c; bk
II,  par  3-8  9b-10d  /  City  of  God,  bk xix, CH 14-16, 520c-522a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, A I, rep 2 488d-489d; a 2
489d-490c; q 96, A 4 512d-513c

[923b]
Chapter  42: JUSTICE 865 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i ii, q 105,
A  4 318b 321a 22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [4694-4707] 239a / Wife of
Bath's  Prologue  [5697-6404]  258a-269b / Tale of Wfe of Bath 270a-277a
esp
[6619-6627]
273a-b,
[6839-6846] 277a
/ Summoner's Tale
[7563-7582]
289b-290a / Clerl(s Tale 296a-318a / Fran{lins Tale
[11,041-117]
351b-352b / Physician's Tale
[12,006-036] 367b-368a
/  Parson's  Tale,  par  79-80  541a-542a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
109c-lllb;   121a;   155b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  83a-84b;  183c-192d;
410a-422b 26 Shakespeare: Comedy of Errors, act ii, sc i
[6-43] 152a-c; sc
11
[i 12-148] 154c-d /
Titus Andronicus, act v, sc hi
[35-64] 196d-197a
/ Taming of the Shrew 199a-228a,c esp act v, sc ii
[136-180]
227d-228a,c / Romeo and Juliet, act III, sc V
[127-215] 308c-309c
/  Midsummer-Night' s Dream, act i, sc i [1-121] 352a-353c / Merchant of
Venice, act i, sc ii
[24-36]
408c / 1st Henry IV, act ii, sc hi 443b-444b; act hi, sc ii
[1-161] 452d-454c
/ Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i
[234-309]
577a-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc v
[22-91]
37a-d;  act  hi, sc iv [106-135] 55d-56a / Troilus and Cressida, act ii,
sc  ii [16^-188] 115b-c / Othello, act I, sc hi [175-189] 210d-211a; ACT
IV,  sc  III [63-108] 236c-237a / King Lear 244a-283a,c / Cymbeline, act
i,  sc  i  [125-158]  451a-c  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 251b;
261c-262a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  75c  /  New Atlantis,
207c-209d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[452-594]
242a-245a; bk x
[144-156]
277b;
[182-196]
278b;
[867-936]
293b-294b  /  Samson Agonistes [871-902] 358b-359a; [1010-1060] 361b362b
35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch vi 36a-42a; CH VII, sect 82-83 43b-c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i, 29b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 410a-411a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 100b-102a; lOSc-llOc; 126d-127b; 136a-c; 217d-219c;
235b-238d;  283c-d; 310b-313b; 359b-362c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  xxiii,  187d-188c;  bk xxvi, 216a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357a-b;
365a-b  /  Political  Economy,  367a-368c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
82b-86d  passim  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 404d; 418c-422d 43 Mill:
Liberty,  305d-306b;  316d-319d  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  160a-b; 247c-d;
301d302a;  429d-430a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 171
60d-61a; par 174-180 61b-63c / Philosophy of History, part hi, 288c-289b

[924a]
(7.  Domestic justice: the problems of right and duty in the family?) 50
Marx:  Capital, 241a-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 38d-41a; 45b47b;
EPILOGUE I, 654a-662a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, la11a; BK
II,  34d-36b;  bk  xii,  370b-371c; 395a398a 54 Freud : New Introductory
Lectures, 876c 8. Economic justice: justice in production, distribution,
and  exchange  Old Testament: Exodus, 20:15,17 / Leviticus, 19:11,35-36;
i.y.T^^-T,']  I  Deuteronomy,  5:19,21; 24:10-15; 25:13-16; 2.y:i'j / 11
Samuel,  12:16-(D)  // Kings, 12:1-6 / / Kings, 2.1- (D) III Kings, 21 /
//  Kings,  ^  -.20-27-{D)  IV Kings, 5:20-27 / Nehemiah, 5:1-12— (D) //
Esdras,  5:1-12  /  Job,  24  /  Proverbs, 1:1019; 6:30-31; 11:1; 14:31;
16:11;  20:10;  21:67; 22:16,22-23; 23:10-11; 28:8,24; 30 '8-9 / Isaiah,
3:14-15;  10:1-2—  (D)  Isaias,  3:14-15;  10:1-2  /Jeremiah, 17:11— (D)
Jeremias,  17:11  /  EzeJ{iel,  22:12-13,25-29;  45:9-12—  (D) Ezechiel,
22:12-13,25-29; 45:9-12 / Amos, 2:6-7; 5:11-12; 8:1-7 ^^P 8:4-6 / Micah,
6:9-12—  (£>)  Micheas,  6:9-12  /  Zechariah,  5:3 — {D) Zacharias, 5:3
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 5:8,14; 20:25; 26:29; 27:2; 29:19; 34:18-22—
(D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 5:10,16-17; 20:27; 26:28; 27:2; 29:25; 34:21-27
New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:18  / Mar\, 10:19 / Luke, 3:12-13; 18:20 /
Acts,  2:44-47;  4-315:11  /  Romans,  13:9  /  /  Corinthians,  6:10  /
Ephesians, 4:28 / // Thessalonians, 3:10 5 Euripides: Helen
[903-908]
306d-307a  / Phoenician Maidens [528-567] 382c-d 5 Aristophanes: P/w/;/^
629a-642d  esp  [76-1  11] 630a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 87a-b; bk
vi,  201d-202c;  bk  vii,  245b  7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 297a-c; bk ii,
316a319b;  bk  iii-iv, 340c-343a; bk v, 364c-365d / Laws, bk V 686d-697a
passim; bk viii, 738c-743a / Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 2
[ii30^i3-''i7]
377c-378a; bk viii, ch 13-14 414d-416d passim / Politics, BK I, CH 3-1 1
446d-453d  passim;  bk  II,  CH  5 458a-460a; ch 7 461d-463c; bk v, CH I
[1301^25-^2]   502b-c  /  Athenian  Constitution,  CH  12  557b-558a  12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  viii,  sect  33 288a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-37b  /  Solon,  68d70c  /  Poplicola-Solon,  87a  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 21, a I 124b-125b; q 98, a i, rep 3 516d-517c 21
Dante:   Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  15a-16b  passim  22  Chaucer:  Tale
ofMelibeus, par 49-51 422a424a

[924b]
866 THE GREAT IDEAS Sto Sa 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 93b-c; part ii,
124d-126a;  156c-157a  24  Rabelais:  Gargatitua  and Pantagruel, bk hi,
133b-134d  25  Montaigne : Essays, 42a-b 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act
i,  sc  i  351a354d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 86b-c 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters  ,  91a-94a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a
passim  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 154b-155b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk v, 19a-d; 23a-25a; 29c; bk xiii 96a-102a,c; bk xviii, 128b; BK
XX,  146b-d;  bk  xxiii,  199b-200a,c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348b;
354a-355b;  360b-361a;  365b-366a  /  Political  Economy,  377b-385a,c /
Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  415b417c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
20b-23b  passim,  esp 21a-c; 27b-37b esp 33c; bk v, 309a-311c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  22c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86d-87c 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 443b-d; 446a-b 43 Constitution of the U.S. : article
i, sect 2
[17-29] lib; SECT 9 [273-275] 13d; article
VI [578-582] 16d; AMENDMENTS, V [645-648] 17c; VII 17d; xiv, sect i
[748-750]
18c; SECT 4 19a; xvi 19b 43 Federalist: number 73, 218d-219b; number 79,
233c-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  322c-d / Representative Government, 335a-b;
366c-367a  /  Utilitarianism,  470c-471b passim; 472d-473c 44 BoswEi.1.:
Johnson,  125b-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 49 24c-25a;
part hi, par 241 76d-77a; additions, 29 121c; 148 140c-d / Philosophy of
History,  PART  IV,  353b-c  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 292a-297a 50 Marx:
Capital la-383d esp 19c-25d, 37d38b [fn 5], 42b-47a, 79a-84a,c, 89a-94a,
112c113c, 150a-151a,c, 161b-162d, 261d-262a, 264a-275c, 280c-286a, 327b,
354b-c,  377c378d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  415a434d  esp
420b-423a, 425d-426d, 428d-429c, 434c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
197b-c; 211a-213a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-166a 54
Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787  d788a 8a. Private and
public  property: the just distribution of economic goods Old Testament:
Exodus,  20:15,17  / Leviticus^ 19:11 / Deuteronomy, 5:19,21; 27:17 / //
Samuel, 12:1-6— (D) II Kings, 12:1-6 / / Kings, 21 — (D) /// Kings, 21 /
Job, 24 / Proverbs, 6:30-

[925a]
Sfl  to  U  -9 / Jeremiah, 21:6-7; 23:10; 24; 30:8 31; I — (D) Jeremias,
17:11  17:  New Testament: Matthew, 19:18/ Marl{, 10:19 / Luke, 3:12-13;
18:20  /  Acts,  2^4-47;  4:315:11  /  Romans,  13:9 / Ephesians, 4:28 5
Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[528-567]
382c-d 5 Aristophanes: Ecclesiaztisae 615a-628d esp
[554-1 III] 621b-628a / Pliitus 629a-642d
7  Plato: Republic, bk hi, 341c-d; bk v, 364c365d / Laws, bk v 686d-697a
passim; bk viii, 738c-742a / Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 4
[1131^27-33]
379b-c; ch 9
[1136^15-1137*4]
384d-385a; bk vtii, ch 9 4lid-412c; ch 13-14 414d416d passim / Politics,
bk ii, ch i
[1260*^361261*7] 455b,d; CH 3 [1261^16-38] 456c-d; ch
5 458a-460a; ch 6
[1265*28-^17] 460c-461a;
CH 7 461d-463c; bk hi, ch 10
[1281*11-28]
478d-479a; bk v, ch 8
[1308^10-1309*32]
510d-511c;  CH  9  [1309^18-1310*12]  511d-512b; bk vt, ch 4 [1319*6-19]
522c-d; bk vii, ch 9
[1329*18-26]
533c; CH 10
[1329^35-1330*3]
534b-c  /  Athenian  Constitution, ch 12 557b558a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-b  /  Solon,  68d-70c  /  Poplicola-Solon,  87a / Agis 648b,d-656d /
Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 31a-b; 32b-d /
Histories,   bk  ii,  236d-237a;  bk  iv,  286c287a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  1,  q  98,  A  I,  rep  3 516d-517c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 94, A 5, rep 3 224d-225d; q 105, a 2, ans and
REP  1-6  309d-316a;  part  ii-ii,  q  32,  aa  5-6 544a-546b 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,   part   i,   94d-95a;   part  ii,  124d-125d;  156b-157a  27
Shakespeare:  King Lear, act hi, sc iv [2636] 264c; ACT IV, sc i [66-73]
270a-b  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 391b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  appendix,  xvii  448d 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 91a-94a;
97b-98b  35  Locke  : Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part iv, 154b-155b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 310a-311b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk v, 19a-21d passim; 23a-25a; 29c; bk xxvi, 221c-222b
38   Rousseau:  Inequality,  353a;  360b-361a;  362d363a,c  /  Political
Economy,  375b-d;  377b385a,c  /  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 415b-417c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b esp 33c; 52b-62a esp 52b-c; bk
iv,  225d-228a;  239c-240a; bk v, 309a-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
22b-c;  127a-c; 251d-255d passim; 501b-502b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
86d-89d  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 403a-410d; 411c415d; 422b,d-425b;
426b-428a; 431a-432c; 441d-443d; 446a-b

[925b]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  867  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: amendments, v
17b-c;  XIV,  sect i 18c 43 I^>.deralist: number 35-36 112a-117d passim;
number  73,  218ci-219b;  number  79,  233c-d  43 Mill: Liberty, 309a-c;
322c-d  / Representative Government, 335a-b; 366c-367a / Utilitarianism,
467b;  472d-473a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  i,  par  46  23d-24a; par 49 24c-25a; par 64 28c-d; par 68
29d-30a;  part  hi,  par  237  76c;  par 241 76d-77a; par 244-245 77c-d;
additions, 27 121b; 29 121c; 145 140b; 148-149 140c-141a / Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  275b-276a; 277b-c; part hi, 287d-288b; 289a-b; part
IV,  353b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 292a-297a 50 Marx: Capital, 34d-35c;
61c-62b;  89a-b;  174d-175c; 218d-219a; 286a-296a esp 288b-d, 292d-295d;
302d-383d  esp  303b-305a,  308d309b,  317c-321b,  325d-326a, 354a-355d,
369C-371C,   377c-378d,   383d   50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
425c427b;  428d-429a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 197b-c; bk x,
414C-416C  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788b Sb. Fair
wages   and  prices:  the  just  exchange  of  goods  and  services  Old
TESTAMENT:Z^r///r«-<",  19:11, 13,35-36;25:3537 / Deuteronomy, 24:10-15;
25:13-16  /  /  Kings, 21 -(D) III Kings, 21 / // Kings, 5:20-27— (D) IV
Kings,  5:20-27  /  Nehemiah,  5:1-12— (D) // Esdras, 5:1-12 / Proverbs,
6:30-31;  II  :i;  16:11;  20:10; 22:22-23; 28-8 / Jeremiah, 22 :i3— (D)
Jeremias,   2.2:1-7,   /  Eze^iel,  22:12-13;  45:9-12—  (Z))  Ezechiel,
22:12-13;  45:9-12  /  Amos,  8:4-6 / Micah, 6:9-12— (D) Micheas, 6:9-12
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:14—  (D) OT, Tobias, 4:15 / Ecclesiasticus, 26:29;
^7-2;  34:20-22  {D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  26:28;  27:2;  34:24-27  New
Testament:  Matthew,  10:10 / Lu^e, 10:7 / / Timothy, 5:18 / II Timothy,
2:6  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  158b-c  7  Plato:  Laws, bk viii,
740d-743a;  bk  xi,  772d-775d  esp 775a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 4
[ii32''ii]-ch 5
[1133^29] 380b-381c; bk viii, ch 9 411d-412c;
ch  13-14 414d-416d passim; bk ix, ch i 416b,d-417c / Politics, bk i, ch
9-10 450d-452d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 22 33b-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 4, ANS 229b- 230c; q 105, a 2, ans
and  rep  3-6 309d-316a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi 15a-16b passim
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 126a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 42a-b

[926a]
868  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (8.  Economic  justice:  justice  in production,
distribution, and exchange. Sb. Fair wages and prices: the just exchange
of goods and services.) 2*7 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i [1-167]
351a-353a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 30c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv,  154b-155b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xviii, 128b; BK
XX,  146b-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353b;  365d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i, 13a-16a; 20b- 23b esp 20c, 21c; 27b-37b esp 33c; 42a62a
passim, esp 52b-c, 56b-57a, 61c-d; 106c107a; BK IV, 225d-228a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  22c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 424b-425a; 446a-b 43
Constitution of the U.S. : amendments, vii 17d 43 Mill: Liberty, 309a-c;
322c-d  /  Representative  Government, 366d-367a / Utilitarianism, 467b;
470c-d; 472d-473a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 236 76a-c;
additions,  145  140b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  353b-c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  292a-297a 50 Marx: Capital, 13a-50a esp 13d-18a,
19d-20b,  24c-25d,  27a-c,  31b-33b,  37c-39c,  42b-44c;  69a-84a,c  esp
74c-78a,  79c-84a;  89d-102b  passim,  esp  93b-96a,  lOOa-lOla; 171a-c;
256b260c esp 258b-c; 264a-275c; 296c-298a; 305c307c; 324a-327b esp 327b;
366a-368a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  423c-d; 425d-427b 51
Tolstoy:   War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  572d-573b  8c.  Justice  in  the
organization  of  production  50  MAKyi:  Capital,  ZZd-36c esp 34d-35a;
37d-38b
[fn5];
85a-263d  esp  lllc-115c,  160d-164a,  171d-180d,  192d-209a, 215a-217b,
226d-227d,  261c-262a;  279d-286a  esp  285c-286a;  311c321b; 354a-355d;
377c-378d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 419d425b esp 421a-422c;
426a-427b  8r(l) Economic exploitation: chattel slavery and wage slavery
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1134^7-17]
382b-c; bk viii, ch ii
[ii6i^30-*'io] 413c-d
/ Politics, BK I, CH 3-7 446d-449c; ch ii
[i259^i8]-CH
13
[1260^7]
453c-455a; bk hi, CH 6 [1278^32-37] 476a-b / Athenian Constitution, cH 2
553a-c  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46c-47a  /  Marcus  Cato, 278d-279c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  A 4, ANS and REP 1-4
318b-321a  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [1-51]  339b-340b  36  Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv, 154b-155a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a; 353c-355b;
365b-366a

[926b]
1  I  8^/08^  f  39  Smith:  Wealth  ofNations,  bk  i,  28a-d; 61c-d; 1
109d-110d;  bk  hi,  165b-170c;  bk  iv,  253cI  254a; 287c-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  144b  !  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 45b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 421c-422d; 445c- | 446a 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article i, sect 9
[260-266] 13d; article
iv,  sect  2 [529-535] 16b; amendments, xiii 18c 43 Mill: Representative
Government,   339d-340c   44   BoswELh:  Johnson,  363c-364a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part iv, 335b336c 50 Marx: Capital la-383d esp
102b-105c, 112c115c, 127c-131a, 150a-c, 176a-178d, 193a-209a, 264a-275c,
282d-286a,  296c-301b,  354a-355d,  366a-368b,  376c-377a,  379a-383d 50
Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,   420c-d',  422c-423a;  424b-425a;
426b-428a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 211a-213a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk vi 165b-c i 8c(2) Profit and unearned increment
14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  287c-d  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
20b-23b  passim,  esp  21a-c; 27b-28a; 109d-110d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par 243 77b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 71d-72c; 85a-263d esp
92c94a,  lOOa-lOlb,  104b-105c,  112c,  154d-156d, 198c-199b, 254c-255a,
263c-d;  267b;  267d275c  passim,  esp  271b-c;  286a-301b  passim,  esp
288b-289c,  295a-d, 301a-b; 327b Sd. Justice and the use of money: usury
and  interest rates Old Testament: Exodus, 22:25 / Leviticus, iy.1^-y] I
Deuteronomy,  23:19-20;  24:10-13/  Nehemiah,  5—  (£))  //  Esdras, 5 /
Psalms,  15:5  —  (D) Psalms, 14 :5 / Proverbs, 28 :8 / Jeremiah, 15:10—
(£)) Jeremias, 15:10 / Ezel^iel, 1 8 :4-2 esp 18:8, 18:13, 18:17; 22:12—
(D)  Ezechiel,  18:4-21 esp 18:8, 18:13, 18:17; 22:12 7 Plato: Republic,
bk viii, 408c-d / Laws, bk V, 694c-d; bk xi, 775c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 2
[1130*13-^8]
377c-378a; ch 5
[1133^^29]
380d-381c; bk IX, cH 2
[1164^30-1165^11]
417d-418a / Politics, BK I, cH 9-10 450d-452d esp ch 10
[1258*38-^8]
452d / Athenian Constitution, cH 12, par 4 557d-558a 14 Plutarch: Marcus
Cato,  287c-d  /  Lucullus  409b-d  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 90a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q lH 105, A 2, REP 4 309d-316a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b;  xvii [31-75] 24a-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi,
133b-140b

[927a]
^to9b Chapter 42: JUSTICE 869 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i,
sc  III 409c-411b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 55a-57a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk v, 29c; bk XII, 92d-93c; bk xxi, 169a-170b; bk xxii,
175d-176a;  184b-187a,c  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 37b-41d; bk
ii, 140b; 154c-155a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 498c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  90d-91a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 424a-425b 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  304b-c; 409a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part iv, 353b-c
50  Marx:  Capital, 77c-78b; 252b; 293a-d [fn i]; 371c-372c 9. Political
justice:  justice  in  government  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 23b-d 6
TnucYmDES : Peloponnesian War, bkii, 396c-d 7 Plato: Crito 213a-219a,c /
Republic  295a441a,c  esp bk iii-iv, 340c-343a, bk iv, 348d350a / Latvs,
bk  hi,  670c-671a;  672c-676c;  BK  vt,  699d-700b; bk xii, 795a-797c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^14-19]
377a; ch 2
[1130*^17-29]
378a-b; ch 6
[ii34*24]-CH 7
[1135^14] 382a-383a / Politics,
bk I, CH 2
[1253^*8-18] 446b-c;
[1253*29-39]
446d;  bk  hi, ch 6 475d-476c esp [i279''i7-22] 476c; ch 9 477c-478d; ch
12-13  480c-483a  /  Athenian Constitution, ch 12 557b-558a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 46c-47a 18
Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 21 142d143a; bk ii, ch 21 161b-162d; bk
iv,  ch  4 190d; BK XIX, CH 21 524a-525a; ch 24 528b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 96, A 4 233a-d; q 100, a 2, ans 252b-253a 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b; 91a-b; part II, 132a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ix
53c-54d;  CH  XI 55b-58b; ch xiii-xiv 59b-64c; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch
xvi-xix  65d-81d  passim  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  353b-362b  passim  / Political Economy 367a-385a,c passim /
Social  Contract  387a-439d  passim  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
309a-311c  42  Kant: Science ofRight, 433c-434d; 435c-437c; 438d-439a 43
Federalist:   number   10,   50d-51a;   number   51,   164c-d  43  Mill:
Representative   Government,  369d-370a  /  Utilitarianism,  464d-476a,c
passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 210-228 69d-75b 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4772-481 i]
118b119b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428d429c

[927b]
9a.  The  natural and the conventional in political justice: natural law
and  the  general will 7 Plato: Gorgias, 271b-275d / Republic 295a441a,c
esp  bk  ii-iv 310c-356a / Theaetetus, 528b c; 531a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 7 382c-383a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 13
[i373''i-i8]
617c-d;  ch 15 [1375^25-^25] 619d-620b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi,
par 1^-15 16c-17b; par 17 17d-18a / City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b-162d;
bk xix, ch 21 524a-525a; CH 24 528b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  91,  A  3,  ANS  209d-210c;  q 95, aa 2-4 227c-230c 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  i,  86b;  91a-b; part II, 131a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
281a-283c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii,
sect  7-13  26c-28b; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi 55b-58b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
ofLaws,  bk  i, lc-d;3b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333a-d; 362d-363a,c /
Political Economy, 368d-369b; 370b-d / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c; bk
ii,  396d398b;  399b-400c  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 397a-c 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  430a-431a;  435a-b;  448b-d; 450a-b 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  465d-466b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
210228  69d-75b  esp  par  217  72b-c  / Philosophy of History, part ii,
272a-d 9b. Justice as the moral principle of political organization: the
bond  of  men  in  states  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-372]  134a-b  5
Euripides:  Suppliants  [304-313]  261a  /  Phoenician Maidens [528-558]
382c-d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vh,  225d-226b 7 Plato: Protagoras,
43d-45b / Crito 213a219a,c / Republic, bk i, 308b-309b; bk iv, 346a-350a
/ Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, BK XII, 786b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v,
ch  6  [1134^24-^15]  382a-c;  bk  vih,  ch  i  [1155*22-28]  406d; ch 9
411d-412c; ch ii 413b-d; bk ix, ch 6 420c421a esp
[1167^5-15]
420d-421a / Politics, bk I, CH 2
[1253*8-18] 446b-c;
[1253*29-^59]
446d; BK III, CH 9 477c-478d esp [1280*8-31] 477c-d; ch 12
[i282''i5-2o]
480c;
[1283'^
18-20] 481b; ch 13 [1283*37-40] 481c; bk vii, CH 14 [1332^27-32] 537c 14
Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  59d-60b  / Lycurgus-Numa, 61b,d-62c / Dion,
784d785a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; BK IV, CH 4
190d; bk xix, ch 21 524a525a; ch 23-24, 528a-c

[928a]
870  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (9. Politicaljustice: justice in government. 9h.
Justice  as the moralprinciple ofpolitical organization: the bond of men
in  states.)  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, A 2, ANs
252b-253a;  q  105, a 2, ans 309d316a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xviii  [52]- XX [148] 134a-138b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 91a-92b 27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, sc III [98-124] 109a-b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, appendix, xv-xvi 448c-d 35 Locke: Toleration,
3a / Civil Government, CH II, SECT 13 28a-b; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c;
ch   xi,   sect  135-139  55d-58a;  ch  xix,  SECT  219  75b-c  /  Human
Understandings  BK  I,  CH  II,  SECT  2  104a-b  38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  369a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 396d-398b 43 Federalist:
number   51,   164c-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a  /  Representative
Government,  422b  /  Utilitarianism,  460aA61c; 464d-476a,c passim, esp
470a-471b,  473d474b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 141 139c;
155 142a-b; 160 142d-143a / Philosophy of History, part ii, 272a-d; part
iv,  321a;  334b-c  54 Freud: Group Psychology, 685c-686c / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents,  780b-781a 9c. The criteria of justice in various
forms  of  government and diverse constitutions 6 Herodotus: History, bk
ii,  107c-108c  6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 396c-d 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viii  401d-416a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  / Laws, bk hi,
670c-671a; 672c-676c; bk iv, 681d-682c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3
[1131^24-29]
378d; CH 7
[1134^36-1135^4] 382d-383c; bk
VIII, CH II 413b-d / Politics, bk hi, ch 6 475d476c esp
[1279^17-22]
476c; ch 9-13 477c483a; ch 15-17 484b-487a; bk iv, ch i
[1289^13-20] 488a; bk
v, ch i
[1301*25-39]
502b-c;  CH 9 [1310*25-36] 512c; bk vi, ch 2 520d-521b esp [1317*40-^16]
520d,  [1318*4-10]  521b;  CH  3  521c-522a;  bk vii, ch 14 537b538d esp
[1333^5-1334^10]  538b-d  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 46c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  4,  ANS  229b-230c; q 100, a 2, ans
252b-253a;  Q  105, A I 307d-309d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi,
12b13c;  BK  VI, 33a-35a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369a-d / Social
Contract, bk ii, 405a-406a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 616d-617d passim
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94c-95c; 403b; 575d-577b

[928b]
I  9c  to  9d  42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  343b-344d;  350b-355b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
ii,  271d272d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428d429c 9d. The
relation  of ruler and ruled: the justice of the prince or statesman and
of  the  subject  or  citizen  Old  Testament: Exodus, 22:28 / / Samuel,
8:10-20—  (Z>)  / Kings, 8:10-20 / // Samuel, 23:3— (D) // Kings, 23:3 /
//  Chronicles,  1:712— (Z>) // Paralipomenon, i:y-i2 / Proverbs, 16:12;
17:7;  20:28;  24:21;  28:15-16;  29:14  / Ecclesiastes, 10:20 / Isaiah,
3:14—  (D)  IsaiaSy 3:14 New Testament: Matthew, 22:16-22 / Acts, 23:5 /
Romans,  ly.i-j  I  Titus,  3:1 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [365-401]
5c6a  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d;  [631765]  136c-137d 5
Euripides: Suppliants
[342-358]
261b-c / Helen
[i 627-1 641] 313c-d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  84b-c;  bk hi, 107c-d; 120b-c; bk vii,
223c-d;  245b  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk i, 301b-306b; bk iv, 346a-350a /
Laws, bk i, 642d-643b; bk hi, 670c-671a; 672c-676c; bk iv, 681b-682c; bk
viii,  733d-734a  /  Seventh  Letter,  806d-807b;  814b-c  9 Aristotle :
£/A/c^, bk v, ch i [1130*1-5] 377b; ch 6 [1134*25-^17] 382a-c; ch ii
[1138*4-13]
386b-c;
[1138^5-13]
387a,c; bk viii, ch ii 413b-d / Politics, bk i, ch 12-13 453d-455a,c; BK
III, CH 4
[1277^16-20] 474d; ch 6 475d476c
esp
[1278^30-1279*22]
476a-c; ch 10 478d-479a; ch 13 481b-483a; bk vii, ch 14
[1332^13-1333*16] 537b-538a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 7 182b184a 12 AuRELius: Meditations,
bk  vi, sect 30 276d277a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  48a  /  Numa  Pompilius,  59d-60b / Lycurgus-Numa,
61b,d'62c   /   Aristides   262b,d-276a,c  esp  263d-266b,  273d-275c  /
Agesilaus, 490d-491b; 494a-c / AgesilausPompey, 539a / Alexander, 566a-b
/  Phocion,  604b,d-605d  / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c esp 636d-637c /
Demetrius, 742c-743b / Dion, 784d-785a; 798b-d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk
iv,  290a-d  18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiv, ch 28 397a-d; bk xix, ch
15-16 521a-522a; ch 21 524a-525a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
96  510a-513c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, AA 1-3
307d-318b

[929a]
9e  Chapter  42: JUSTICE 871 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xviii [52]-
XX [148] 134a-138b passim Machiavelli: Prince, ch xv-xix 22b 30a HoBBFs:
leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-102c;  104b-d; 112d-117b; 147b-c; 154b-158a;
conclusion,   279d-282c  Montaigne:  Essa\s,  7a-d;  50b-51a;  382b383d:
386b-d; 437'b 438a Shakespeare: Richard III, act v, sc hi [23725 26 270]
146b-c / Richard II, act iv, sc i [114-157] 342c-343a / Henry V, act iv,
sc i
[95-297]
552c-554c  Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure 174a204d esp ACT 11, sc 11
181d-184a  /  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 27 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
94b-95b  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii [445-456] 121a; BK V [800-845]
192b-193b  Locke:  Civil Government, ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c 30 32 35
Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs, bk ii, 6b-7c; BK III, lOc-lla; 12b-13c; bk
iv, 14d-15c; 38 16a-b; bk v, 18d-19d; 23a-25a; bk viii, 51a-56a; bk xii,
93d-94a;   94c-96a,c   Rousseau:  Inequality,  361c-362a;  366c-d  /  38
Political  Economy,  370d-372b  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk iv, 284d
GiBROs:  Decline  and  Fall,  50a;  61d-62d;  127d;  284b-c;  288b-289a;
339d-343c   esp  343b-c  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  39b-40a;  173b-d;
575d-577b   passim   Kant:   Science   of  Right,  434a  Declaration  of
Independence:  la-3b  passim  Mill:  Representative  Government, 334b-c;
366a-370a; 413d-414d Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 215 71c-d;
par  293 98b; par 302 lOla-c; par 304 102a / Philosophy of History, part
i,  242d243b;  PART  II,  271d-272d; part hi, 301c-303c Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk i, 9c-10d; epilogue ii, 680b-684a 39 40 41 42 43 43 46 51 S>e.
The  just  distribution  of  honors,  ranks,  offices, suffrage 4 Homer:
Iliad, bk i 3a'9a,c; bk ix
[89-655]
58a-63c  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084]  38b-39a,c 5
Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [430-480]
146d-147b,
[10471421] 152a-155a,c
5 Euripides: Hecuba [239-331] 354d-355c 5 Aristophanes: Knights
[1333-1383]
486c487a  /  Lysistrata  [572-586]  590c-d  6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
70c-d; 83d-84a; BK VIII, 275c-d 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
396c-d  7  Plato:  Apology,  209b-d / Republic, bk hi, 340c-341a; bk iv,
349c-350a / Laws, bk hi, 672c-676c; bk vi, 699d-700b

[929b]
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[ii29*'i9-24]
377a; ch 2
[1130^30-34] 378b; ch
3 378c379b esp [ii3i«24-29] 378d; cii 6
[1134^^1-7]
382b; CH 9
[ii36''i5-ii37'*4] 384d-385a; bk
viii, ch 14
[ii63''5-i3] 416a-c; bk
ix, ch 6
[1167^^5-15] 420d-421a /
Politics, bk i, ch 12
[1259*^5-8]
454a; bk ii, ch 2
[i26i*23-**6]
456a-b; ch 7
[i266''3 6- 1267*2] 462c;
[1267*
37-41] 463b; ch 9
[1270*^18-25] 466d-467a;
ch II
[1273*32-^7] 469d-470a; bk
hi, ch 5 475a-d; ch 6
[1279*8-17] 476b-c; ch
10-13 478d-483a; ch 16
[1287*10-23] 485c; bk
v, CH 2
[i302*i6]-cH
3
[1302^20]
503b-504a; CH 8
[1308^10-1309*15]
510d-511b; ch 12
[1316^21-24] 519d; bk VI, ch 2 [i3I7*4o]-ch 4
[1319*6] 520d-522c; bk
vii, ch 13
[1332*1341] 536d-537a / Athenian Constitution, ch
12,  par I 557b-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45c-46a / Numa Pompilius, 50a /
Pompey,  505a-c / Cato the Younger, 636d-637c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi,
105d-107b  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi, 32d-33a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  74b-c; part ii, 103c-d; 104b; 146d; 147d-148b; 156c; 158a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 181d-183c; 519d-520a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[445-456]  121a  /  Areopagitica,  383a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 305 228a 36
Swift: Gulliver, part i, 15b-16b; 28b-29a; PART HI, 114a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Latvs,  bk  ii,  4a-6b;  7c-8c passim; bk hi, llc-12b; bk v,
23a-25c;   31a-32c;  bk  xi,  71d-72a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358c;
360a-361a esp 360b,d
[£ni]
/  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  408d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 17a-b;
240c-244c  esp 240c-d, 242a-c; 245d-247a passim; 501c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  39d;  73b;  317b318b  42  Kant: Science of Right, 436d-437c;
444c446a  43 Articles of Confederation: iv [17-36] 5bc; VI [87-93] 6b 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 2
[11-40] llb-d; sect 3
[67-72] 12a; [88-95]
12b; sect 6
[143-151]
12c-d; sect 9
[289]-
SECT 10
[303] 14a; article
ii, sect i
[327382]
14b-d; ARTICLE IV, sect 2
[519-521]
16a;  amendments, xii 18a-c; xiv, sect i 18c; XV 19b; xix 19d; xxiii 20d
43  Federalist: number 68, 206b-c; number 80, 236a-b; number 84, 252a 43
Mill: Liberty, 302d-303a / Representative Government, 380c-389b passim /
Utilitarianism,  466c-467b  44 Bos\K ^1.1.'. Johnson, 124d-125d; 127b-c;
141a;  197c;  479a-d;  498c-499a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  206  68d-69b;  par 291-293 97d-98b / Philosophy of History, part i,
222a-224a; part hi, 295d296c; part iv, 356c-357a

[930a]
872 THE GREAT IDEAS (9. Politicaljustice: justice in government. 9e. The
just  distribution  of  honors,  ranks,  offices, suffirage.) 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[10,849-976]
264a267a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk hi, 131c-135c; BK V, 205a-b;
228c-229a;  232a-234a;  bk vi, 241c-242b 9f. Justice between states: the
problem of right and might in the making of war and peace Old Testament:
Deuteronomy, 20 esp 20:10-14 5 Sophocles : Oedipus at Colonus
[897-959]
122d-123b  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  5 Aristophanes: Peace
[601-692]  532d-534a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, la-2b; bk hi, 93c-d; bk
iv,  144c-d;  bk  vi,  202c-203c;  212a-c;  bk  vii,  218a'b; 237d-239a;
241c-246c;  bk  vni, 287a-c; bk ix, 289a-c 6 Thucydides : Pelopon?2esian
War,  bk  i 349a386d esp 358b-360c, 368b-d, 378a-380a, 384b'386d; bk ii,
402c-d;  404d-405b;  bk  hi,  418d-420c;  424d-428d;  429b-434c;  bk iv,
461b-463a; 469d-470b; bk v, 504c-508a,c; BK VI, 511c-516b; 529b-533a esp
531b-c;  bk VII, 542b-c; 556d-557a 7 Plato: Gorgias, 274a / Republic, bk
i, 308b309b; BK V, 367b-368c / Laws, bk i, 640a643b 9 Aristotle : EM/Vi,
bkx, CH7 [1177^8-11] 432b / Politics, BK I, CH 8
[1256^20-26] 450c; bk
III, CH 9 [1280^34-^12] 478a-b; bk vii, ch 2
[1324^2-1325^13] 528c-529a; ch
14 [1333^181334*11] 538a-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[847-853] 233b-234a;
BK  XI  [243-444]  334b-340a;  bk  xii  [175-213] 358b-359b 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  26b-27a  /  Numa  Pompilius,  55c-56a/  Themistocles,  96c-d /
Camillus,  106b-107a;  108b-109a  /  Marcellus,  254c-255d  / Aristides,
273b-275a / Pyrrhus, 319b-d / Lysander, 357a-b / Cimon, 398a-d / Nicias,
426a  /  CrassuS'Nicias,  456d-457c  / Sertorius, 468b-469a / Agesilaus,
484a-b;   491a-b;   497c498a  /  Pompey,  503a-d;  518a-b  /  Alexander,
549d-550c; 569a-b / Cato the Younger, 639d640a / Demetrius, 727d-728b 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i, 15b; bk xi, 106b-d / Histories, bk iv, 272b-c;
290a-d  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  1-7  129d133a; ch 21
142d-143a;  bk  iv,  ch 14-15 196b-197a; bk xix, ch 7 515a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 3 316a-318b; part ii-ii, q 10, a 8
432b433b;  Q  29,  a  i  530b-531a;  q  40 577d581 d 22 Chaucer: Tale of
Melibeus, par 12-13 404a405a; par 30-38 413b-418a; par 53-60 425b427b

[930b]
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32a-d; ch xxvi, 36b-37a 23 HoBBES :
Leviathan,  part  i,  95a; part ii, 147cs 159c; conclusion, 279d-282c 24
Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk 36a-38a; 54a-55a; 58a-59d; bk hi,
131b,d133b  25 Montaigne: Essays, llb-13c; 95a-97b; 381a-] b; 387c-388c;
440b-442d 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act v, sc hi
[237-270]
146b-c / King John, act ii, sc i
[561-598] 385c-386a; act
hi, sc i
[255-347]
388d-389d / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc i 487b489d; sc ii
[52-123] 490b-491b
/ Henry V, ACT I, SC II [1-2:53] 534a-536b; act iv, sc vii
[1-68] 558d-559b
29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part ii, 290c-d 30 Bacon: Novtnn Organum, bk
i,  aph  129 134d135d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [638-714] 313a314b
33  V\s<zK\.\  Pensees,  291-294  225a-226b;  296  226b  35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  ix,  sect 131 54d; ch xi, sect 139 57c-58a; ch xv, sect
172  65b-c; CH XVI 65d-70c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 23a-25b; part ii,
75a-b; 76b-78b; part iv, 149b-151a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
3a-b;  BK  X,  61b,d-64a;  bk  xv,  109b-c;  bk  xxiv,  201b-c; bk xxvi,
223c-224a;  bk  xxix, 265d266a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy , 369a-b /
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  389d-390d; bk ii, 395d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  4a-b;  84d-85a;  402b-404b; 504d-507c; 509b-c; 535d-536c; 543b-c;
549d-550b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 5d-6a; 7d-8a; 17d-18c; 27b esp
604c
[n 107]; 130b-c; 373d374d; 383c-384b; 445a; 532d-533a
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  413d; 452b-458a,c esp 454a-b, 454d-455b,
457a-458a,c  / Judgement, 504a-b; 586c-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b  passim 43 Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d passim 43 Constitution
of the U.S.: article i, sect 8
[220-225]
13b; SECT 10
[314-320]
14b;  article  III,  SECT  2  [469-492]  15c-d;  amendments,  XI  18a 43
Federalist:  number  3-7  33b-44c  passim;  NUMBER  II,  54c; number 43,
140d-144a;   number   80,   235b-236c;   number   83,  248b-c  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  434c-435c  passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  326 107d-108a; par 330-340 108d-110c esp par 333
109b-c, par 336 109d, par 338 llOa-b; par 351 112a-b; additions, 193-194
150c-d  /  Philosophy of History, part hi, 299a-c; part iv, 357c-358b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  292a-295a  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
428a-b

[931a]
9gto  \0a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 346a-355c; BK X, 442c-443b;
bk xii, 547a-551c; bk xiv, 589a-c 54 Freud: War and Death, 755a-757d esp
757b-c;  761a-c  9^.  The  tempering  of  political justice by clemency:
amnesty,  asylum,  and pardon Old Testament: Numbers, 35:6,11-15,28-33 /
Deuteronomy, 4:41-43; 19:1-13 /Joshua, 21— (D) Josue, 21 5 Aristophanes:
Frogs  [686-705] 572a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 20b-d; 36b-c; BK II,
71b-72a; bk vi, 212a-c; bk vii, 251a-b 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War,
bk hi, 424d429a; 433d-434a; bk iv, 451d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv,
ch  5 228a230b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi [ioo-iii] 330b-331a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  37b-c  /  Solon,  68a / Aristides, 275c / Agesilaus, 494a-c /
Pompey,  503a-d  /  Caesar, 599a-b / Dion, 798b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii, 39b-c; bk hi, 59d; BK XII, 113d-114a; bk xiv, 151d-152c / Histories,
bk i, 208b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 1-7 129d133a; bk ix, ch
5 288b-289a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, x
[7093] 68a-b; xv [85-114] 76b-c
22 Chaucer: Tale ofMelibeus, par 77-78, 431a432a / Parson's Tale, par 68
533b-534a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 94a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 3a-5a;
51a-53c  26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act iv, sc I [182-205]
427c-d  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  v, sc v 466a-d / Henry F, act ii, sc ii
[39-83]  539c-540a  27  Shakespeare:  Measure for Measure, act ii, sc II
[25-162]  182b-183d  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc V [286-422] 486c-488d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  71b-d;  108c-109b; 177a-b; part ii,
332d-333b  30  Bacon:  New Atlantis, 205a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
xiv,  sect  159  62b-c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Latvs, bk vi, 36a-b;
43c-d;  bk  xxv,  209b-d;  bk  xxix, 264b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
176a;  302d; 449d451a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 449c 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.:  article  ii,  sect 2 [417-420] 15a 43 Federalist: number 69,
208c-d;  number  74,  221d-222d  44  Bosw ell: Joh?2son, 335c; 344a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 282 95d-96a; additions, 74
127d-128a;  173 146d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 230b-232a; bk xii,
548d-549b 52 Dostoevsky: Brotfiers Karamazov, bk xii, 398a-d

[931b]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  873  10. Justice and law 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xviii
[497-508]  135b  7  Rlato:  Gorgias,  261b-d / Republic, bk ii, 311b-c /
Laws, bk iv, 681b-683d; bk ix 743a757d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^12-24]
377a; ch 6
[1134*25-^8] 382a-b; ch 7 382c383a
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 16
[i287*io-''25]
485c-486b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354*161355*3] 593b-594a
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [507-508] 117a; bk vi
[847-853] 233b- 234a
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon, 66a-b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13-17  16c-18a  /  City of God, bk ii, ch 21
161b162d;  bk XIX, ch 21 524a-525a; ch 24 528bc / Christian Doctrine, bk
iv,  ch  18  686d687d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 21, A 2
125c-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91,  A  5, ANS
211c-2i2c;  q 94, a 4 223d-224d; q 95, AA 1-3 226b-229b esp a i, rep 2-3
226c-227c;  Q 100, A 2, ANS 252b-253a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b;
part  ii,  131a-c;  157b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 291-338 225a-233a 35 Locke:
Civil Government, ch ix 53c-54d; ch xviii 71a-73c passim 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk i, Ic-d; bk xxvi 214b,d-225a,c passipn 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  370b-371c  /  Social  Contract, bk ii, 399b-400c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 96a-d 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
392a  /  Science  of  Right, 400b-d; 432c-433a 43 Federalist: number 10,
50d-51b   43   Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465c-466b;  467c-468a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 212-213 70d-71a; par 215 71c-d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 553a 10a, The measure of justice in laws
made  by  the  state:  natural and constitutional standards 5 Euripides:
Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c  6  Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
396c-d  7 Plato: Protagoras, 52b / Gorgias, 271b-274c / Republic, bk ii,
316a-319b  esp 318a; bk IV, 349a-350a / Statesman, 598b-604b / Latvs, bk
IV,  680c-683b;  bk  ix,  747c;  bk  x,  760c  8  Aristotle: Sophistical
Refutations, ch 12
[173*7-19] 238b-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[ii29''i2-24]
377a; ch 7 382c-383a; ch 9
[1136^32-35]
385a; ch ii [1138*4-13] 386b-c / Politics, bk i, CH 6
[1255*3-^4]
448c-449a; bk hi, ch ii
[1282^1-14] 480b-c; ch 16 [i287*28-°5] 485d-

[932a]
(10.  Justice  and  law. 10<«. The measure ofjustice in laws made by the
state:  natural  and  constitutional  standards.)  486a;  bk  iv,  ch  i
[1289*13-20]  488a  /  Rhetoric,  BK  I,  CH  10 [1368^7-10] 611d; CH 13
[1373^117] 617c-d; CH 15
[1375^25-^25] 619d-620b;
[1376*33-^31] 621a-c
12  AuRELius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4 264a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  hi,  par  15  17a-b;  par  17  17d-18a  /  City of God, bk ii, ch 21
161b-162d;  bk  xix, ch 21 524a-525a; ch 24 528b-c / Christian Doctrine,
bk iv, ch 18 686d687d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, A 3
209d-210c;  q  93,  a  3  217b-218a;  q  94,  a  4  223d-224d; q 95, a 2
227c-228c;  q  96,  a  4, ans 233a-d 23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 91a-b;
part  ii,  113d;  116a-b;  131a-c;  132a-b;  134b-135b;  156b-c; 157b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  47c-48a;  281a-283c;  384b-c;  519a-520b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 94d-95b 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [888-902]
359a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338 225a-233a; 878-879 345a-b 35 Locke:
Toleration,  llb-12c  /  Civil Government, CH II, SECT 12 27d-28a; ch ix
53c-54d;  ch  XI  55b-58b; ch xviii 71a-73c passim; ch xix, sect 221-222
75d-76c;  sect 240-242 81b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, Ic-d;
3c-d; BK VI, 39b; bk viii, 54b; bk xii, 85c86d; BK XIX, 136a; 138a-c; bk
xxvi  214b,d225a,c  passim, esp 214b,d; bk xxix, 262a; 265d 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  369c-d;  370b-d  /  Social Contract, bk ii, 397b-c;
399b-400c;  405a-406a;  bk iv, 426b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
61b;  bk  ii,  140b;  bk  iv,  228a; 232b; 284d; bk v, 397a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  525d-526c;  617a-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
76d-77b;  89d-94b passim; 403b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of
Right,   429a-c;   434a;   435a-436a;   450d-452a   43   Declaration  of
Independence: la-3b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: preamble lla,c; ARTICLE
I, sect 8-10 13a-14b; article vi
[583-590] 16d; AMENDMENTS, i-x 17a-d
43  Federalist:  number  33,  108b-c;  number  44, 145c-147a; number 78,
230d-232d;  number  81, 237d-238b 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-323a,c passim /
Utilitarianism,  465d-466b; 467c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 203d-204a; 205b;
363c364a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 212-213 70d-71a;
additions, 134 138b-c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 364b

[932b]
I  874  THE  GREAT IDEAS lOato lOc 10^. The legality of unjust laws: the
extent  of  obedience  required  of the just man in the unjust society 5
Sophocles : Antigone 131a-142d esp
[43-99]
131c-132a,
[441-496]
134d-135b,
[631-765]
136c-137d, [891-943] 138d-139a 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[1625-1670]
392b-d  7  Plato:  Apology 200a-212a,c / Crito 213a219a,c / Republic, bk
vi,  379d-380b  /  Laws,  BK  VI,  706b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  800c-d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1282^114] 480b-c; CH 13 [1284*3-37] 482a-c / Rhetoric, BK
I, CH 13
[1373^1-12] 617c-d; CH
15
[1375*25-^25] 619d-620b; [1376^5-28] 621b-c
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk xv, 172c-173c; bk xvi, 180d-184a,c 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk hi, par 17 17d18a / City of God, bk xix, ch 17 522b-523a
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, A I, rep 4 213c-214c; q
93,  a  3,  rep  2  217b218a;  q  94,  a  6,  rep 3 225d-226b; q 95, a 2
227c-228c;  a  4 229b-230c; q 96, a 4, ans and rep 2-3 233a-d; q 97, a 2
236d-237b;  part  ii-ii,  Q  42, A 2, REP 3 584b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii, 102b-c; 104b-d; 112b-d; 113d-114b; 115a-116a; 134b-135b; 157b;
PART  III, 238b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 7a-d; 47a-51a; 319a-b; 381a-388c
esp   383c-d,   384d-385a,   388a-c;  463a-465c;  480b-482b;  504c-506a;
519a-520b   32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a  33  Pascal:
Provincial  Letters,  114b  /  Pensees,  326  231a 35 Locke: Toleration,
16d-17b  / Civil Government, CH XIII, SECT 155 60d-61a; ch xiv, SECT 168
64b-c;  ch  xvi-xix  65d-81d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 366b-d / Political
Economy,  369c-d  /  Social  Contract, bk i, 388d-389a; bk iv, 426b-d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c  42 Kant: Science of Right,
439a-441d;  451d-452a  43  Declaration  of Independence: la-3b passim 43
Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c; number 28, 97c-d; number 33, 108b-109a;
number  78, 230d-232d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 465d-466b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk vi, 244d-245d; EPILOGUE I, 668a-669c; 670d-671a 10c. The
justice   of   punishment  for  unjust  acts:  the  distinction  between
retribution  and  vengeance  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 9:6 / Exodus, :ii
:i2-2g esp 21:23-25 / Leviticus, 24:16-21 / Deuteronomy, 19:11-13,21 New
Testament: Romans, 13:2-4 5 Aeschylus: Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[306314]
73a-b,
[400-404] 74a
/ Eumenides 81a 91d esp [490-565] 86b-87a

[933a]
i  lOcto  lOd Chapter 42: JUSTICE 875 5 Sophocles: Electra 156a-169a,c 5
Euripides:   Medea   212a-224a,c   esp  [764-819]  218d-219b  /  Electra
327a-339a,c esp
[9071 100] 335b-337a / Orestes [470-629] 398d-400b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  99c-100a;  bk vii, 237d-239a; bk viii,
278c-279a;  bk  ix,  306c307a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
424d429a;  429c-434c;  bk  vii,  556d-557a  7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d /
Euthyphro,  194c-d  /  Republic,  bk  ix,  426d  /  Laws, bk ix, 743a-d;
746a-748d; bk x, 769d-770c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5
[1113^21iii4''2] 359d-360a; bk v, ch 4 379b-380b esp
[ii:52''3-3o]
379c-380a; ch 5
[1132^21-29]
380b-c; ch ii
[1138*7-10] 386b; [1138*20-23]
386c;  bk  x, ch 9 [1180*5-13] 434d / Rhetoric, bk I, ch 10 [1369^12-14]
612d  14 Plutarch: Theseus, 4a-b / Solon, 70d; 71b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xii,  ch  3,  344b;  bk  XIV,  ch  15 388d-390a; bk xix, ch 13
519a-520a;  ch  15  521a-c; bk xxi, ch 11-12 570b-571c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  19,  a  9,  ANS  116d-117d;  q  21, a 4, rep 3
126c-127c;  Q  49,  A  2, ANS 266a-c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 87 185c-192d; q 95, a i 226c-227c; q 105, a 2, ANS and rep 9-12
309d-316a;  q  108,  a  3, rep 2 334a-336b; part ii-ii, q 25, a 6, rep 2
504d-505d;  part  hi  suppl,  q  89, a 6, ans and rep i 1009d-1010c; a 7
lOlOd-lOllb;  a  8, ANS 1011b-1012a; q 99 1078b-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xix  [70145]  82b-83a  22  Chaucer: Tale ofMelibeus
401a-432a  esp par 55, 426b, par 63-65 428a-b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i, 94a; part it, 145a-d; 147b-c; 157d-158a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-24a
26 Shakespeare: Titus Andronicus, act iv, sc iii-iv 189d-192b / Merchant
of Venice, act iv, sc I 425c-430b / 2nd Henry IV, act v, sc h
[73-145] 498d-499b / Henry
V, act h, sc h 539a-541a 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure 174a204d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part i, 68b- 73a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  51, schol 439d; PROP 63, schol 444a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
ii, sect 7-12 26c-28a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28a-b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 27b-30a; 399c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 37d43c; bk
xii, 85c-86d; bk xix, 138c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 351b-d; 360b,d
[fni]
/ Political Economy, 371a-c / Social Contract, BK II, 398b-399a; 406c 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 175d-176a; 617b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
91a-93c passim

[933b]
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  306b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals,
391d-394a,c / Science of Right, 400b-d; 446a-449c esp 446b-447c, 448b-d;
450a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article hi, SECT 2 [493]-sECT 3
[511] 15d-16a; article
IV, SECT 2 [522-528] 16a-b; amendments, vVI 17b-c; viii 17d; xiii 18c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  272b-d;  302d-312a  passim,  esp 304c-305b; 312a-323a,c
passim  /  Utilitarianism,  467d-468c;  469c-470d;  471d-472d; 474b-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 96 36c-37a; par 99-100 37b-38a;
par  103  39b;  part  hi,  par  218 72c-d; par 220 73a-b; par 319, 106a;
additions,  60  125d; 62-65 126a-c; 74 127d-128a; 138 139a-b; 173 146d /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  214d-216a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii, 30b32a; bk v, 123c-124a; bk xii, 384c-d; 398b-d \0d.
The  correction of legal justice: equity in the application of human law
6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 32b-c; bk vi, 211d212a 7 Plato: Laws, bk ix,
754a-d;  bk  xi,  777d778b;  BK  XII,  785c-786a 8 Aristotle: To/?z<ri-,
bkvi,ch3  [141*15-18]  194b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 10 385c-386b /
Politics,  BK  III,  CH 15 [1286*10-37] 484b-d; ch 16 [1287*23-28] 485d;
[1287^15-25]  486a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 13 [1374*17-^24] 618c-619a; ch
15
[1375^25-^25] 619d-620b; [1376^19-21]
621b-c  14  Plutarch: Fabius, 150c-151a / Agesilaus, 494a-c / Agesilaus-
Pompey, 539a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, A 6 235a-d;
q  97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  100, a 8, ANS and rep i 259d-261a 23HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  i,  94d;  part  ii,  132d; 134b-135d; 136b; 142a-144d;
156b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 50b-51a; 519a-c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of
Venice,  act iv, sc I 425c-430b 27 Shakespeare: Timon of Athens, act hi,
sc   V   406d-408a   29   Cervantes:   Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a;
PARTii,333a-b;340d-343a;353b-356d;361a-d   30   BacOxn:  Advancement  of
Learning,  94d-95a  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiv 62b-64c 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  152b-154a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 8c-10c; 12b-c 38
Montesquieu  : Spirit ofLaws, bk vi, 35d-36a; 39b; 40a-b; 42a-c; bk xii,
85c-86d  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 397a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  73d-74b; 77d-78a; 91b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 399c-400a
43  Federalist:  number  78,  232c-d;  number  80,  237a-b;  number  83,
248d-249a 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 223229 73c-75b

[934a]
S76  THE GREAT IDEAS 11. Divine justice: the relation of God or the gods
to  man 1 la. The divine government of man: the justice and mercy of God
or  the gods Old Testament: Genesis, 3; 6:5-8:22 esp 8:2022; 18:20-19:29
/  Exodus,  20  /  Leviticus,  26  I  'Numbers, 13-14 esp 14:11-20; 25 /
Deuteronomy,  32  /  // Samuel, 24— (Z)) U Kings, 24 / // Chronicles, 6;
12—  (Z>)  II  Paralipomenon,  6; 12 / Nehemiah, 9:5-38— (Z)) II Esdras,
9-5-38  /  Job I Psalms, 5-7; 28; 37; 59-60; 73; 76; 81; 83; 89:14; 146—
(£))  Psalms, 5-7; 27; 36; 58-59; 72; 75; 80; 82; 88:15; 145 / Proverbs,
14:32 / Ecclesiastes, 12:14 / Isaiah, i; 30-31; 42 esp 42:1-7; 45:21-25;
59—  (D)  Isaias,  i; 30-31; 42 esp 42:1-7; 45:21-26; 59 / Jeremiah, 15;
24;  29-31;  34  —  (D)  Jeremias,  15;  24;  29-31; 34 / Lamentations I
Ezel^iel,  11; 14; 18; 33-34— (-0) Ezechiel, 11; 14; 18; 33-34 / Daniel,
4:4-37  —  ip) Daniel, 4 / Joel, 3 / Amos / Obadiah —(D) Abdias / Jonah—
(D)  Jonas  /  Micah,  1-3— (D) Micheas, 1-3 / Nahum / Malachiy 3-4— (D)
Malachias,  3-4  Apocrypha:  To^//,  3—  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 3 / Wisdom of
Solomon,  1-6  passim;  12—  (D)  OT,  Booy^ of Wisdom, 1-6 passim; 12 /
Ecclesiasticus,  16;  35— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 16; 35 / // Maccabees,
6:12-17—   (D)   OT,  7/  Machabees,  6:12-17  New  Testament:  Matthew,
5:22,29-30;    11:2024;    12:36-37;    13:24-30,36-43;    18:7-9,11-14;
19:16-20:16;  23  / Mar}{, 9:43-48; 10:17-31; 16:16— (D) Mark^, 9:42-47;
10:17-31;  16:16  /  Luke, 1:46-55; 6:36-38; 7:36-50; 10:25-28; 14:7-14;
15;  16:19-26;  18:1-8;  23:34,39-43  /  John,  5:30;  8:1-11  / Romans,
1:16-2:16;  6:28  /  Galatians, 6:7-8 / Ephesians, 2 / II Thessalonians,
2:10-12—  (D)  II  Thessalonians,  2:10-11  /  II Timothy, 4:8-9— (D) II
Ti?nothy,  4:8  /  Hebrews,  10:26-31  / / Peter, y.iS / II Peter, 2 / I
John, 1 :9 / Jude / Revelation passim, esp 17-20— (D) Apocalypse passim,
esp 17-20 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xxiv
[513-551] 176d-177a
/ Odyssey, bk i [11-95] 183a-184a 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [1-175]
la-3a / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon
[636-781]
58d-60b;
[i 560-1 566]
68c / Choephoroe [772-780] 77c / Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[279-289] 133c / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[430-459]
146d-147a,
[748783]
149c-d / Electra
[173-179]
157c  /  Trachiniae  [1264-1278]  181c  /  Philoctetes  [446-452] 186a 5
Euripides: Suppliants
[598-617]
263c-d / Helen [191-305] 300a-d;
[711-721] 304d-305a
/ Hecuba [1023-1033] 361c-d / Heracles Mad
[772-816] 371c-d
5 Aristophanes: Plutus [86-92] 630a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 20b-22a;
bk ii, 77a-b; bk iv, 159d; bk vi, 199c-d; 201d-202c;

[934b]
'  11/0  Ua  203a-b;  212c-213a;  bk vii, 237d-239a; bk VIII, 278d-279a;
283d;  bk  ix,  308a-c 6 Thvcydibes: Peloponnesian War, bk v, 506b-c; bk
VII, 560a-b 7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 437c-441a,c / Theaetetus, 530b-531a
/  Laws, bk iv, 682d-683b; BK IX, 757a; bk x 757d-771b / Seventh Letter^
806a  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [8-33] 103a-104a; [223296] 109a-llla; bk
xii [791-843] 375a-376b 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 26b-27a / Camillus, 108b-c
/  Aristides,  265c-d  / Phocion, 605b-d / Cato the Younger, 639d-640a /
Dion,  784d785a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 284b-c 17 Plotinus : Third
Ennead,  tr ii, ch 13 88d-89b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 4 2a;
bk ii, par 15 12b-c; bk hi, par 13-15 16C'17b; par 17 17d-18a; bk v, par
1-2  27a-c;  bk vii, par 5 44c-d; bk ix, par 34-36 70c-71a / City ofGod,
bk I, ch 21 142d-143a; bk v, ch 9-11 213b216d; CH 15-16 220d-221b; ch 21
226a-c;  bk XI, ch 23 334c-335c; bk xii, ch 3 343d-344b; bk XIII, CH 1-8
360a-363c;  ch 12-16 365d367d; CH 21 371a-c; bk xiv, ch i 376b,d377a; ch
15 388d-390a; bk xv, ch 24-25 418d-419b; bk xvi, ch 4 425b-426a; bk xix,
CH  11-17  516d-523a; ch 21 524a-525a; bk xx, ch I 530a-531a; bk xxi, ch
11-12  570b-571c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c; ch 32 633c-d;
bk ii, ch 23 648a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, A 6, ANS
and rep i 113c-114d; a 9, ans 116d117d; Q 21 124b-127c; q 22, a 2, rep 4
128d130d;  Q 65, A 2, REP 3 340b-341b; q 96, a 3, REP 3 512a-c; q 103, a
5,  rep 2-3 531b-532b; a 8, rep I 533d-534b; q 105, a 6, rep 2 543b544a;
part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  7 642a-d; q 21, a 4 719d-720a,c; q 39, a 2, rep 3
790d-791b; q 47, A I, rep I 819c-820b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  72,  A  5  115a-116b;  q 73, a 9, rep 3 126d-128a; a 10, REP 2
128a-d;  q  79,  aa  3-4  158a-159c;  q  81,  A 2, REP I 164d-165c; q 87
185c-192d; q 91, AA 4-6 210c-213c; q 94, a 5, rep 2 224d-225d; QQ 98-108
239b-337d;  part  ii-ii,  q 19, a i, REP 2 465a-d; q 24, a 12 499c-500d;
part  hi suppL, QQ 97-99 1066a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp hell,
ii
[i]-iii
[18] 2c-4b, XI 15a-16b, purgatory, hi [103145]
57a-c, VI
[25-48]
61a- b, xvi
[52-81]
77b-c, XVIII [40-75] 80b-c, xix
[i 15-126] 82d,
xxx-xxxi 99b-102b, paradise, hi
[i]-v
[87]
109b-113a, VII [19-120] 115b-116b, xviii [52]- XX [148] 134a-138b, xxxii
[37-84]  155a-c  22  Chaucer:  Tale  ofMelibeus,  par  77-78, 431a432a /
Parson's  Tale  495a-550a esp par 10 498b-502a, par 56 527b-528b, par 68
533b534a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 88c-89a; part ii, 160c-161a;
163d-164a;   part  hi,  197d-198a;  240c-d;  245b-c;  part  iv,  254a-b;
276d-277a

[935a]
HI?  Chapti:r42:  JUSTICE 877 25 Montaigne: Essays, 152d 153a; 250a-251c
26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice, act iv, sc I [184-202] 427c m 27
Shakespeare: Hamlef, act i, sc v
[9-22]
37a  / Measurefor Measure, act ii, sc ii [7379] 182d / Cymbeline, act v,
sc iv
[9-28]
481a-b   29   Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  71c-d  31  Descartes:
Meditations, 69b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a
/  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [1-26] 93b 94a; BK III [80-166] 137a-139a esp
[131-134] 138a;
[372-415]
143b-144b esp
[397-411]
144a-b; BK X 274a-298b esp
[1-16]
274b,
[162-223]
278a-279a,
[1046-1104]
297a-298b; bk xi
[22-44] 299b-300a; bk xii [223-248] 324a-b;
[285-484]
325b-329b  /  Samson  Agonistes  339a-378a esp [293-299] 346a, [667-709]
354a355a.
[1156-1177]
364b-365a,
[1669-1707]
376a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 497 259b260a; 584 276b-277a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c; sect 12-13
107b-108c;  ch  III,  sect  5  113c;  bk  ii, ch xxi, sect 62 194c-d; ch
xxviii,  sect  8 230a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 108-109
500b-501a  37  Fielding: Tom Jo7ies, 20a-21a; 75c-d 42 Y^^sr: Judgement,
592a-c  44  BoswELi.: Johnson, 482a-d; 539d-540a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
30a-36b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 272a-b; bk XIV, 606a-607a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 127c-d; bk vi, 151a-152a; bk xi,
341c-342c  lib.  Man's  debt  to  God or the gods: the religious acts of
piety  and  worship  Old  Testament: Genesis, 22; 28:18-22 / Exodus, 20;
32-34  /  Leviticus,  18:1-5;  26  / Deuteronomy, 4:1-40; 5-6; 8; 10-12;
23:21-23  /  Joshua,  22:1-6—  (D)  Josue, 22:1-6 / Job, 9:2-21 / Psalms
passim, esp 5:7-8, 22:22-31, 27:1-14, 29:2, 40:8, 78:5-8, 89:1-52, 95:6,
96:8-9, 99:1-9, 132:7, 138:1-2— (£)) Psalms passim, esp 5:8-9, 21:23-32,
26:1-14,  28:2,  39:9,  77:5-8,  88:1-53,  94:6,  95:8-9, 98:1-9, 131:7,
137:1-2 / Proverbs, 21:3 / Ecclesiastes, 5:4-5; 12:13— (D) Ecclesiastes,
5:3-4;  12:13  / Micah, 6:8-(Z)) Micheas, 6:8 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
2:15-18;  18:22-24; 35— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:18-23; 18:2224; 35 / /
Maccabees,  2:20-28; 4:36-61 — (D) OT, / Machabees, 2:20-28; 4:36-61 New
Testament:  Matthew,  18:23-35;  22:21  /  Mar\, 12:17 / Luke, 10:25-27;
17:7-10;  20:25 / John, 4:21-24 / Romans, 3:19-28; 4:1-8; 5:8-21; 8:1-17
/ Galatians, 3:10-13; 5:1-5 4 HoxMer: Iliad, bk i 3a-9a,c; bk ii
[394-431]
14a-b: bk ix [485-526] 62a-b / Odyssey, bk hi
[1-68] 193a-d

[935b]
5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c / Persians
[800-842] 23d-24b
/ Seven Against Thebes
[1011-1084] 38b-39a,c
/ Agamemnon
[351-402] 55d-56b
5  Sophocles  :  Oedipus  the King [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus
[461-509] 118b-d / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[1-99]
131a-132a,
[446470] 134d-135a / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[666677] 148d, [748-783] 149c-d, [i3i6-i42i]154b155a,c
/ Electra
[1060-1097]
164d-165a  /  Philoctetes  [1440-1444] 195a,c 5 Euripides: Ion 282a-297d
esp  [82-183] 282d283c, [585-647] 287d-288b / Helen [865-1031] 306c-308a
/ Bacchantes 340a-352a,c csp [9771023] 348b-c / Hecuba
[786-805] 359c-d
/  Phoenician Maidens [1625-1670] 392b-d 7 Plato: Euthyphro, 196c-198a /
Apology  200a212a,c  passim  /  Republic,  bk  i,  297a-b / Laws, BK IV,
682d-683b; bk x, 768d-771b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[105^2-6]
148c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk i, ch i2 347a-b; bk iv, CH2 [1122^18-23]
369c;  BKViii,  ch  9  [1160*1929]  412b-c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 9
[1329*2634]  533d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 16, 122c-d; BK II,
CH  16,  158b-d; bk hi, ch 24, 208d-210a 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk i,
sect  17 255d256d; BK II, sect 13 258c; bk hi, sect 13 262c; BK IX, sect
i 291a-c; sect 40 295b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii
[687-720] 143b-144b;
BK IV
[331-361]
176a-177a; bk v
[42-60]
188a-b; bk xii [176-21 i] 358b-359b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
2  27b-c; bk IX, par 36 71a / City of God, bk i ch 15 138c-139c; bk vii,
ch  27-31  259c-262a;  bk  x, ch 1-7 298b,d-303a; ch 16 308b-309c; ch 19
310d-311b;  bk xix, ch 19 523b-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 10 627b;
ch  22-23 629b630c; CH 26-27 631b-d; ch 29-30 632a-633b; CH 35 634c-d 20
Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, A 3, ANs 51c-52b; q 99, a 3
247a-248a;  q  100,  A 8 259d-261a; qq 101-103 265d-304a; part III, Q 25
839c-845a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  99,  a  4  1083a-1084a 21 Dante: Divine
Cotnedy, purgatory, xxxXXXI 99b-102b; paradise, hi [i]-v
[87] 109b113a;
VII
[19-120]
115b-116b; xx
[16-148]
136d-138b; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale 463b-471b
23   HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  161b-163d  25  Montaigne:  E/^aj'^,
152b-156d;  233a-b;  242d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol i
434d-435b  32  Milton: Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk IV [720-735]
168a-b;   bk  v  [153-208]  178b-179b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1334-1379]
368b-369b  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 470 256a;
476  256b-257a;  482  258a;  489,491  259a; 531 264b; 539 265b 35 Locke:
Toleration, lb; 16c

[936a]
CWSS-KEFEKENCES sal AND Particular 6c.

[936b]
878  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  U^  ,,  ^  ^.  .  .  .  ,  ,  .  ,^  J  -  ,  42
KANT:Pmc?/c<2/i?(f^^o«,325a-327d;344c-348b   (11.  Utvtne  justice:  the
relation  ofGod  or the gods j judgement 61lac to man lib. Man's debt to
God  or  the  gods:  44 Boswell: Johnson, 84b-c; 262b the religious acts
ofpiety and worship.) 45 Hegel : Philosophy of History, part i, 225b; 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  155-156  part  hi, 290d-291c^ 311b-d
444b-d  48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  30a-36b  37  Fielding:  Tow /owd'^,
187d-188a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 122b-c; 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  259b-260a  bk  vi,  271c-d  For:  Matters  relevant  to  the
conception of justice as a virtue and as it relates to the other virtues
and  to  happiness,  see  Courage  4;  Good and Evil 3e; Happiness 5-5b;
Temperance  la;  Virtue  and  Vice  2a(i),  3b;  Will  8c;  and  for the
theological  doctrine  of  original justice, see Sin 3a. The relation of
justice  and  duty,  see Duty 7; Will 8e. The comparison of justice with
love  and  friendship,  see Love 3c, 4b. Other considerations of natural
rights  and  civil liberties, see Law 4e, 7c; Liberty le-ig; Slavery 3d;
Tyranny  5a.  Problems  of  economic justice, see Democracy 4a(2); Labor
7a-7b, 7c(2), 7d-7f; Liberty 2d; Slavery 4a-4c, 5a-5b; Wealth 5e, 6d(2),
lod.  Problems  of justice in government and law, see Aristocracy la-ib;
Constitution  5a;  Democracy 4a-4a(i), 4b; Honor 4b; Law 5c, 6c; Liberty
if;  Monarchy  ia(2),  4e(3), 5a-5b; Oligarchy 4, 5a; Slavery 5a-5b, 6d;
State  3e;  Tyranny  la-ib,  4b,  6;  and for the special problem of the
distinction between justice and equity, see Law 5h; UniverJustice in the
relation  of  states  to one another and in the issues of war and peace,
see Law 4g; State 9c; War and Peace 3a-3b, iib. The issue concerning the
justice   of   punishment  as  a  political  instrument,  see  LAw6e(3);
Punishment  ib,  2,  4c-4d.  The  justice  of  divine punishment and the
relation of God's mercy to God's justice, see God

[937a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Plutarch.  "Delays  in  Divine Justice," in Moralia Aquinas.
Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq  57-80,  108-113, 120-122 Dante. On
World-Government  or  De  Monarchia, BK I, CH II ; BK II, CH 6 F. Bacon.
"Of Usury," in Essays Spinoza. Tractatus Politicus {Political Treatise),
ch  2  Hume.  A  Treatise  ofHuman  Nature,  bk  hi,  part ii, SECT I-VI
Fielding.  Amelia  A.  Smith.  The  Theory ofMoral Sentiments^ part ii .
Lectures  on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms Kant. Lectures on Ethics,
pp 191-253 Hegel. The Philosophy ofMind, sect ii, sub-sect c, (bb, b, c)
DosTOEVsKY.  The  House of the Dead Tolstoy. Resurrection II. Cicero. De
Finibus  {On the Supreme Good) . De OfficHs {On Duties), 11 (ix) Seneca.
De  Beneficiis  {On  Benefits)  Saadia  Gaon.  The  Boo\  of Beliefs and
Opinions,  treatise  IV-V,  IX  Xjalssaga  Langland. Piers Plowman Soto.
Libri Decem de Justitia et Jure Spenser. The Faerie Queene, bk v Hooker.
Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity Grotius. The Rights of War and
Peace  H.  More.  An  Account  of  Virtue  {Enchiridion  Ethicum), bk ii
Leibnitz.  Philosophical  Worlds,  ch  8  {On  the  Notions of Right and
Justice)   \'oLTAiRE.  Essay  on  Toleration  .  "Equality,"  "Justice,"
"Rights," "Toleration," in A Philosophical Dictionary

[937b]
Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  879  Voltaire.  The  Ignorant  Philosopher, ch 32
Bentham.  Defence  of  Usury  Paine.  Rights  of  Man Godwin. An Enquiry
Concerning Political Justice LiEBER. Manual of Political Ethics Whewell.
The  Elements of Morality, bk ii, ch 2122; BK IV Proudhon. De la justice
dans  la  revolution  et  dans  Veglise  Bakunin.  God  and the State H.
SiDGwicK.  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  bk  hi,  CH 5 George. Progress and
Poverty  T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results,  viii  T. H. Green. The
Principles  of Political Obligation, (h,i,o) O. W. Holmes Jr. The Common
Law  Ritchie.  Natural  Rights  Zola. Letter to M. Felix Fame {J'accuse)
Willoughby.  Social  Justice Vecchio. The Formal Bases of Law Croce. The
Philosophy  of the Practical G. Dickinson. Justice and Liberty Stammler.
The  Theory  ofJustice Kafka. The Trial Hobhouse. The Elements of Social
Justice  Hocking. Present Status ofthe Philosophy ofLaw and of Rights J.
Dickinson. Administrative Justice and the Supremacy of Law in the United
States Berdyayev. Christianity and the Class War M. R. Cohen. Reason and
Nature,  bk hi, ch 4 Tawney. The Acquisitive Society . Equality MouNiER.
A   Personalist   Manifesto   Michel.  Christian  Social  Reconstruction
Maritain.  Ransoming  the Time, ch i . The Rights of Man and Natural Law
Kelsen. Society and Nature

[938a]
INTRODUCTION  KNOWLEDGE,  like  being, is a term of comprehensive scope.
Its  comprehensiveness is, in a way, correlative with that of being. The
only  thing  which  cannot  be  an object of knowledge or opinion, which
cannot  be thought about in any way except negatively, is that which has
no  being of any sort— in short, nothing. Not all things may be knowable
to  us,  but  even  the skeptic who severely limits or completely doubts
man's  power to know is usually wilHng to admit that things beyond man's
knowledge  are  in  themselves  knowable. Everyone except Berkeley would
agree  that the surfaces of bodies which we cannot see are not, for that
reason, in themselves invisible. The consideration of knowledge extends,
therefore,  to  all things knowable, to all kinds of knowers, to all the
modes  of  knowledge,  and  all  the methods of knowing. So extensive an
array of topics exceeds the possibility of treatment in a single chapter
and  requires  this  chapter  to  be  related to many others. The Cross-
References which follow the References indicate the other chapters which
deal  with  particulars we cannot consider here. For example, the nature
of  history,  science,  philosophy,  and theology, and their distinction
from one another, are treated in the chapters devoted to those subjects.
So,  too,  the chapters on metaphysics, mathematics, physics, mechanics,
and  medicine  deal  with  the  characteristics  and  relations of these
special sciences. The psychological factors in knowing— the faculties of
sense  and mind, of memory and imagination, the nature of experience and
reasoning—also  have  their own chapters. Still other chapters deal with
the   logical   elements  of  knowledge,  such  as  idea  and  judgment,
definition,  hypothesis,  principle, induction, and reasoning, logic and
dialectic.

[938b]
Chapter  A,y KNOWLEDGE The program which Locke sets himself in his Essay
Co7icerning  Human  Understanding  is  often  taken to include the basic
questions about knowledge. His purpose, he tells us, is "to inquire into
the  original,  certainty,  and extent of human knowledge, together with
the  grounds  and  degrees  of  belief,  opinion, and assent." Two other
matters,  not explicitly mentioned by Locke in his opening pages, assume
central  importance in the fourth book of his essay. One is the question
about  the  nature  of knowledge itself. The other concerns the kinds of
knowledge.  It  may be thought that certain questions are prior to these
and all others. Is knowledge possible? Can we know anything? The man the
skeptic  challenges  is  one who thinks that knowledge is attainable and
who  may  even  claim  to  possess knowledge of some sort. But the issue
between the skeptic and his adversaries cannot be simply formulated. Its
formulation  depends  in  part  upon the meaning given knowledge and the
various things with which it is sometimes contrasted, such as belief and
opinion,  or ignorance and error. It also depends in part on the meaning
of   truth   and  probability.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  some
consideration  of the nature of knowledge should precede the examination
of  the claims concerning knowledge which provoke skeptical denials. The
theory  of  knowledge  is  a  field  of many disputes. Most of the major
varieties  of  doctrine  or analysis are represented in the tradition of
the  great  books.  But  the fact that knowledge involves a relationship
between  a  knower  and  a known seems to go unquestioned. William James
expresses this insight, perhaps more dogmatically than some would allow,
in  the  statement  that  knowledge  "is  a  thoroughgoing  dualism.. It
supposes  two  elements, mind knowing and thing known . . . Neither gets
out of itself or into the other, neither in any way is the other, 880 I

[939a]
neither  inal^s  the  other.  They  just  stand face to face in a common
world,  and  one  simply knows, or is known unto, its counterpart." This
remains  true  even  when  attention  is  turned  to the special case of
knowledge  about  knowledge  or  the  knower knowing himself. The mind's
examination  of  itself  simply  makes the mind an object to be known as
well  as  a  knower.  This  suggests  a second point about the nature of
knowledge which seems to be undisputed. Ifknowledge relates a knower toa
known,  then  what  is  somehow  possessed  when a person claims to have
knowledge,  is the object known. It does not seem possible for anyone to
say  that  he  knows something without meaning that he has that thing in
mind.  "Some  sort of signal," James writes, "must be given by the thing
to  the  mind's brain, or the knowing will not occur—we find as a matter
of  fact  that  the mere existence of a thing outside the brain is not a
sufficient  cause  for our knowing it : it must strike the brain in some
way,  as  well as be there, to be known." What is not in any way present
to  or  represented  in  the  mind  is not known in any of ' the various
senses  of  the  word  "know." What the mind cannot reach to and somehow
grasp  cannot be known. The words which are common synonyms for knowing—
"apprehending"  and  "comprehending"—convey  this  sense  that knowledge
somehow takes hold of and surrounds its object. That knowledge is a kind
of  possession  occasions  the  comparisons which have been made between
knowledge  and  love.  The ancients observed that likeness and union are
involved  in  both.  Plato, for example, suggests in the Sytnposium that
both  the  knower  and the lover strive to become one with their object.
"Love  is  also a philosopher," Diotima tells Socrates, and, as "a lover
of  wisdom,"  the  philosopher  is  also  a  lover.  With regard to some
objects,  love  and knowledge are almost inseparable. To know them is to
love  them.  But  this  does  not  hold  for  all  objects, nor does the
inseparability  of  knowledge  and  love  in certain cases prevent their
analytical  distinction  in  all.  Like  is  known  by like, but unlikes
attract  each  other. Furthermore, according to one theory of knowledge,
expounded by Aquinas, the knower is satisfied to possess an image of the
thing to be known. This image

[939b]
Chapter  43: KNOWLEDGE 881 provides the likeness through which knowledge
occurs;  and  thus, Aquinas writes, "the idea of the thing understood is
in  the one who understands." The lover, on the other hand, is "inclined
to  the thing itself, as existing in itself." He seeks to be united with
it  directly.  The  nobility  or  baseness  of the object known does not
affect  the  knower  as  the  character  of the object loved affects the
lover.  This  understanding of the difference between knowledge and love
leads  Aquinas to say that "to love God is better than to know God; but,
on  the contrary, to know corporeal things is better than to love them."
The  principle  of  likeness  between  knower  and  known  does  not  go
undisputed.  On  the  contrary,  the opposite views here form one of the
basic  issues  about  the  nature of knowledge. The issue is whether the
thing  known  is actually present to the knower, existing in the mind or
consciousness  exactly  as  it exists in itself; or whether the thing is
represented  in  the mind by a Ukeness of itself, through which the mind
knows  it.  In this view, the mode of existence of the thing outside the
mind is different from the way in which its representative exists in the
mind. Berkeley, at one extreme, identifies being and being known. "As to
what  is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any
relation to their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible,"
he  writes.  "Their esse is percipi, nor is it possible they should have
any existence, out of the minds or thinking things which perceive them."
At  the other extreme are those hke Kant for whom the thing in itself is
unknowable  precisely  because  there  can be no resemblance between the
phenomenal   order  of  objects  represented  under  the  conditions  of
experience and the noumenal order of the unconditioned. "All conceptions
of  things  in  themselves," he writes, "must be referred to intuitions,
and  with  us  men these can never be other than sensible, and hence can
never  enable  us  to  know  objects as things in themselves but only as
appearances.  .  . . The unconditioned," he adds, "can never be found in
this  chain  of  appearances." In between these extremes there are those
who agree that things exist apart from being known without ceasing to be
knowable, but who nevertheless differ with respect to whether

[940a]
882  THE  GREAT IDEAS the thing exists in reaUty in the same way that it
exists   in  the  mind.  The  several  forms  of  idealism  and  reahsm,
distinguished  in  the  chapter  on  Idea, mark the range of traditional
differences  in the discussion of this difficult problem. For ant theory
of  what  knowledge  is  there  is  a  distinction between knowledge and
ignorance  —between  having  or  not  having something in mind. Nor does
anyone  confuse  ignorance  and  error. The mind in error claims to know
that  of which, in fact, it is ignorant. This, as Socrates points out in
the  Meno, makes it easier to teach a person aware of his ignorance than
a  person  in  error; for the latter, supposing himself to know, resists
the  teacher.  Hence  getting a person to acknowledge ignorance is often
the  indispensable  first  step  in  teaching. But though the difference
between  knowledge  and  ignorance  and that between ignorance and error
seems  to  be  commonly  understood,  it  does not follow that everybody
similarly  agrees  upon the difference between knowledge and error. This
much  is  agreed,  that to know is to possess the truth about something,
whereas  to  err  is  to  be deceived by falsity mistaken for truth. The
disagreement  of  the  philosophers begins, however, when the meaning of
truth  and  falsity is examined. Truth is one thing for those who insist
upon  some  similarity  between  the thing known and that by which it is
known or represented in the mind. It is another for those who think that
knowledge   can   be   gained   without   the  mediation  of  images  or
representations.  In  the first case, truth will consist in some kind of
correspondence  between  what  the  mind  thinks  or understands and the
reality  it  tries  to  know.  In the other, truth will be equivalent to
consistency  among  the  mind's  own  ideas.  The  examination  of  this
fundamental  disagreement is reserved for the chapter on Truth. Here the
identification   of   knowing  with  having  the  truth  calls  for  the
consideration  of  another  distinction,  first  made  by  Plato. In his
language,  as  in  that  of  Aristotle  and others, it is the difference
between  knowledge  and  opinion.  Sometimes,  as  with Locke, a similar
distinction  is made in terms of knowledge and judgment; sometimes it is
made  in  terms  of knowledge and belief; sometimes in terms of adequate
and

[940b]
inadequate,  or  certain and probable, knowledge. The difference between
these opposites, unHke that between knowledge and error, is not a matter
of  truth  and  falsity.  There  is  such  a  thing  as "right opinion,"
according  to  Socrates,  and  it  is  "not less useful than knowledge."
Considering  the truth so far as it affects action, Socrates claims that
the  man  with  right opinion "will be just as good a guide if he thinks
the  truth,  as  he  who  knows the truth." The difference between right
opinion  and  knowledge  is  here  expressed by the contrast between the
words  "thinks"  and  "knows."  It  does not consist in the truth of the
conclusion,  but  in the way that conclusion has been reached or is held
by  the mind. The trouble with right opinion as compared with knowledge,
Socrates  explains,  is  that  it  lacks stability and permanence. Right
opinions  are  useful  "while they abide with us . . . but they run away
out of the human soul and do not remain long, and therefore they are not
of  much  value  until they are fastened by the tie of the cause"—or, in
other  words,  until  they are fixed in the mind by the reasons on which
they  are grounded. "When they are bound," Socrates declares, "they have
the  nature  of  knowledge and . . . they are abiding." At this point in
his  conversation  with Meno, Socrates makes the unusual confession that
"there  are  not  many  things which I profess to know, but this is most
certainly  one  of  them,"  namely,  that  "knowledge  differs from true
opinion."  It  may  be that Socrates claims to know so little because he
regards  knowledge  as  involving  so  much  more than simply having the
truth,  as  the  man  of right opinion has it. In addition to having the
truth,  knowledge  consists  in  seeing  the reason why it is true. This
criterion can be interpreted to mean that a proposition which is neither
self-evident  nor  demonstrated expresses opinion rather than knowledge.
Even  when it happens to be true, the opinion is quaUfied by some degree
of  doubt  or  some  estimate  of probability and counterprobability. In
contrast,  when  the mind has adequate grounds for its judgment, when it
knows that it knows and why, it has the certainty of knowledge. I

[941a]
For  some  writers,  such  as  Plato,  certitude  is as inseparable from
knowledge as truth is. To speak of "a false knowledge as well as a true"
seems   to  him  impossible;  and  "uncertain  knowledge"  is  as  self-
contradictory  a  phrase  as  "false  knowledge."  Others  use  the word
"knowledge"   more   loosely  to  cover  both  adequate  and  inadequate
knowledge,  the probable as well as the certain. They make a distinction
within  the  sphere  of  knowledge that is equivalent to the distinction
between knowledge and opinion. Spinoza, for example, distinguishes three
kinds  of  knowledge.  He  groups  the  perception  of individual things
through  the  bodily  senses,  which  he  calls  "knowledge  from  vague
experience,"  with  knowledge "from signs" which depends on ideas formed
by the memory and imagination. "These two ways of looking at things," he
writes,  "I shall hereafter call knowledge of the first kind —opinion or
imagination.  '  In contrast, that which is derived "from our possessing
common  notions  and adequate ideas ' he calls "reason of the properties
of things, and knowledge of the second kind." ' The third kind, which he
calls  "intuitive science," is that sort of knowing which "advances from
an  adequate idea of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge
of  the  essence of things." Knowledge of the second and third kinds, he
maintains, "is necessarily true." That there can be falsity in the first
kind,  and  only  there, indicates that it is not genuinely knowledge at
all,  but  what  other  writers would insist upon calling "opinion." The
several   meanings   of  the  word  "belief"  are  determined  by  these
distinctions.  Sometimes  belief  is  associated with opinion, sometimes
with knowledge, and sometimes it is regarded as an intermediate state of
mind.  But  in  any of these meanings belief stands in contrast to make-
believe,  and  this  contrast  has a bearing on knowledge and opinion as
well.  To know or to opine puts the mind in some relation to the real or
actual  rather than the merely possible, and subjects it to the criteria
of  truth and falsity. The f^mciful or imaginary belongs to the realm of
the  possible  (or  even  the  impossible)  and the mind in imagining is
fancy-free—  free  from  the  restraints  and  restrictions of truth and
reality.

[941b]
Chapter  43: KNOWLEDGE 883 Skepticism in its most extreme form takes the
position  that  there is nothing true or false. But even those who, like
Montaigne,  deny  certitude with respect to everything except matters of
religious  faith,  do  not  go  this  far. In his Apology for Raimond de
Sebonde  he  concedes  that  if  opinions  are  weighed  as more or less
probable,  their truth or falsity is implied —at least as being the hmit
which  an  increasing probability or improbability approaches. Referring
to ancient skeptics of the Academic school, he comments on the fact that
they  acknowledged  "some  things to be more likely than others"—as, for
example,  that  snow  is  white  rather  than  black.  The  more extreme
skeptics,  the  Pyrrhonians,  he  points  out, were bolder and also more
consistent.  They  refused  to  inchne  toward one proposition more than
toward  another, for to do so, Montaigne declares, is to recognize "some
more  apparent  truth  in  this  than  in  that."  How  can  men "suffer
themselves,"  he  asks,  "to  incline to and be swayed by probabihty, if
they  know  not  the truth itself? How should they know the simihtude of
that  whereof they do not know the essence?" In this respect Montaigne's
own  skepticism  tends to be of the more moderate variety, since, in the
realm  of  action  at  least,  he  would admit the need for judgments of
probability.  But in all other respects, he takes a firm skeptical stand
that nothing is self-evident, nothing has been proved. The contradictory
of  everything  has been asserted or argued by someone. "Men can have no
principles," he writes, "if not revealed to them by the Divinity; of all
the  rest,  the beginning, the middle, and the end are nothing but dream
and  vapor  Every human presupposition and every declaration has as much
authority,  one  as  another.  .  .  .  The persuasion of certainty is a
certain  testimony  of  folly  and  extreme  uncertainty." The skeptical
extreme  is represented in the great books only through references to it
for  the  purpose  of  refutation.  Aristotle  in  the  Metaphysics, for
example, reports the position of those who say that all propositions are
true  or  that  all  propositions  are false, and who therefore deny the
principle  of contradiction and with it the distinction between true and
false.  But  if  all  propositions  are true, then the proposition "Some
propositions are false" is also true; if

[942a]
884  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  all propositions are false, the proposition "All
propositions are false" is also false. The skeptic may reply, of course,
that  he  is  not  checked by arguments which try to make him contradict
himself,  for  he  does not mind contradicting himself. To this there is
only  one  answer,  which  is not to argue with the skeptic any further.
From  the skeptic's point of view his position is irrefutable so long as
he  does  not  allow  himself  to  accept  any of the standards by which
refutation  can  be effected. From his opponent's point of view complete
skepticism  is  self-refuting  because  if  the  skeptic  says  anything
definite  at  all, he appears to have some knowledge or at least to hold
one  opinion  in  preference  to  another.  His only choice is to remain
silent.  If  he  insists  upon  making  statements  in defiance of self-
contradiction, his opponent can do nothing but walk away. "It may seem a
very  extravagant  attempt of the skeptics to destroy reason by argument
and  ratiocination,"  Hume  writes,  "yet this is the grand scope of all
their  enquiries and disputes." He has in mind the excessive skepticism,
or  Pyrrhonism,  from  which  he  tries  to  distinguish a mitigated and
beneficial form of skepticism. Referring to Berkeley's arguments against
the  independent  reality of matter or bodies, Hume says their effect is
skeptical,  despite Berkeley's professed intention to the contrary. That
his  arguments  are  skeptical  "appears from this, that they admit ofno
answer  and  produce  no  conviction. Their only effect is to cause that
momentary  amazement and irresolution and confusion, which is the result
of  skepticism."  Here  and  elsewhere,  as in his comment on Descartes'
skeptical  method of doubting everything which can be doubted, Hume does
not  seem to think that excessive skepticism is refutable or even false.
But  it  is  impractical.  "The  great  subverter  of  Pyrrhonism or the
excessive   principles   of   skepticism,"  he  says,  "is  action,  and
employment,  and  the  occupations  of life." Extreme skepticism becomes
untenable  in  thought  the moment thought must face the choices of life
and  take  some  responsibility  for  action. There is, however, "a more
mitigated  skepticism or academical philosophy which may be both durable
and  useful." This, according to Hume, consists in becoming "sensible of
the

[942b]
strange  infirmities  of  human understanding," and consequently in "the
limitation  of our enquiries to such subjects as are best adapted to the
narrow  capacity of human understanding." His own view of the extent and
certainty  of  human  knowledge seems to him to exemplifv such mitigated
skepticism  in  operation.  The  only  objects  with  respect  to  which
demonstration  is  possible are quantity and number. Mathematics has the
certitude  of knowledge, but it deals only with relations between ideas,
not  with  what Hume calls "matters of fact and existence." Such matters
"are evidently incapable of demonstration." This is the sphere of "moral
certainty,"  which  is  not  a  genuine  certainty, but only a degree of
probability  sufficientfor  action.  Probabilities  are  the  best  that
experimental  reasoning or inquiry about matters of fact can achieve. If
probability  is characteristic of opinion rather than knowledge, then we
can  have  nothing  better  than opinion concerning real existences. The
diametrical  opposite  to  the  extreme of skepticism would have to be a
dogmatism  which  placed no objects beyond the reach of human knowledge,
which  made  no  distinction between degrees of knowability and admitted
equal  certitude  in all matters. Like excessive skepticism this extreme
is  not  a  position  actually  held  in  the great books. All the great
thinkers  who  have  considered  the problem of human knowledge have set
limits to man's capacity for knowledge. They have placed certain objects
beyond  man's  power  to apprehend at all, or have distinguished between
those  which  he  can  apprehend  in some inadequate fashion, but cannot
comprehend. They have indicated other objects concerning which his grasp
is adequate and certain. They all adopt a "mitigated skepticism"— to use
Hume's  phrase—  if  this  can be taken to mean avoiding the extremes of
saying  that  nothing  is knowable at all and that everything is equally
knowable.  But they differ in the criteria they employ to set the limits
of  knowledge  and  to  distinguish  between  the areas of certainty and
probability.  Consequently  they  differ  in  their determination of the
knowability  of  certain  types of objects, such as God or the infinite,
substance or cause, matter or spirit, the real or the ideal, the self or
the thing in itself.

[943a]
For  example, Plato and Aristotle agree that knowledge must be separated
from opinion and c\cn appeal to certain common principles in making that
separation;  but  they  do not define the scope of knowledge in the same
way,  as  is  indicated  by  their disagreement about the knowability of
sensible things. Nor do Descartes and Locke, Bacon and Spinoza, Hume and
Kant  agree  about  the  knowability  of God or of the soul or about the
conditions  any  object  must  meet  in  order to be knowable. All alike
proceed  from  a  desire  to be critical. Each criticizes what other men
have  proposed  as knowledge and each proposes a new method by which the
pursuit  of knowledge will be safeguarded from illusory hopes or endless
controversy. In this last respect the moderns depart most radically from
their  mediaeval  and  ancient  predecessors. At all times men have been
interested  in examining knowledge itself as well as in exercising their
powers  to  know.  But  in  the earlier phase of the tradition knowledge
about  knowledge  does  not  seem  to  take  precedence  over  ail other
inquiries  or  to be prerequisite to them. On the contrary, the ancients
proceed  as  if  the  study  of  knowledge  necessarily  presupposed the
existence of knowledge. With them the exammation takes place because the
mind  is essentially reflexive rather than for reasons of selfcriticism.
But beginning with Descartes' Discourse on the Method, in which a method
of  uni-  \  ersal  doubt  is  proposed  to  clear the ground betore the
foundations  of  the sciences can be laid, I he consideration of knowing
is  put  before  any  attempt  to know. Sometimes, as with Descartes and
Bacon,  the  emphasis  is upon a new method which will at last establish
knowledge  on  a firm footing or ad- \ ance learning. Sometimes, as with
Locke  and  Hume,  attention  is  given  first  of all to the faculi\ of
understanding  itself.  "If  we  can find out," says Locke, "how far the
understanding  can  extend its views, how far it has faculties to attain
certainty,  and  in what cases it can only judge and guess, we may learn
to  content ourselves with what is attainable by us in this state. . . .
When  we  know  our  own  strength,  we  shall  the  better know what to
undertake  with  hopes  of  success;  and when we have well surveyed the
powers ofour own minds, and made some estimate of what we may expect

[943b]
Chapter  43: KNOWLEDGE 885 from them, we shall not be inclined either to
sit  still,  and  not  set  our  thoughts  to work at all, in despair of
knowing  anything;  nor,  on  the  other  side, question everything, and
disclaim  all  knowledge, because some things are not to be understood."
Hume also proposes that a study ofhuman understanding precede everything
else,  to  "show from an exact analysis of its powers and capacity" what
subjects  it  is  or is not fitted to investigate. "There is a truth and
falsehood  in  all propositions on this subject which lie not beyond the
compass  of human understanding." No one can doubt that a science of the
mind  or knowledge about knowing— is possible unless he entertains "such
a  skepticism  as  is  entirely subversive of all speculations, and even
action."  Disagreeing  with the principles of Locke and Hume, as well as
with  their conclusions, Kant does approve the priority they give to the
question  of  the  possibility  of  knowing  certain objects. To proceed
otherwise,  as  Kant  charges  most  other  philosophers  with doing, is
dogmatism.  The  use of the word "critique" in the title of Kant's three
major  works  signifies his intention to construct a critical philosophy
which  does  not  presume  that  "it  is possible to achieve anything in
metaphysic  without  a  previous  criticism of pure reason." He does not
object  to  what  he  calls  "the dogmatical procedure of reason" in the
development  of  science,  but  only  after  reason's self-criticism has
determined just how far reason can go. For Kant, as for Bacon, dogmatism
and  skepticism  are  the opposite excesses which only a critical method
can  avoid.  These  two  different approaches to the theory of knowledge
seem  to result in different conclusions concerning the nature and scope
of  human  knowledge.  Those who begin with the established sciences and
merely  inquire  into  their foundations and methods, appear to end with
unqualified  confidence  in  man's  ability  to know. Those who make the
inquiry  into  the  foundations  and  methods  of  science  a  necessary
preparation  for the development of the sciences, tend for the most part
to  set  narrower  boundaries  to  the  area of valid knowledge. The two
approaches  also affect the w^ay in which the various kinds of knowledge
are  distinguished  and  compared.  There  are  two  sorts of comparison
involved

[944a]
in the classification of kinds of knowledge. One is a comparison ofhuman
knowledge  with  divine,  or with angelic knowledge and the knowledge of
brute  animals. The other is a comparison of the parts or modes of human
knowledge  according  to  such  criteria as the objects to be known, the
faculties  engaged  in  the  process of knowing, and the manner of their
operation.  Though  made  separately,  those  two comparisons are seldom
independent  of  one  another.  As  the  nature  of  man is conceived in
relation to other beings, superior or inferior to himself, his faculties
will  be  rated  accordingly, and his power as a knower will suggest the
methods  or  means  available  to him for knowing. Aquinas, for example,
attributes  to  man  the kind of knowledge appropriate to his station in
the  hierarchy of beings. Man is superior to the brutes because he has a
faculty  of reason in addition to the faculties of sense and imagination
which  he  shares with them. Man is inferior to purely spiritual beings—
the  angels and God because, since he is corporeal, his intellect cannot
function  independently of his bodily senses and imagination. Unlike the
angels and God, he is not a •purely intellectual being. Accordingly, the
essential  characteristics  of  human  knowledge  are, first, that it is
always both sensitive and intellectual, never merely sense-perception as
with  the  brutes  or  pure  intellectual  intuition as with the angels;
second,  that  its  appropriate object is the physical world ofsensible,
material things, with respect to which the senses enable man to know the
existence of individuals, while the intellect apprehends their universal
natures;  and,  finally,  that the way in which the human mind knows the
natures of things is abstractive and discursive, for the intellect draws
its  concepts from sense and imagination and proceeds therefrom by means
of j udgment and reasoning. This analysis denies innate ideas. It denies
man's power to apprehend ideas intuitively or to use them intuitively in
the  apprehension  of  things.  It  can  find no place for a distinction
between  a priori and a posteriori knowledge, since sense-perception and
rational  activity  contribute  elements  to  every  act  of knowing. It
affirms  that  knowledge  is  primarily  of  real  existence, not of the
relations  between  ideas;  but it does not limit human knowledge to the
changing

[944b]
886  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4 temporal things ofthe material universe. Though
these are the objects man is able to know with greatest adequacy, he can
also  know  something  of  the  existence  and  nature of immaterial and
eternal  beings.  Yet,  according  to Aquinas, even when man's knowledge
rises  above  the  realm of experienceable things, it is obtained by the
same  natural  processes and involves the cooperation of the senses with
reason.  The  theologian  does,  however,  distinguish  sharply  between
knowledge  gained  through  man's  own  efforts  and  knowledge received
through  divine revelation. In addition to all knowledge acquired by the
natural   exercise  of  his  faculties,  man  may  be  elevated  by  the
supernatural gift of knowledge— the wisdom of a faith surpassing reason.
The  foregoing  summary  illustrates, in the case of one great doctrine,
the  connection  between  an  analysis  of  the kinds of knowledge and a
theory  of  the  nature  and  faculties  of man in relation to all other
things.  There  is  no  point  in this analysis which is not disputed by
someone  —by  Plato or Augustine, Descartes, Spinoza, or Locke, by Hume,
Kant,  or William James. There are many points on which others agree not
only  Aristotle  and  Bacon,  but  even Augustine, Descartes, and Locke.
These  agreements  or disagreements about the kinds ofknowledge , or the
scope ofhuman knowledge, its faculties, and its methods, seldom occur or
are   intelligible  except  in  the  wider  context  of  agreements  and
disagreements  in  theology and metaphysics, psychology and logic. Hence
most  of  the  matters considered under the heading "kinds of knowledge"
receive  special  consideration  in  other chapters. The CrossReferences
should  enable  the  reader to examine the presuppositions or context of
the  materials  assembled here. The cult of ignorance receives little or
no  attention  in the tradition of the great books. Even those who, like
Rousseau,  glorify  the innocence of the primitives, or who satirize the
folly  so  often admixed with human wisdom and the foibles attending the
advance  of  learning, do not seriously question the ancient saying that
all  men  by  nature  desire  to  know. Nor is it generally doubted that
knowledge  is  good; that its possession contributes to the happiness of
men

[945a]
and the welfare of the state; that its pursuit by the individual and its
dissemination  in  a  society should be facilitated by education, by the
support  and  freedom  of  scholars  and scientists, and by every device
which can assist men in communicating what they know to one another. But
knowledge  is  not  valued by all for the same reason. That knowledge is
useful  to  the  productive artist, to the statesman, to the legislator,
and to the individual in the conduct of his life, seems to be assumed in
discussions  of  the applications of science in the various arts, in the
consideration of statecraft, and in the analysis of virtue. In this last
connection,  the problem is not whether knowledge is morally useful, but
whether  knowledge of good and evil is identical with virtue so that sin
and  vice result from error or ignorance. If there is a negative opinion
here, it consists in saying that knowledge is not enough. To know is not
to  do.  Something  more than knowledge is required for acting well. The
more  radical dispute about the value of knowledge concerns the goodness
of  knowledge  for  its own sake, without any regard to its technical or
moral  utility.  Is  the  contemplation of the truth an ultimate end, or
does  the  goodness  of  knowledge always consist in its power to effect
results  in  the  mastery  of  nature  and the guidance of conduct ? The
utility  of  knowledge  is  seldom  denied by those who make speculative
wisdom and theoretic science good in themselves, even the highest goods,
quite  apart  from  any  use to which they may be put. The conOUTLINE OF
TOPICS  1.  The  nature  of  knowledge:  the relation between knower and
known;  the issue concerning the representative or intentional character
of  knowledge 2. Man's natural desire and power to know 3. Principles of
knowledge 4. Knowledge in relation to other states of mind 4^. Knowledge
and  truth:  the  differentiation of knowledge, error, and ignorance 4^.
Knowledge,  belief,  and opinion: their relation or distinction /\c. The
distinction between knowledge and fancy or imagination 4^. Knowledge and
love

[945b]
Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  887 trary position, however, docs not admit the
special  value of contemplation or the separation of truth from utility.
To  those who say that "the contemplation of truth is more dignified and
exalted  than  any  utility or extent of effects," Francis Bacon replies
that  "truth  and  utility  are perfectly identical, and the effects are
more  of  value as pledges of truth than from the benefit they confer on
men."  How  knowledge  and  action  are  related  is  one  question; how
knowledge  itself is divided into the speculative and practical is quite
another.   Bacon,   for   example,   insists   upon   the  necessity  of
distinguishing   the   speculative   and  practical  branches  ofnatural
philosophy—concerned with "the search after causes and the production of
effects." Unlike Aristotle and Kant he does not use the word "practical"
for  the kind of knowledge which is contained in such sciences as ethics
or politics, but only for the applied sciences or technology. Ethics and
politics  fall  under  what  he  calls "civil philosophy." Despite these
differences in language, the way in which Bacon divides the whole sphere
of  knowledge closely resembles Aristotle's tripartite classification of
the  sciences as theoretic, productive (or technical), and practical (or
moral); and, no less, a similar threefold division by Kant. But Kant and
Aristotle  (and,  it  should  be  added,  Aquinas) give a more elaborate
analysis  of  these  three types of knowledge, especially with regard to
the  principles  appropriate  to  each,  the nature of the judgments and
reasoning by which they are developed, and the character and criteria of
their truth. 890 892 893 894

[946a]
objects  (i)  God  as  an object of knowledge certainty, and finality of
human  knowledge  knowledge 6. The kinds of knowledge tion and judgments
of  experience  knowledge  and  acquired  knowledge  through  grace  and
inspiration

[946b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS PAGE 5. The extent or limits of human knowledge 895 ^a.
The  knowable,  the  unknowable,  and  the  unknown:  the knowability of
certain  (2)  Matter  and the immaterial as objects of knowledge 896 (3)
Cause  and  substance  as  objects of knowledge 897 (5) The past and the
future  as  objects of knowledge 898 5^. The distinction between what is
more  knowable  in  itself  and  what  is  more  knowable  to us 899 5^.
Dogmatism,  skepticism,  and  the  critical attitude with respect to the
extent, <^d. The method of universal doubt as prerequisite to knowledge:
God's goodness as the assurance of the veracity of our faculties 900 5^.
Knowledge  about  knowledge  as  the  source  of criteria for evaluating
claims to (i) Being and becoming, the intelligible and the sensible, the
necessary  and  the  contingent,  the  eternal  and  the  temporal,  the
immaterial  and  the  material  as objects of knowledge (2) Knowledge of
natures  or  kinds  distinguished  from knowledge of individuals 901 (3)
Knowledge  of  matters  of  fact  or  real  existence distinguished from
knowledge  of  our  ideas  or  of  the  relations  between  them 902 (4)
Knowledge  in relation to the distinction between the phenomenal and the
6b,  The classification of knowledge according to the faculties involved
in  knowing  (i)  Sensitive  knowledge:  sense-perception  as knowledge;
judgments  of  percep-  (2)  Memory  as  knowledge  903  (3) Rational or
intellectual knowledge 904 (4) Knowledge in relation to the faculties of
understanding,  judgment,  and  reason;  and  to  the work of intuition,
imagination,  and  understanding  6c.  The  classification  of knowledge
according  to the methods or means of knowing (i) Vision, contemplation,
or intuitive knowledge distinguished from discursive (2) The distinction
between  immediate  and  mediated  judgments:  induction  and reasoning,
principles  and  conclusions  905  (3)  The  doctrine  of  knowledge  as
reminiscence: the distinction between innate (4) The distinction between
a priori and a posteriori knowledge: the transcendental, or speculative,
and   the   empirical  906  (5)  The  distinction  between  natural  and
supernatural knowledge: knowledge based on sense or reason distinguished
from knowledge by faith or

[947a]
6d,  The  classification of knowledge according to the degrees of assent
907  (i)  The distinction between certain and probable knowledge (3) The
distinction  between  adequate  and inadequate, or perfect and imperfect
knowledge  6tf.  The classification of knowledge according to the end or
aim  of  the knowing (i) The distinction between theoretic and practical
knowledge:  knowing for the sake of knowledge and for the sake of action
or production (2) The types of practical knowledge: the use of knowledge
in  production  and 7. Comparison of human with other kinds of knowledge
ya.  Human  and divine knowledge yb. Human and angelic knowledge 910 yc.
Knowledge in this life compared with knowledge in the state of innocence
and  knowledge  hereafter yd. The knowledge of men and brutes 911 8. The
use  and  value  of  knowledge Sa. The technical use of knowledge in the
sphere  of  production: the applications of science in art Sb. The moral
use  of knowledge and the moral value of knowledge 912 (i) The knowledge
of  good  and  evil: the relation of knowledge to virtue and sin (4) The
possession  or  pursuit  of  knowledge  as  a  good or satisfaction: its
relation  to  pleasure  and  pain; its contribution to happiness Sc. The
political  use  of knowledge: the knowledge requisite for the statesman,
9.  The  communication  of  knowledge  916  ga. The means and methods of
conmiunicating   knowledge   gb.  The  value  of  the  dissemination  of
knowledge:  freedom of discussion 917 10. The growth of human knowledge:
the history of man's progress and failures in the pursuit of knowledge

[947b]
Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  889 PACK in the direction of conduct; technical
and moral knowledge 909

[948a]
890 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The nature of
knowledge:  the  relation between knower and known; the issue concerning
the  representative  or  intentional  character  of  knowledge  7 Plato:
Cratylus,  113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 124c126c esp 126a-c / Meno, 179d-183a
esp  180a-b,  182c-183a;  188d-189b  /  Phaedo,  228a-230d;  231b-232b /
Republic,  bk  hi,  333b-d; bk v, 371b-373c; bk vi-vii, 383d-398c esp bk
vii,  397a-398c  /  Timaeus,  476b  /  Theaetetus,  515d517b; 521d-522b;
538d-541a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[6^1-6] 11a;
[7^
22-8^12] 12c-13a; ch 8
[11*20-39]
16b-c / Interpretation, ch i
[16*4-9] 25a /
Topics, bk IV, ch I [121*1-6] 168d; ch 4 [124^15-19] 173c;
[124^27-34]
173c-d; BK VI, CH 5
[143*9-12]
196c;  CH  6 [145*12-18] 198d; ch 8 [146*37-^9] 200b-c; CH 12 [149^3-23]
203d-204a / Physics, BK VII, CH 3
[247^1-248*6] 330b-d
/ Metaphysics, BK V, CH 15 [1021*27-^3] 542c-d; bk ix, CH 6 [1048^18-34]
574a-c;  ch 9 [1051*22-34] 577b-c; bk x, ch i [1053*32-^3] 580a; bk xii,
ch 7
[1072^14-29] 602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d;
BK XIII, CH 10 [1087*10-25] 619c / Soul, bk I, ch 5
[409^18-411*7] 639c-641a; bk
ii, ch 2
[414*4-14] 644a-b; ch 5 [416^32-417*2] 647b;

[948b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface.
[417*17-21]
647d;
[418*2-6]
648c-d; bk hi, ch 2 [425^17-26] 657d-658a; ch 3 [427*16-^6] 659c-d; ch 4
661b-662c; ch 5 [430*14-16] 662c;
[430*20-22] 662d; CH 7 [431*1-8] 663c; ch 8
664b-d / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i
[450*25-451*19] 691a-692b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch i
[1139*6-11]
387c  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [26-109] 44b-45c; [722-817]
53d-54d  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 7 3d-4a / Third Ennead, tr
viii,  ch 6, 132a; ch 8, 132d133b; ch 9, 134a-b / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch
4,  210b-c;  tr  III, CH 4-5 217b-218c; ch 10-13 221b-224b; tr v, ch 1-2
228b-229d; tr ix, CH 7 249b-c / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 36-41 339c-342c
18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 11-38 74a-81a esp par 17 75c-d, par
19 76a-b, par 22-24 76d-77c, par 27-28 78b-d / City of God, bkviii, ch6,
269b/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  38,  654c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i, q 3, a 3, REP I 16a-d; q 5, a 4, rep i 25d-26c; q 8,
a  3, REP 3 36b-37c; q 12, a i, rep 4 50c-51c; a 2 51c-52c; A 4, ANs and
rep  i 53b-54c; aa 9-10 58b-59d; q 13, a 7, ans and rep 6 68d-70d; Q 14,
A I, ANS and rep 3 75d-76c; a 2 76d-77d; f

[949a]
1/0 2 Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 891 AA 5-6 79a-81c esp a 5, rep 2-3 79a-80a,
a  6, REP 1,3 80a-81c; a 8 82c-83b; a 9, rep 2 83b-d; a 12, ans 85d 86d;
a 15, rep i 89b90b; Q 15, A I, ANS 91b 92a; q 16, a 2 95c96b; Q 17, A 3,
ANS  102d  103c;  q  i8,  a 4, ans and REP 2 107d-108c; q iq, a ^, rep 6
110b111c;  Q  27,  A  I,  ANS  and  rep  2 153b-154b; a 2, ANS and REP 2
154c-155b; a 3, ans 155c-156a; A 4, ANS and REP 2 156b-d; q 28, a 4, rep
i  160c-161d;  Q  34, A I, rep 2-3 185b-187b; a 2, rep I 187b-188a; a 3,
ans  188b-189a; q 54, A I, rep 3 285a-d; a 2, ans and rep 2 285d286c; QQ
55-57  288d-300b; q 58, a 2 301 b-d; Q 59, A 2 307c-308b; o 60, a 2, ans
311a-d;  q 75, A I, rep 2 378b-379c; q 78, a i, ans and REP 3 407b-409a;
a 3, ans 410a-411d; a 4, ans and rep 2 411d-413d; q 82, a 3, ans and REP
I  433c-434c; q 84 440b-451b; q 85, a i, REP 3 451c-453c; a 2 453d-455b;
a  3,  rep  1,4  455b-457a; a 4 457a-d; a 5, rep 3 457d-458d; a 8, rep 3
460b-461b;  q 86, a i, ans 461c462a; q 87, a i 465a-466c; q 88, a i, rep
2 469a-471c; q 89, a 2, ans and rep 2 475a-d; A 6, ANS and rep 2 478b-d;
part  i-ii,  q  28,  A I, rep 3 740b-741a 20 Aquinas: Sutnma Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  50, A 5, rep I lOb-d; q 51, a i, rep 2 12b-13c; part III
suppL,  Q 82, A 3 971a-972d; q 92, a i 1025c-1032b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part i, 49a-d; part ii, 162c; part iv, 261a; 262a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  332b-333c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii  18b-25a passim, esp
24a-c; xiv, 29b-c; 30c-d / Meditations, iii, 82b-87a passim; vi, 99a-b /
Objections  and  Replies,  108b-109d; axiom v 131d-132a; 137a; 219b-c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, axiom 4,6 355d; prop 30-31 366c-367a; part ii,
prop  7  375a-c;  prop  11-13 377b-378c; prop 17, scHOL 381b-d 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxx,  sect 2 238b-c; ch xxxi, sect 2
239b-d;  ch  XXXII,  sect  8  244d;  sect  14-16  245c-246b; BK IV, CH I
307a-309b;  ch  iv,  sect  1-12  323d-326d;  sect  18 328d-329a; ch xiii
363c364b;  CH  xvii,  sect 2 371d-372b; sect 8 377b-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knoivledge, sect 1-91 413a-431a esp sect 2-4 413b-414a, sect 8-9 414c-d,
sect  25-33  417d-419a,  sect  48-49  422a-b, sect 56 423c-d, sect 86-91
429c431a;  sect  135-142  440a-441c;  sect 147-148 442b-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect xii, div 118, 504d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 7b-d; 12c-d
[fn  i];  14a-b  15d-16c;  22a,c;  23a-24a;  34a-35b;  55a-56c  88b-91d;
99a-101b;   101d-102a;  109d-110d  115b-c;  121a-123b;  125b  [fn  i]  /
Practical  Rea  son,  292d  [fn ij; 307 d-310c / Judgement, 550a 551a,c;
604b-c; 612c-d

[949b]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part iii, par 146-147 55c-56a; par 34:5
llOd-llla   /   Philosophy   of  History,  intro,  160c-161a  53  James:
Psychology,  128a-129a;  140b-143b; 153b-154a;' 176a i84a esp 176a-178a,
179b180a; 194b-196b esp 196a-b; 213a-239a passim, esp 213b-214a, 219a-b,
223a-b,  228a-b,  232b238b;  258b-259b;  307a-311a  esp 307a-308a, 309a;
325a-327a  esp  326a-b [fni]; 450a-451b; 454a-455a; 469a-b; 851b-852a 2.
Man's  natural  desire  and  power  to  know 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 125b-c /
Theaetetus,  535b-c  /  Sophist,  557c-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  810b-c  8
Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [247^1-248* 9] 330b-d / Metaphysics, bk
i,  ch  i  [980*2228]  499a  /  Soul, bk hi, ch 4 [429*18-20] 661c; CH 5
[430*14-15] 662c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355*14-17]
594b  11  NicoMACHUs:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 811a-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,   bk  i  [921-934]  12b-c;  BK  IV  [1-9]  44a-b  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk i, ch 2, 106d 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-b 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk x, par 10 73d-74a / City of God, bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, A I, ANS 50c-51c; A 2, ans
and rep i 51c-52c; AA 3-6 52c-56a; a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; a 11, ANS and rep
3  59d-60d; a 12 60d-61c; q 14, A 2, rep 3 76d-77d; a 10, rep i 83d-84c;
q  18, A 2, ANS and rep i 105c-106b; q 26, a 2, ans 150c-151a; q 54, a 4
287b-288a; q 60, a 2, ANS 311a-d; q 61, a 2, rep 3 315c-316a; q 62, A I,
ANS  317d-318c;  q  75,  a  2,  ans  379c-380c; Q 78, A I, ANS and rep 3
407b-409a;  q  79  413d427a;  q  84,  aa 1-3 440d-444d; q 88, a i, rep 2
469a-471c;  q  117, a i 595d-597c; part i-ii, Q 3, A 8, ANS 628d-629c; q
22, a i, rep i 720d721c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A
3,  rep 3 8b-9a; part hi, q 10, a 4, rep i 771b-772a; q ii, a i, ans and
rep  i 772b773a; part iii suppl, q 92, a i, ans and rep 2,15 1025c-1032b
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi [112-120] 39b; purgatory, xviii
[49-60]
80b-c; xx ;i24]-xxi ./DJ 84c-85d; paradise, iv
[115]-
23   Hobbes:   Leviathan,   part  i,  63a;  77a;  78d-80a  25  Montaigne
:£^^j>'i,244d-246a;503b-d;   517b519a   31   Descartes:  Objections  and
Replies,  124b-125b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, def 3 373b; axiom 2
373d; part iv, prop 26-28 431a-c; part v, PROP 25-26 458d-459a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, sect 7 139a-b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3  405b-c; sect 105 433b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy, 236b-238a

[950a]
(2. Man's natural desire andpower to know.) 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v, 335b-c 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 130b; 151d 46 Hegel: Pliilosophy of
History, intro, 157b158a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-517]
lla-14b;
[522-601] 15a-16b; [1765-1784] 42b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  4b-5a  53  James:  Psychology, 522b-525a esp
524b-525a;   711b-712b;   729a-730a;  851b-852a  54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis, 16b 3. Principles of knowledge 7 Plato:
Phaedo,  228a-230c  /  Republic, bk hi, 333b-d; bk iv, 350d-351b; bk vi-
vii,  383d398c  /  Theaetetus,  544d-547c  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Physics, bk
i, ch i 259a-b; ch 5
[188^26-189^9] 264b-c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch I 499a-500b; bk v, ch i
[1013^^14-23] 533b;
CH 6
[1016^18-25] 537b /
Soul, bk ii, ch 2
[413*11-13] 643a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[1139^25-34]
388c;  CH  6 389d 12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk i [690-700] 9c; bk
IV [469-521] 50b-51a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i la-b; bk IV,
par  25  25c; bk v, par 4 27d-28a; bk x, par 65 87d-88a; bk xiii, par 46
123a-c  /  City of God, BK VIII, CH 4-7 266d-269d; ch 9-10 270d-271d; bk
x,  ch  2  299d'300a;  bk  xi, CH 7 326a-c; ch 24-25 335c-336d; ch 27-29
337b-339b;  bk  xix,  ch  18 523a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-40
635b-636a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  7 638d-639c; bk hi, ch 37, 674a-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, ans and rep 1,3 lOd-lld; q 15
91b-94a passim, esp a 3, ANS 93b-94a; q 18, a 2, ans 105c-106b; Q 84, aa
4-6 444d-449a; Q 85, a 3 455b-457a; Q 88, A 3, rep I 472c-473a; q 105, a
3  540c541b; part i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a; a 5, ANS 613a-614a 20
Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 3, REP 3 8b-9a; q 51, a
i,  ans  12b'13c;  part III, Q II, A 6, REP 3 775d-776b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-60] 80b-c; PARADISE, IV [28-48] Ilia
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  285c-286a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal Ge?2eration,
332a-335c esp 333d-334d 30 Bacon: Advafjcement of Learning, 39d-40a; 58b
/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 14 107d108a; APH 39-40 109c 31 Descartes:
Rules, i la-2a; iv, 5c-d; 6d; vi, 8d-9a; vni, 13c-d / Discourse, part iv
51b54b  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d / Objections and Replies, 224b,d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 37-40 386b388b

[950b]
892  THE GREAT IDEAS 3 to 4« 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
SECT  23,  120a;  bk  ii, ch i 121a-127d passim, esp SECT 1-8 121a-123a,
sect  22-25  127a-d; CH VII, sect 10 133a-b; ch ix, sect 15-cH x, SECT 2
141a-c; ch x, sect 8 142d-143a; ch XII 147b-148d; ch xiv, sect 2 155b-c;
ch XVII, sect 22-cH xviii, sect I 173d-174a; CH xviii, sect 6 174c-d; ch
xxii,  sect 9 202c-203a; ch xxv, sect 9 216d; sect ii 217a; bk hi, ch i,
sect  5 252b-c; ch xi, sect 23 305a-b; bk iv, ch i, sect 9-cH 11, sect i
308c-309d;  ch  ii,  sect  7-8  310d-311a;  ch hi, SECT 1-2 313a; ch vii
337a-344d  esp  sect  r  337a,  SECT  lo-ii, 339b-340a; ch xii, sect 1-6
358c-360a;  sect  15  363a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 4
405c-d;  SECT  25 412a,c; sect 1-2 413a-b; sect 25-33 417d-419a; sect 89
430b-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect ii 455b457b esp div 13-14
455d-456b;   sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d;  DIV  61,  477c  38  Rousseau:
Inequality, 338c-339b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 34a-35b; 66d-72c esp 67d-68a
/ Practical Reason, 343a / Judgement, 492c-d; 517d
[fn2];
550a-551a,c;  562a-d;  570b-572b;  577b;  578a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  intro,  par  2 9b10a 53 James: Psychology, 213b-214a; 299a-300a;
315a-319a  esp  317b-318a;  360a;  453a-459b  esp  453b-454a, 455a-457a;
859a-860b 54 Freud: Ego and Id, 700a-701d Knowledge in relation to other
states  of  mind  Aa.  Knowledge  and  truth:  the  diflFerentiation  of
knowledge,  error,  and  ignorance  7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b  / Meno,
179b-183a  esp  180d,  181d,  182c-d;  188c-189b  / Apology, 201d-202d /
Gorgias,  256b  /  Republic,  bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk vi-vii, 383d-398c /
Timaeus,  447b-d;  450b-c;  457c-d  /  Parmeiiides, 490b-d / Theaetetus,
535c-536a;  542a-544a  /  Sophist,  557c-558b  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  748a 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 21 87d89b / Posterior Analytics,
bk  i,  ch  6  [75^1218]  103a; CH 16-18 l69b-lllc / Topics, bk vi, CH 9
[147^16-21]  201a-b; [147^26-148*9] 201d202a; ch 14 [151^32-^3] 206b-c /
Metaphysics, bk II, CH I 511b,d-512b; bk iv, ch 7 [loii^ 25-29] 531c;
[1012*1-17]
531d-532a; bk v, CH 29
[1024^27-38] 546d-547a; bk
vi,  ch 4 550a, c; bk ix, ch 10 577c-578a,c; bk xii, CH 10 [1075*^20-24]
606c / Soul, BK III, ch 3
[427*16-^6] 659c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 9
[1142^7-12]
391 d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355^21-39]
594c-d  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder, bk i, 403b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv [469-521] 50b-51a

[951a]
^b Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 893 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 5 llOb-c
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 10 73d74a; par 19 76a-b; bk xii,
par  5 lOOa-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 36 634d-635b; bk II, CH 38,
654c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i, REP 1-2 3b-4a; q 2,
a i, ans and rep 1,3 lOdlld; Q 13, A 12, REP 3 74c-75b; q 14, a 8, REP 3
82c-83b;  a  9,  rep  i  83b-d; a 12, ans and rep 3 85d-86d; a 15, rep 3
89b-90b;  QQ  16-17  94b-104b;  q  54, a 2, ans and rep 2 285d-286c; a 5
288a-d;  q  57, a i, rep 2 295a-d; q 58, a 5 303c-304c; q 59, a 2, rep 3
307c-308b;  q  60, a i, rep 3 310b-311a; q 79, A 9, rep 3-4 422b-423d; q
84,  a  6,  rep  i  447c-449a:  a  7,  rep 3 449b-450b; Q 85, a i, rep I
451c-453c;  a 2, ans 453d-455b; a 6 458d-459c; a 7, ans 459c-460b; q 88,
a  3,  rep I 472c-473a; q 89, a 5, ans 477a-478b; Q 94, A 4 505a-506a; q
ioi,  a i, rep 2 522c523a; q 117, a i, ans 595d-597c; part i-ii, Q 22, A
2, ans 721c-722c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, A 2, ans
216c-217b;  part hi suppl, q 92, a 3, REP 8 1034b-1037c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, iv
[115]-
V
[12] llld-112b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-d;  58d-60a;  78a-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  150d-151a;  238c-d  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 39-45
109c-110b  31 Descartes: Rules, i-ii la-3b; xii, 24a-c / Discourse, part
iv,  52a  /  Meditations, i 75a77c; IV 89a-93a / Objections and Replies,
126a-b;  168b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 43, schol 388d-389b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  263 221a-b; 327 231a-b / Vacuum, 358b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch v 329a-331b esp sect 8-9 330d-331a; ch vi, SECT
16  336d;  ch  xx,  sect  i, 388d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 224a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  7a;  intro,  par  I 9a; part ii, par 140,
52c-54a  53 James: Psychology, 141a-142a 54 Freud: General Introduction,
560c-561a / New Introductory Lectures, 879c-d 4b. Knowledge, belief, and
opinion:  their relation or distinction 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  i,  353d354b  7  Plato: Cratylus, 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a126c /
Symposium,  163b  /  Meno, 188b-189a / Gorgias, 256b-257a / Republic, bk
iv,  354d355a;  bk v, 370c-373c; bk vi-vii, 383d-398c; bk X, 430d-431d /
Timaeus,  447b-d; 450b-c; 457c-d / Theaetetus, 531a-532a; 534a; 536b549d
/ Sophist, 559c-561d / Philebus, 632d635a

[951b]
8  Aristotle: Categories, ch 7 [8"35-^i4] 13b-c / Prior Analytics, bk 1,
ch 13 [32^4-23] 48b-d/ Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[7i''8-i6] 97d98a; ch 33 121b-122a,c /
Topics, bk iv, ch i
[121*20-26] 169a-b /
Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4 [1008^27-32] 528b; BK VII, ch 15
[io39**3i1040*8] 563d-564a; bk ix, ch 10 577c-578a,c
/ Soul, BK III, CH 3 [427*16-428^9] 659c-660d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i,
ch 3
[1094^12-28]
339d-340a; bk hi, ch 2
[iii2'*7-8] 357d; bk
VI, CH 3 [1139^14-18] 388b; ch 5
[ii4o*33-''4l
389b;
[1140*^25-28] 389c; ch 9
[1142*32-*'! 6]
391c-d passim; ch 10 392b-c; bk vii, ch 3
[i 146*^23-34] 396d-397a /
Rhetoric,  bk ii, ch 25 [i402*'i3-i403*i7] 652b-653a 10 Hippocrates: The
Law,  par  4  144d  11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-d 17 Plotinus:
Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch 7 249b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i
la-b;  bk  VI, par 5-8 36b-37c / City of God, bk xxii, CH 4-5 588b-590a;
ch  7  591c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 40 636a,c; bk ii, ch 7
638d-639c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 8, rep 2 7c-8d; q
12,  a 7, ans and rep 2-3 56a57b; A 13, REP 3 61c-62b; q 14, a 15, rep 3
89b-90b;  q  16,  a 8 99d-100d; q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; q 79, a 9, rep
3-4  422b-423d;  Q  108, a 7, REP 2 560b-561a; part i-ii, q 17, a 6, ans
690b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A 3 14b-15a; q 53,
a  i,  ans 19d-21a; q 57, a 2, REP 3 36a-37b; q 67, a 3 83b-84d; q 77, a
2,  REP  3 145d-147c; part ii-ii, q i, aa 4-5 382c384b; Q 2 390d-400b; q
4,  a  i 402a-403d; PART III, Q 9, A 3, REP 2 765b-766b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, xx
[67148] 137b-138b esp [88-93] 137c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza  2992b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  58d-59a; 65b66c; PART III, 241c-242a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  80b-82b;  98b-99a;  150c151a;  238c-239c; 240c-246a; 258c-261c;
267c268a;  271b-273b  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 333c-d; 335a-b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 16a-b; 95d96a 31 Descartes: Rules, ii-
iii 2a-5a / Discourse PART VI, 64a-d / Meditations, 72b,d; i 75a 77c; V,
95b-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies  123a-d;  167a-d;  218c-d;  226d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, appendix 369b372d; part ii, prop 40, schol 2
388a-b;  PROP  49,  schol  391d-394d 32 xMilton: Areopagitica, 406a-b 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 99 191a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect 2-5
93b-94d;  bk i, ch hi, sect 23-25 119b120d; BK IV, CH I, sect 2 307a; ch
ii, sect 14, 312b; ch VI, sect 13 335c-d; ch xiv-xv

[952a]
(4.  Knowledge  in  relation  to  other  states  of mind. Ah. Knowledge,
belief,  and  opinion: their relation or distinction^ 364b-366cesp chxv,
sect 1-3 365a-d; ch xvi, SECT 14 371b-c; ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; SECT
14-24   378c-380d   passim;   ch  xviii-xix  380d-388d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  iv  458a463d  passim, esp div 20-21 458a-c, div 30
461d-462b;  sect  vi, 469d [fn i] 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165a-b 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335d-336a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 2a-4a,c;
228c-d;   240b243c   /   Judgement,  601d-607c  esp  601d-602a,  603a-b,
603d-604b,  604d-606d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b  passim  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  pref la-7d passim; INTRO, par I 9a; part ii, par
132, 46b-c; PART III, par 147 55d-56a; par 316 104c; additions, I 115a-d
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk i, lla-b 53 James: Psychology,
636a-638b passim 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 661c662a / New
Introductory  Lectures,  881d-882b 4r. The distinction between knowledge
and fancy or imagination 7 Plato: Ion, 142a-148a,c / Republic, bk viVII,
383d-389c; bk x, 427c-431d esp 430b431b / Sophist, 577a-b / Laws, bk iv,
684b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809b-810b  8  Aristotle:  Soul, bk hi, ch 3
659c-661b  14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 191d-192b 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk hi, par lo-ii 15b16a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, A 3,
ANs  and REP 3 52c-53b; a 11, rep i 59d60d; A 13, ANS and rep 2 61c-62b;
q  17,  a  2, REP 2 102a-d; q 54, a 5 288a-d; q 57, a i, rep 2 295a-d; q
78,  a  4,  ans  411d-413d;  q  84,  A  2, rep I 442b-443c; a 6, rep 1-2
447c-449a;  a 7, REP 2 449b-450b; a 8, rep 2 450b-451b; Q 93, A 6, rep 4
496b-498a;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a 7, REP 3 690d-692a 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  hi suppl, Q 70, A 2, rep 3 896a-897d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[13-45] 78c-79a
28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 335a-c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
i,   189d193c;   PART  II,  205a-209d;  273c-278a;  326c331a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  ofLearning,  32d; 33c-d; 38d-39b; 55a-d / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  15  108a;  APH  60 112c-113a / New Atlantis, 203a 31 Descartes:
Rules, hi, 4a-b; viii, 13a; 14b; XIV, 29b-31c / Discourse, part iv, 53b;
54a-b  /  Meditations, i, 75d-76c; 11, 79a-81d; hi, 82d-86a; vi 96b-103d
passim,  esp  96b-d  /  Objections and Replies, 122c-d; 136d-137a; 212a;
218c-d; 219b-c

[952b]
894  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4(r  to M, 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17,
coROL381a;  PROP  17,  scHOL-PROP 18 381b-382b; prop 26 384a-b; prop 40,
schol  i 387b-388a; prop 44 389b-390a; prop 49, schol 391 d-394d passim;
part V, PROP 34 460c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[95-128] 177b178a; bk viii [179-197] 236a-b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  82-86 186b-189a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch xxx 238a-239b; bk iv, ch iv, sect 1-12 323d326d passim, esp sect
1-3  323d-324c;  sect  18  328d-329a; ch v, sect 7-8 330b-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, sect 29-30 418c; sect 33 419a; sect 36 419c-d; sect 82
428d-429a;  sect 84 429b-c; sect 86 429c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  v,  div 39-40 466c-467c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 345c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 173b-174a / Judgement, 528c-529c; 532b-d; 575b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part i, 220c221a 53 James: Psychology, 639a-641a;
646b-655a; 659a-660b 4d. Knowledge and love 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 126a-129d
/  Symposium^  164d-165b;  167a-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 2
lOd  / Third Ennead, tr v, ch 3, 102a-b; ch 7, 104a-c / Sixth Ennead, tr
vh,  ch  34-35 338b-339c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1-6 la-2c;
bk X, par 33-35 79d-80c; par 38 81a; bk xi, par 3 89d-90a / City of God,
bk  viii, ch 4-5, 267c-268b; ch 8-10 270a-271d; bk x, ch 3 300b-301a; bk
xi,  ch  7  326a-c; ch 25-29 336b-339b; bk xiv, ch 28 397a-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  36-40  634d-636a,c; bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c; ch 38,
654c;  ch  41-42  656a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 6,
rep  3  6b-7a; a 8, rep 2 7c-8d; q 8, a 3, rep 3 36b-37c; q 12, a 6, ans
55b-56a;  a  7, rep i 56a-57b; q 14, a 15, rep i 89b-90b; q 16, a i, ans
94b-95c;  a  4 esp ans and rep 1-2 97a-c; Q 23, A 4 135a-d; q 27, aa 3-5
155c-157c;  q 28, A 4, ans 160c-161d; q 30, a 2, rep 2 168a169b; Q 35, A
2,  ANS 189d-190d; q 36, a 2, ANS and REP 4-5 192a-194c; q 37 197c-200c;
Q 59, A 2 307c-308b; q 60, a i, rep 3 310b311a; A 2 311a-d; a 3, ans and
rep  3 311d312b; A 5, REP 5 313b-314c; q 64, a i, ans 334a-335c; q 78, a
i,  ans  and rep 3 407b409a; q 82, a 3, ans and rep 3 433c-434c; q 87, A
I, REP I 465a-466c; q 93, aa 7-8 498a500c; PART i-ii, Q I, A 8 615a-c; q
3,  a 4 625a626b; q 22, a 2, ans 721c-722c; q 27, a 2 737d-738c; q 28, a
i  esp rep 3 740b-741a; a 2, ans and rep 2 741a-742a; a 3, ans and rep I
742a-d;  a 4, rep 2 742d-743c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50, A 5, REP I lOb-d; Q 66, a 6, rep i 80c-81b; f

[953a]
5 to 5^(1) Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 895 Q 86, A I, REP 2 184a-d; part ii-ii
REP I 487a-d; q 27, a 4 523c-524a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy ^ purgatory, Q
23, A 6, XVII
[1-75I
78c-79b; paradise, iv
[ii5]-v
llld-112b; XXVI
[25-36]
146a; xxviii
[88-
[12]
114]  149c-150a  26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's Lost, act iv, sc III
[289-365]  271c-272a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 227b-c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, axiom 3 373d; prop 48-49 391a-394d; part v,
prop 24-33 458d-460c; prop 34, corol 460d; prop 35-37 460d-461c; prop 42
463b-d  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  440a  5. The extent or
limits  of  human  knowledge  5a.  The knowable, the unknowable, and the
unknown: the knowability of certain objects 7 Plato: Meno, 179d-183a esp
180a  /  Parmenides,  489d-491a;  492a-504c  esp  495b-c,  504c; 507c-d;
509d-510b  esp  510b; 511c-d / Theaetetus, 544C'547c / Sophist, 560a-b 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 3
[16^19-26]
25d-26a  / Physics, bk ii, ch 4 [197*5-7] 273a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
BK  VI,  CH  2  548c-549c;  bk vii, :io36^ 9-12] 559c; CH 15 563c-564c 9
Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5 [644^ 21-645^5] 168c-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 20 164c166c 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead,
tr hi 215d-226c esp CH 13 223d-224b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
1-6 la-2c / City ofGod, bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xii, ch 7 346c-d; bk xxi,
ch  5  563d-564d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, rep 2
16d-17c;  q  5,  a  2,  ans  24b-25a;  q 12, A I 50c-51c; Q 14, A 3, ans
77d-78b;  a  10,  ANS and rep 4 83d-84c; q 16, a 3 96b-d; q 50, a 2, ANS
270a-272a;  q 55, a i, rep 2 289a-d; Q 57, A 3, ANS 297b-298a; q 79, a 3
416a417a;  q  84,  a  2, ans 442b-443c; q 87 464d468d passim 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part hi, q 10, A 3 769d-771b; part hi suppl, q 92, a i
1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, hi
[16-45] 56a-b; paradise,
xix
[22-99]
135b-136a; xxi
[73-102]
139a-b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  80b-82b;  98b-99a;  238c239c; 246a 261c
passim;  271b-273a;  291b294b; 439c-440a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi,
sc i
[56-88]
47c-d  28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 363d-364a; 389b; 492c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  96d-97b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph i
107a

[953b]
31  Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; viii, 12a-14a; XII, 22b-c / Meditations,
iv,  90a-b  / Objections and Replies, 112a-d; 215a-b 31 Spino/a: Ethics,
part  i,  prop  30  366c-d; APPENDIX 369b-372d; part ii, axiom 5 373d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[544-576]
187a-b; bk vii
[109-130] 219b-220a; bk
viii
[i 14-130] 234b-235a; [179-214] 236a-b / Samson Agonistes [60-67] 340b-341a
33   Pascal:   Pensees,   72  181a-184b;  263  221a-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, intro, sect 3-7 93d-95c; bk ii, ch i, sect r-8 121a-123a;
sect  24  127b-c;  ch ii, sect 3 128b-c; ch vii, SECT 10 133a-b; ch xiv,
sect  26  160c-d;  chxv,  SECT  II 165a-b; ch xxii, sect 9 202c-203a; CH
xxiii  204a-214b passim; ch xxxi, sect 6-13 240d-243b; ch xxxii, sect 24
247c-d;  BK  HI, CH HI, SECT 15-18 258b-259c; ch vi 268b-283a passim; bk
iv,  ch hi 313a-323d; CH VI, SECT 4-16 331d-336d passim; ch viii, SECT 9
347d-348a;  ch  x,  sect 19 354a-c; CH XII, SECT 7-13 360b-362d; ch xvi,
sect  12  370b-371a;  ch  xvh,  sect  9-10 377d-378a; SECT 23 380b-c; ch
xviii, sect 7 383b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 2-3 405b-c;
sect 81 428c-d; sect 89 430b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div
7-10  453c-455b;  sect  iv, div 26 460b-c; sect viii, div 62, 478c; sect
ix, div 84, 488b [fn i]; sect xii 503c-509d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
159a-c;  308c-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  19d-20c;  117b118a;
120c-121a; 175b
[fn
i];  215d-216c;  224a-c  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals 281c-282d;
285a-287d  / Practical Reason, 292a-c; 296a-d; 309b; 337a-c; 354d-355d /
Judgement,  465a-c;  564a-c;  599d-600d; 604a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[672-675] 18a; part ii
[11,441-452] 278b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl^,  366a-b  53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b esp
117b, 119b; 122b; 223b-224a; 65ob-657a; 822b 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  383b-c  5^(1)  God  as  an  object  of knowledge Old Testament:
Exodus,  33:12-23  /  Deuteronomy,  34:10  /  /  Chronicles, 28:9— (D) /
Paralipomenon,  28:9  /  job,  26:14; 36:26; 38:1-42:6 / Psalms, 19:1-4;
46:10; 83:18; 100:3 — (D) Psalms, 18:1-5; 45:11; 82:19; 99*3 / Proverbs,
2:5 / Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 8:16-17; 11:5 / Isaiah, 11:9; 49:22-26; 60:16—
(Z))  IsaiaSy  11:9;  49:22-26;  60:16  /  Jeremiah,  24:7;  31:34 — (D)
Jeremias,  24:7;  31:34 / Ezel{iel, 6:910,13-14; 28:22-26— (D) Ezechiel,
6:9-10,1314;  28:22-26  /  Hosea,  2:20;  6:2-3,6— (D) Osee, 2:20; 6:3,6
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  8:1-4;  9:1316;  i3:i-9-(D) OT, Boo{of
Wisdom,  8:1-4;  9:13-16;  13:1-9  /  //  Maccabees,  7:28—  (D)  OT, II
Machabees, y:2S

[954a]
896  THE GREAT IDEAS (5a. The knowahle, the unknowable, and the unknown:
the knowahility of certain objects. 5^(1) God as an object of knowledge^
New  Testament:  John,  1:1-5,18;  14:7-11;  17:2526  / Acts, 17:22-31 /
Romans,  1:18-21;  11:3336  /  /  Corinthians,  2:16;  8:1-7; i5'34 / ^^
Corinthians,  4:6  /  Ephesians,  1:17;  3:2-5  / Colossians, 1:9-15 / /
Timothy,  6:14-16  /  Hebrews,  8:11; 11:3 / I John, 4:7-21 5 Aeschylus:
Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b 5 Euripides: Helen
[11 37-11 50] 309a
7   Plato:   Timaeus,   447c  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2
[982^28983*11]  501a-b;  bk  xii, ch 8 [1074^1-14] 604d605a 14 Plutarch:
Numa Pompilius, 53b-c / Coriolanus, 191d-192b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr  viii,  ch 9, 133d134b / Fifth E?2?2ead, tr i, ch i 208a-c; tr hi, ch
13-14,  224a-c;  tr  v, ch 6 231b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
7-38  73a-81a;  par 65 87d-88a; bk xiii, par 17-19 115a-d / City of God,
bk  viii,  ch 10 271a-d; BK XI, ch 2 323a-c; bk xxii, ch 29 614b-616d 19
Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; a 7, rep i 7a-c; q
2,  aa  1-2  10d-12c;  Q  3,  A  3, rep I 16a-d; a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; a 5
17c-18b; QQ 12-13 50b-75b; q 32 175d-180d; Q 42, A 2, REP 1,4 225d-227a;
q  50, a 2, ans 270a-272a; q 56, a 3 294a-d; q 57, a 5 299b300b; Q 84, A
5 446c-447c; a 7, rep 3 449b450b; Q 86, a 2, rep i 462a-463a; q 88, a 2,
REP  4  471c-472c;  a  3  472c-473a; q 89, a 2, REP 3 475a-d 20 Aquinas:
Sumrna  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 93, A 2 216c-217b; part hi, q 9, a 3,
rep  3  765b766b;  part hi suppl, q 92, a i 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b; paradise,
ii  [37-45]  108a;  iv  [2848] Ilia; XIX [22-99] 135b-136a; xx [130-148]
138a-b;  xxi  [73-102]  139a-b;  xxxiii  [46-145]  156c-157d  23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, part i, 54b-c; 78d-79a; 79d-80b; part ii, 162a-163b; part iv,
271b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;  208c-209c; 212a-d; 238c-239c;
246a-257d  passim 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b20a; 38a;
45a-46a; 95d-101d esp 96d-97b, 99c-100a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv
51b-54b  passim  /  Meditations,  69b-d;  74a,c; iii 81d-89a; IV, 89b; V
93a-96a  / Objections and Replies, 108a-114c; 120c-d; 121a-123a; 127b-c;
postulate  V  ]31b-c;  prop  i-iii 132b-133a; 211c212a; 213a; 213d-214a;
215b-c; 227b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop ii, schol 358d359b; PART
II,  PROP 1-2 373d-374a; prop 47 390c-391a; part v, prop 24-32 458d-460b
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [109-130] 219b220a; bk viii
[i 14-130] 234b-235a / Samson
Agonistes [60-62] 340b-341a; [293-325] 346a-b

[954b]
5^(1) to 5«(2) 205a-217b passim, 33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 esp 233-241
213b-217b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, general schol, 370b-371a 35
Locke:  Human  Ufiderstanding, bk i, ch ii, SECT 12, 107c-d; ch hi, sect
7-18  113d-117c;  BK  II,  CH XVII, SECT I 167d-168a; sect 17 172b-c; CH
XXIII, sect 33-37 212d-214b passim; bk hi, ch vi, sect ii 271b-d; bk iv,
CH  X  349c-354c  passim  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, pref, 404a; SECT
146-156  442a-444d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii, div 14 456b;
SECT  xi  497b-503c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308b-309a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  33a-d;  143a-145c;  152a153c;  177b-179c; 186d-187a; 190a-192d;
218d223d;  239a-c;  241d-242c / Practical Reason, 291a-292c; 348b-352c /
hitro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  384a,c /Judgement. 575b-577a; 588d589c;
603b-607c   esp  606d-607c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
158c160b; PART IV, 349b-350a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196b-197b;
bk xv, 630d-631c 5a{2) Matter and the immaterial as objects of knowledge
7   Plato:  Timaeus,  456a-458a  8  Aristoti^e:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  7
[i9i''8-i2] 266d / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 9
[991^8-11] 509b; bk
VII, CH 10
[1036*2-12] 559b-c; bk
ix, ch 2
[1046^7-15] 571c-d
/ Soul, BK I, CH I
[403*
25-^19]  632b-d  12  Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk i [265-328] 4b-5a;
[418-448] 6b-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii, ch 9 31c-32a / Second
E?inead,  tr  iv,  ch  10  53b-d; ch 12 54c-55b; tr v, ch 4-5 59c-50c 18
Augustine:  Confessio7is , bk xi-xii 89b-110d / City of God, bk xi, ch 3
323d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 9 8d-9c; Q 12, a I,
rep  2  50c-51c; a 2, ans 51c-52c; q 13, a 12, rep 3 74c-75b; q 14, A II
84c-85c;  q  15, a 3, rep 3-4 93b-94a; q 16, A 5, rep 3 97c-98b; q 29, a
2,  rep 3 163b-164b; q 54, A 4, ANS and rep 2 287b-288a; q 56 291d-294d;
q  57,  aa 1-2 295a-297a; q 76, a 2, REP 3 388c-391a; g 84, a 7, ans and
rep  3  449b-450b;  q  85,  a  i  451c-453c;  q 86, a i, ANS and REP 3-4
461c-462a; a 2, rep i 462a463a: a 3 463 b-d; q 87, a i, ans 465a-466c; Q
88  468d-473a; q 89, a 2 475a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
ii,  a  I,  REP 2 772b-773a; q 12, a i, rep 3 776c777b; part hi suppl, q
92,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 12 1025c-1032b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iii,
172a-d;  part  iv, 269C-270C 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning. 41d-42a;
43d-44c

[955a]
>a(3)  to 5j(4) Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 31 Descartes: Meditations, 74a, c:
i-ii  75a-81d  esp  II,  81b-c  /  Objections and Replies, 120b-c; 122c:
POSTULATE  II 131a; 152b,d 155d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72, 184a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk 11, cm xv, SECT II 165a-b; cii xxiii 204a-214b
passim,  esp SECT 5 205a-b, sect 15 208c-d, sect 29 211d-212a; bk hi, ch
vi,  sect  11-12  271b272b;  CH xi, sect 23 305a-b; bk iv, ch hi, SECT 6
313c-315b;  sect  9-17  315c-317c  passim,  esp sect 17 317c; sect 23-27
320a-322a;  CH  VI, sect 14 335d-336b; ch x, sect 19 354a-c; ch xi, sect
12  357c-d; ch xvi, sect 12 370b-371a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
16-20 416a-417a; sect 25-27 417d-418b; sect 86-89 429c -430c esp sect 89
430b-c;  sect  135-148  440a-442d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xh,
div  123  506a  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 336b-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  186b-d / Practical Reason, 319c-321b / Judgement, 603a-d 5a{}>)
Cause and substance as objects of knowledge 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii,
ch 4
[i96*'5-7]
273a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [983^5-10] 501b; BK III, CH 2
[996*i8-''26]
514d-515b; ch 4
[999^24-29]
518a; ch 6
[1003*5-17]
521d522a,c; bk vii, ch 15 563c-564c; bk xi, ch 2
[1060^20-23] 588d; BK XII, ch 10 618c-619a,c
9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 6 [742^17-35] 283d-284a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[526533] 67d-68a; bk vi [703-711] 89c-d
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  505a-506a  17
Plotintjs:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  ii  348b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 8, ans 57b-58b; q 19, a 5, rep 2 112d-113c;
Q  29,  A  I, rep 1,3 162a-163b; q 56, a i, rep 2 292a-d; q 57, a 3, ans
297b-298a; q 77, a i, rep 7 399c-401b; q 84, a 7, ans 449b-450b; Q 86, A
I, ans 461c-462a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2, rep
3 2b-4a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[2445] 56a-b; xviii [49-60] 80b-c
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 78a-80c; part iv, 271c-272c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  271b-272c; 497d-498a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 45a-46a
/  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 2 137b-c / New Atlantis, 210d 31 Descartes:
Meditations, iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, 108a-112a; 209c- 2 10b;
211b-c;  215a-b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 3-4 355b; axiom 4 355d;
PROP  8, schol 2 356d-357d; prop 10 358a-b; appendix 369b-372d; part iv,
pref, 422b,d-423b

[955b]
897  33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b passim, esp 233-241 213b-217b
34  Newton:  Principles, bk hi, general schol, 371b-372a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch hi, sect 19 117c-d; bk ii, ch xih, sect 17-20
152a-d;  ch xxi, sect 1-6 178b-180a; ch xxiii 204a-214b passim, esp sect
2  204b-c,  sect  5 205a-b, sect 15 208c-d, sect 28-29 211b212a; ch xxv,
sect  ii-ch xxvi, sect 2 217a-d; ch xxxi, sect 6-13 240d-243b; ch xxxii,
SECT  24  247c-d;  bk  hi,  ch hi, sect 15-18 258b-259c; ch vi 268b-283a
passim,  esp  sect  7-10  270b-271b; ch ix, sect 11-17 287d-290a; ch xi,
sect 19-25 304b-306c esp sect 22 305a; bk iv, ch hi, sect 9-17 315c317c;
sect 24-29 320c-323a esp sect 29 322c323a; ch iv, sect 12 326c-d; ch vi,
sect  4-16  331d-336d;  ch  viii,  sect  9  347d-348a;  ch xh, SECT 9-12
360d-362c;  ch  xvi, sect 12, 370b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knoivledge, sect
101-102  432c-433a  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect hi, div 18-SECT
viii,  div  74  457c-484c  passim;  SECT  XI, div 105 498d-499a; div 115
503b-c;  SECT  XII,  DIV  127 507b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15a-b; 17c-d;
46d-47c;  57c-d;  58d-59b;  63d-64a;  76c-83b  esp 81b83b; 86c-d; 95a-d;
99a-100d esp lOOc-d; 110b; 133a: 140b,d-145c; 171a-172c; 214b,d
[fn
i]  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 267d-268a; 285c-286a / Practical
Reason,  294c-295d;  302a-d; 313b-314d / judgement, 550a-551a,c; 556b-c;
557c-558b;  564a-c;  574a-b;  584c-d;  611d-613a,c 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  169a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xih, 563a-b; epilogue I,
646c-647b  passim;  650b-c;  epilogue  II,  693c;  694d-695c  53  James:
Psychology,  89b-90a; 885b-886a 5a{4) The infinite and the individual as
objects   of   knowledge  7  Plato:  Philebus,  610d-617d  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 5
[2'°6-37] 6c-7a /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 31 120a-c / Physics, bk i, ch 4
[187*^7-14]
262d; ch 5
[189*5-7] 264b-c; ch
6
[189*11-19] 264c; bk
HI, CH 6
[207*21-31]
285c-d; bk vii, ch 3
[247^3-7] 330b
/ Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2
[994''i7-3o] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 4 [999*24-29]
518a; ch 6
[1003=^5-17] 521d-522a,c; bk
vii, ch 10
[1036*2-7]
559b-c; ch 15 563c-564c; bk XI, CH 2
[1060^20-23] 588d; bk
xiii,  ch  10 618c-619a,c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1356^28-35]
596b-c  11 NicoMACHus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead,
tr  vi,  ch  3  311c312b  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vii, par 20-21
49d-50a; bk xh, par 3-6 99d-100c

[956a]
898  The knowahle, the unknowable, and the uni5a. known: the knowahility
of  certain objects. 5a(4) The infinite and the individual as objects of
knowledge.^  19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, A 3, ANs 16a-d;
q 12, a i, rep 2 50c-51c; a 7, ANs 56a-57b; a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 14, aa
11-12.  84c-86d;  q  15,  a  3,  rep 4 93b-94a; q 22, A 2, ANS and REP I
128d-130d;  q  29, a i, rep i 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3 163b-164b; q 30, a 4
170c-171b; Q 32 175d-180d; q 56, a i, rep 2 292a-d; q 57, a 2 295d-297a;
q  84,  a 7, ans and REP I 449b-450b; q 86, aa 1-3 461c-463d; Q 89, A 4,
ANS  476c-477a;  part i-ii, q 14, a 6, REP 3 680c-681a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi, q 10, A 3 769d-771b; q ii, a i, rep 3 772b-773a; q
12,  A  I, rep 3 776c-777b; part hi suppl, Q 92, A I, REP 12 1025c-1032b
23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 54b-c; part iv, 262b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  332a-333b  31 Descartes: Meditations, iii, 86a-d; 88c-89a /
Objections  and  Replies,  112a-d;  121d-122b;  169a; 211c-d; 212c-213a;
213d-214a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 10, schol 376d-377a; prop
30-31   385a-c   33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  233  213b216a  /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 435a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  xiii,  SECT 4 149b; cH xiv, sect 26-31 160c-162a passim; ch xv, sect
2-3  162c-d;  sect  12 165b-c; CH XVI, sect 8 167c; ch xvii 167d174a esp
sect  15  171b-172a;  ch xxiii, sect 31 212b-c; SECT 33-34 212d-213b; ch
xxix,  SECT  15-16 237a-238a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 2
405b  46  Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part ii, 278a-b 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i  [1810-1815]  43a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xv, 631a-c;
EPILOGUE  II,  693c-694d 53 James: Psychology, 312a; 631a 5a{5) The past
and  the  future as objects of knowledge Old Testament: Proverbs, 27:1 /
Ecclesiastes,  6:12;  8:6-7;  9  -11-12; 11:2,6— (£)) Ecclesiastes, 7:1;
8:6-7;  9*11-12;  11:2,6 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 8:8— (D) OT, Boo\
of  Wisdom,  8:8  New  Testament:  James, 4:13-14— (Z)) James, 4:13-15 5
Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[463-512]
103c-d;
[1524-1530]
113c / Ajax
[1419-1421]
155c 5 Euripides: Medea [1415-1419] 224c / Alcestis
[1159-1163] 247c
/ Helen [1688-1692] 314c / Andromache
[1284-1288]
326c / Bacchantes
[1388-1392] 352a,c

[956b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 5a(5) to 5a{6) 349b; 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War,
bk  354a-c  7 Plato: Critias, 479d / Theaetetus, 531a-532a 8 Aristotle :
Interpretation,  ch 9 2^ai-29d /Memory and Reminiscence, ch i [449^3-29]
690a-c  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 19 [1392^141393^8] 640 b-c 10
Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par i 19a-b / Epidemics, bk hi, sect hi, par
16  59b-c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi [713-755] 230a-231a 14 Plutarch:
Theseus,  la-b  /  Pericles,  129a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk iv, 79b 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 23-24 77a-c; bk xi, par 17-41 93b-99b
/  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 14, A 13 86d-88c; a 15, rep 3 89b-90b; Q 57, a 3 297b-298a; q
78,  a  4, ans and rep 5 411d413d; Q 79, A 6, ANS and rep 2 419b-420d; q
86,  A  4 463d-464d; q 89, a 3, rep 3 475d-476c; A 7, REP 3 478d-479c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  12,  A I, REP 3 776c-777b 22
Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 56 95b-96a; stanza 136-154
106a-108b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 53C'54a; 65b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  41c-d;  439c-440a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13d-14a;
54c-55a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 259a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  62, schol 443c-d; prop 66, demonst 444c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv,  SECT  12 165b-c; bk iv, ch xi, sect ii
357b-c  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 44 420d-421a; sect 105 433b-c
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect vi 469d470d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
348a,c  /  Social  Contract,  BK  IV,  428a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
88a-c;  96b,d;  413b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 234d / Judgement, 579d580a;
583d-584c  44  B0SWEI.1.: Johnson, 277c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  155b-c;  181b'd;  190a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [570-585] 16a;
part ii
[8591-8603] 209b
48  Melville:  Mo^;;  Dicl{,  366b  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 42a;
59d-60a;  166a,c; 231d-233b esp 233a-b; 242b-243c / Descent of Man, 287d
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xiii, 584d-585b; epilogue II, 685a 53
James: Psychology, 852b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 387a,c 5a(6)
The  self  and the thing in itself as objects of knowledge 8 Aristotle :
Soul,  bk  hi,  ch 6 [430^21-26] 663b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch
27, 133a-b

[957a]
53 to 5c Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 899 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk xi, sect
i,  302a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ix, ch 3, 137c-d / Fourth Ennead,
tr  iv,  ch  2  159d  160b  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr in, ch 1-8 215d-220d 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 7 73a; par 21-25 76c-77d; par 41 81c-d
/ City of Gody BK XI, CH 26 336d-337b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  14,  A  2,  rep  1,7, 76d-77d; q 56, a i 292a-d; q 78, A 4, rep 2
411d-413d;  q  87  464d-468d;  q  88,  A  I, REP I 469a-471c; a 2, rep 3
471c-472c;  Q  89, A 2, ANs 475a-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d 29
Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 332b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
88c-89b 31 Descartes: Meditations, 11 77d-81d esp 81b-c / Objections and
Replies,  postulate  ii 131a; 209d-210a; 215b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  19-30  382b383c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch ix,
SECT  2-3  349a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 362c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
la-4a,c esp Ib-d; 7d-8b; 9a-10b; 12c-d
[fn
i];  32a-c;  49c-50c; 51b-c; 55a-56c; 120c-129c; 200c-204c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c-282d;  285a-287d esp 285c-286a / Practical
Reason, 292a-293b; 307d-310c; 311d-314d; 327d-329a; 331c337a,c; 337a-c /
Judgement, 465a-c; 497a498b; 574b-577a; 594d [fn i]; 599d-600d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i, par 35 21a-b; par 44 23c; additions, 22
120c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 257d-258a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\, 370b-371b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 688b-c 53 James:
Psychology, 121a-125b; 177b-178a; 191a-197a esp 196a-197a; 213a-238b esp
213b-217a,   223b-224a,   227b-228b,   232b233b;   471b-472b  54  Freud:
Unconscious, 428a-430c esp 429c-430c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
767d-768d  5b,  The  distinction between what is more knowable in itself
and  what is more knowable to us 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch
23
[68^30-36] 90c / Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 2
[71^28-72^6]
98b-c / Topics, bk vi, ch 4
[141*26-142^22]
194c-195c; bk viii, ch i
[155^35-156*7] 211d-212a / Physics, bk
i, ch i 259a-b; ch 5
[188^26-189*9]
264b-c; ch 7
[189^30-33] 265b-c
/ Generation and Corruption, BK I, CH 3
[318^13-319*2]
415b-d / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch i
[993^30-^11] 511b,d;
BK VII, CH 3 [1029*35-^12] 552a / Soul, bk ii, CH 2 [413*11-19] 643a-b 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1095^1-4]  340c  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q i, a 5, REP 1-2 5c-6a; a 9 8d-9c; q 2, a i, ans
lOdlld;  A 2, ANS and rep 2-3 lld-12c; q 3, a 3, REP I 16a-d; q 10, a i,
ans and rep i 40d-41d;

[957b]
Q  12, a i, ans and rep 2 50c-51c; aa 7-8 56a58b; Q i^ 62b-75b passim; q
50,  a  2,  ans 270a272a; g 85, a 3 455b-457a; a 8 460b-461b; O 88, A I,
REP  3-4 469a-471c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-c 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part iv 51b-54b / Meditations, 69b-d; 11 77d-81d passim; iv,
89b;  V  93a-96a / Objections and Replies, postulate II 131a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, prop 47, 390c-d 42 Kant: Judgement, 601d 5c. Dogmatism,
skepticism,  and  the  critical  attitude  with  respect  to the extent,
certainty, and finality of human knowledge 7 Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c
/  Cratylus, 86b-d / Meno, 179b-180b / Apology, 203a / Phaedo, 236c-238a
/  Timaeus, 447b-d / Theaetetus, 521d-526b 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 13
[32^4-23] 48b-d
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  CH I [7i*26]-ch 2 [72^4] 97c-99a; ch 6
102b103c; CH 33 121b-122a,c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 5 [287^29-288*3] 379b-c
/ Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14]
411c-d  /  Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5-6 528c-531c; bk x, CH I [1053*31-^3]
580a;  ch  6 [1057*7-11] 584b; BK XI, CH 6 [1062^12-1063^14] 590d-592a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^11-27]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098*20-^^2] 343c-d;
bk ii, CH 2
[1103^26-1104*9] 349b-c; bk
vi,  ch 3 388b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [469-521] 50b-51a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 17 158d161a; ch 20 164c-166c; bk hi,
ch 2, 177c-178b; CH 21 193d-195a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 19
32b-c  / City of God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  i,  a  i  3b-4a;  a  5, ans and rep i 5c-6a; q 84, a i, ANS
440d-442a;  q  85, a 2, ans 453d-455b; q 86, AA 1-3 461c-463d; q 87, a i
465a-466c;  Q 88, A I 469a-471c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  64, AA 3-4 68b-70a; part ii-ii, q 4, a 8 409a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  65c; part iv, 267a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
hi,  197b-200a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b; 208a-294b esp 240c-246a,
253c-254a,   257d-264a,   269d-279c,   285c-294b;   308c-d;   318a-319b;
439c-440a;  497b-502c;  516b-524a  28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, lc-2a 28
Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 267b,d-268d / On Animal Generation, 411c-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 13a-c; 15a17b esp 15d-16b; 47d-48d;
57d-58b  /  Novum  Organum,  pref 105a-106d; bk i, aph 37 109b-c; APH 67
115d-116a; aph 75 118b-d; aph 95 126b-c; aph 126 134b

[958a]
900  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5. The extent or limits of human knowledge. 5c.
Dogmatism,  skepticism,  and  the  critical attitude with respect to the
extent, certainty, and finality of human knowledge^ 31 Descartes: Rules,
iv,  5a-d  / Discourse, part II 44c-48b / Meditations, 72b,d; i 75a-77c;
III,  83b-84a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  168b-d;  272a-c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  ii,  def  4 373b; prop 3747 386b-391a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
381-385  238b-239a;  432  248a;  434-435 248a-251a / Vacuum, 355a358b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, intro 93a95d esp SECT 4-7 94a-95c; bk i, ch
hi,  sect 24 120a-c; bk ii, ch ii, sect 3 128b-c; ch xv, sect ii 165a-b;
ch  xxiii,  sect  12-13 207a208b; SECT 36 213c-d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 1-9
268b-271a  esp  sect 9 270d-271a; bk iv, ch hi, SECT 22-30 319c-323c esp
sect  22  319c-320a;  ch  VI,  SECT  4-16 331d-336d passim; chx, sect 19
354a-c;  ch  xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d; ch XIV, sect 1-2 364b-c; ch xvii,
sect  9-10  377d-378a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro, sect 3-4
405b-d; sect 17 409d-410a; sect 86-88 429c-430b; sect 101-102 432c-433a;
sect  133  439c-440a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect i, div 7-10
453c-455b;  sect  iv,  div  20-21  458a-c;  DIV  26 460b-c; sect iv, div
28-SECT  v,  div  38  460d-466c passim; sect vii, div 60, 477a; SECT XII
503c-509d esp div 129-130 508a-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c; 15c-16c;
19a22a,c;  101d-102a;  129c-130a; 133c-134d; 146a-149d; 157d; 187c-188b;
193a-b;  196b197c;  218d-227a  esp  221c-222b; 248d-250a,c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 253c-d; 277d-279d / Practical Reason, 292d-293b;
295b-d;   311d-313d;   320c-321b;   331a-332d;   335b-c;  336d-337a,c  /
Judgement, 492c-d; 567c-568a 43 Federalist: number 31, 103d-104a; number
37, 119b-120b 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b'293b 44 E0SWEL.1.: Johnson, 121c-d;
126a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 7a; intro, par 31 19c-20a 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[656-675]
17b-18a;
[1064-1067] 26b; [1810-1815] 43a: [1868-2050]
44b-48b esp
[1948-1963]
46a-b,
[1968-1979]
46b-47a,
[201 1-2022]
47b-48a;
[4343-4362]
107a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl^, 78a-b; 250b; 257a; 276a-b 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  253d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 195a 53 James:
Psychology, 881b 54 Freud: Netu Introductory Lectures, 828b-c; 873d-884d
passim, esp 874d-875a, 878d-880b, 883d-884a

[958b]
5c  to  6a{\)  5d.  The  method  of  universal  doubt as prerequisite to
knowledge: God's goodness as the assurance of the veracity of our facul>
ties  31  Descartes:  Rules,  11  2a-3b / Discourse 41a67a,c esp part ii
44c-48b,  part  iv  51b-54b / Meditations, 72b,d; i 75a-77c; iii, 82b-d;
IV, 89b-c; V, 95b-96a / Objections and Replies^ 119c; 123a-d; 124b-125b;
postulate  vii  131c;  134b-c;  142c;  143c; 162a; 167a-c; 206a-c; 207b;
215c-d;  226d-227a;  229c-d;  237b238b;  239a-240a;  242c-244c;  245c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch XXVII, SECT 13 223b-d; bk iv, ch
ix,  sect 3 349b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 3 405b-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 116, 503d-504a; div 120 505b;
div  129-130  508a-d  53  James:  Psychology,  881b  5e. Knowledge about
knowledge  as  the source of criteria for evaluating claims to knowledge
35  Locke: Human Understanding, 87d; intro 93a-95d esp sect 4-7 94a-95c;
bk  iv,  ch  hi,  SECT 22 319c-320a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro,
sect  4  405c-d; sect 17 409d-410a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i,
div 710 453c-455b; sect ii, div 17 457a-b; sect VII, DIV 49-53 471c-474b
esp div 49 471c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-12d esp Ib-d, 8c-9a; 55a-56c;
99a-101b;  121a-123b  /  Practical Reason, 292d'293b; 294a-b; 307d-310c;
331a332d  6.  The kinds of knowledge 6a. The classification of knowledge
according  to  diversity  of  objects  6a{\)  Being  and  becoming,  the
intelligible  and  the  sensible,  the necessary and the contingent, the
eternal  and the temporal, the immaterial and the material as objects of
knowledge  7 Plato: Cratylus, 86b-d; 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 125a-126c /
Symposium,  167a-d  /  Phaedo,  223d-232d  esp  223d-225a,  228b-232d  /
Republic,  BK  ni,333b-334b;  bk  v, 368c-373c esp 372a-373b; bk vi-vii,
383d-398c   /   Timaeus,  447b-d;  457b-458a  /  Theaetetus,  521d-522b;
534d-536b  /  Sophist,  565a-569a  esp  568a- 569a / Statesman, 595a-c /
Philebus, 610d-613a; 633a-635a esp 634b-635a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d
8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4^io-*'i9] 8b-9a
/ Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[32*'4-23] 48b-d
/ Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[7i*'8-i6]
97d-98a; ch 4 [73^21-^30] 100a- 101a; ch 6-8

[959a]
6./(l)  to  6a(2) Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 901 102b-104b; en 30 119d; ch 33
121b-122a,c  /  Phvsns, UK II, en 2 270a-271a; cii 7 [198*2231] 275b-c /
Heathens, bk hi, ch i
[298^1324] 390a-b; ch
7
[306*10-12] 397b
/  Afefaphysics, BK 1, CH 5 [986^25-987'*i] 504d-505a; CH 6 [987*29-^18]
505b-d; ch 8 [989^^21-990^ 8] 507d-508a; bk 11, ch i 511b,d-512b; ch 3
[995'*! 5-20]
513d; BK III, ch 4
[999^24-^4]
518a-b;  bk iv, ch 5-6 528c-531c; bk vi, ch i 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch 15
[1039*^31-1040*8] 563d-564a; bk ix, ch 10 577c-578a,c; bk x, ch I
[1053*31-^3]
580a; ch 6
[1057*7-11]
584b; bk xi, ch 2 588a-589a; ch 6 [1062^121063^14] 590d-592a; ch 7
[io63''36]-ch
8
[1065%] 592b-593b; bk xii, ch
i  [1069*30-^2]  598b-c  / Soul, bk i, ch i [403*25-^19] 632b-d / Memory
and Refniniscence, ch i
[449''30450^10] 690c-d
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[644^
21-645*5] 168c-d / Ethics, bk vi, ch i
[1139*
3-13] 387b-d; cii 3
[1139^19-25]
388b-c  /  Wietoric,  bk  i, ch 2 [1357^14-^21] 596d-597c 11 NicoMACHus:
Arithmetic,  bk i, 811a-812a 14 Plltarck: Marcellus, 252b-c 17 Plotinus:
Fifth  Ennead,  tr v, ch i, 228c229c; TR IX, CH 7 249b-c / Sixth Ennead,
TR VII, CH 36 339c-d 18 AuGUSTiNc: Confessions, bk v, par 3-5 27c28c; bk
VI,  par  6 36c-d; bk vii, par 23 50b-c; BK X, par 8-11 73b-74b; bk xii,
par  5  lOOa-b  / City of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c; CH 10 271a-d; bk
xix,  ch 18 523a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 8 626c-627a; bk ii, CH
27-39  650a-655b  esp ch 27 650a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i,  a  i,  REP  2  3b-4a;  a 9 8d-9c; q 2, aa 1-2 10d-12c; Q 5, A 2, ANs
24b-25a;  q  10,  a i, ans 40d-41d; Q 12, A 4, ANS and REP 3 53b-54c; aa
8-10  57b59d;  Q  13,  A  12,  REP  3 74c-75b; q 14, a 13, ANS and REP 3
86d-88c;  q  16, a i, rep 2 94b-95c; q 54, a 4, ans and rep 2 287b-288a;
QQ  56-57 291d-300b; q 79, a 9 422b-423d; QQ 84-88 440b-473a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  66,  A  5  79b-80c; q 84, a i, rep 3
174b-175a;  q  93,  q  94,  A 4, ANS 223d-224d; A 2 424b-425a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  49d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  291b-294b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 40a-c; 41ba 2 216c-217b; part ii-ii, q 9, 42a;
43d-44c  31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; xii, 21b-c / Discourse, part IV,
53b  /  Meditations, 11 77d-81d esp 81b-c; v 93a-96a passim / Objections
and  Replies,  122b-c;  postulate  ii  131a;  218c-d; 219b-c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part i, def 8 355c; prop 7 356c; prop 8, schol 2 356d-357d; part
ii,  PROP  10, schol 376d-377a; prop 24-45 383c-390b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
72, 184a-b \

[959b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxiii, sect 5 205a-b; sect
15-37  208c-214b;  bk iv, ch hi, sect 9-17 315c-317c passim, esp SECT 17
317c; sect 23-27 320a-322a passim; CH VI, SECT 5-16 332b-336d passim; ch
XI,  SECT  1-12  354c-357d  passim,  esp sect 12 357c-d; ch xvi, sect 12
370b-371a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-27 417d-418b; sect
135-142  440a-441c;  sect  148 442b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
336b-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 16a-b; 113c-115a /Judgement, 551a-552c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  120a-b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 365a-b
6a(2)  Knowledge  of  natures  or kinds distinguished from knov/ledge of
individuals  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 24 116b-118a; ch
31  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  19  [100*14-  ^3]  136d  / Physics, bk i, ch 5
[188^26-189*9]  264b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^25-981^ 131
499b-500a; bk hi, ch 4
[999*24-^4]
518a-b; ch 6 [1003*5-17] 521d-522a,c; bk vii, CH 10
[1035^35-1036*8] 559b-c; ch
15 563c564c; bk xi, ch 2 [1060^20-23] 588d; bk xiii, CH 10 618c-619a,c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 6 389d; ch 7
[1141*20-34] 390a-b; [1141^14-20] 390c-d; ch
II [1143*32-^5] 392d-393a; bk x, ch 9
[1180^
13-23] 435b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356^
28-35]  596b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, a 2, REP 2
4a-c; q 12, a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 14, A II 84c-85c; a 12, ans 85d-86d; q
15,  a  3,  REP  4  93b-94a;  q 22, a 2, ans 128d-130d; q 29, A I, REP I
162a-163b;  a  2,  rep 3 163b164b; Q 30, a 4 170c-171b; q 55, a i, rep 3
289a-d; a 3, rep 2 291a-d; q 56, a i, rep 2 292a-d; q 57, a 2 295d-297a;
q  59,  a i, rep i 306c-307b; q 75, a 5, ans 382a-383b; q 76, A 2, REP 4
388c-391a;  q  79,  a 5, rep 2 418c419b; A 6, ans and rep 2 419b-420d; q
84,  A  7,  ANS  and  rep  i  449b-450b; q 85, a i 451c-453c; a 2, rep 2
453d-455b;  a 3 455b457a; q 86, a i 461c-462a; aa 3-4 463b-464d; Q 89, A
4  476c-477a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi, q ii, A I, REP 3
772b-773a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  1-9  137a-140c  31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 167c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop  37-39  386b387a;  prop  44, corol 2-prop 46 390a-c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxxii, sect 6-8 244b-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 7-9
255d-256c;  ch  vi,  sect  32-33  277c-278c;  BK  IV,  ch  IV,  SECT 5-8
324d-325c;  ch vii, SECT 9 338d-339b 35 Hume: Hu7nan Understanding, sect
xii, div 132 509a-d

[960a]
902  THE  GREAT  IDEAS {6a. The classification of knowledge according to
diversity   of   objects.   6a(2)   Knowledge   of   natures   or  kinds
distinguishedfrom  knowledge  of  individuals.)  42  Kant:  Pure Reason,
211c-218d / Judgement, 572a-b; 572d-574b 53 James: Psychology, 305a-312a
csp  309a-312a  6a{5)  Knowledge  of  matters  of fact or real existence
distinguished  from  knowledge  of our ideas or of the relations between
them 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, A I, REP I 440d-442a; q
85,  a  2  453d-455b  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 60a-b; 65c; 71c-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch i, SECT 15-16 98d-99c; sect 23
101b-102a;  bk  hi, CH V, SECT 12 266d-267a; sect 14 267b-c; CH VI, SECT
43-51  280c-283a esp sect 43 280c-d; bk iv, ch i, sect 1-7 307a-308a; ch
II  309b-313a  passim, esp sect 14 312b-d; ch III, 313a-323d esp sect 29
322c-323a;  ch  iv,  sect 1-12 323d-326d passim; sect 18 328d329a; ch v,
sect  6-8  330a-d; ch vi, sect 13 335c-d; sect 16 336d; ch ix 349a-c; ch
XI  354c-358c  esp sect 13-14 357d-358c; ch XII, SECT 6-13 360a-362d; ch
xvii,  sect 8 377b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a;
sect  23  417b-c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv 458a463d esp div
20-21  458a-c,  div  30 461d-462b; sect V, DIV 34-38, 464b-466c; sect ix
487b488c  esp  DIV  82 487b-c; sect xii, div 131-132 508d-509d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, pref, 5c-6a / Philosophy of History, part iv, 354b
53 James: Psychology, 157b-161a esp 158b-159b; 301b-304b passim; 453a-b;
867a-890a  esp  868b-869a,  879b-882a,  886a,  889a-b 6a{4) Knowledge in
relation to the distinction between the phenomenal and the noumenal, the
sensible  and  supra-sensible  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 25c-26a; 27b-33d;
37b-d;  53b-59b;  93c-99a  esp 94b-95a, 96a-97b, 97d98c; 101b-108a,c esp
106b-107b;   117b-118a;   120c-121d;  153a-157d;  164a-165c;  172c-173a;
193a-b;  224a-230c  /  Fu7id.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d; 264d;
281c-282d;  285a-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-296d  esp  292a-293b;
307d-314d  esp  307d-308b,  310d-311d;  319c321b;  328a-329a; 331a-332d;
337a-c; 340a342d esp 340c-341c; 349b-355d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
383c-d;  390b / Judgement, 465a-c; 474b-475d esp 474d [fn i]; 497a-498b;
500c-d;  501d-502a; 506d-507a; 510b-c; 530a; 541a-542a; 543a; 543c-544c;
564a-c;  570b572b;  574b-577a;  578d-579a;  581a-b;  584c-d;  587d-588a;
596c-598b; 599d-600d; 603a-b; 603d-606d esp 603d-604b, 606a-d 53 James :
Psychology, 233a-234b

[960b]
6a{?>)  to  6b(\)  6b.  The classification of knowledge according to the
faculties  involved in knowing 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-232d esp 224a-225a,
228b-232d  /  Republic,  bk vi-vii, 383d-398c; bk x, 431c-d 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[99^34-100^3] 136b-d
/ Topics, bk iv, ch 4
[125^25-33] 174b
/ Physics, bk i, ch 5 [188^ 26-189*9] 264b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*28-982*1] 499a-500b; bk
hi,  ch  4 [999* 24-^5] 518a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 5 [417^17-28] 648b-c 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr i, ch 7 3d-4a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 13
164d-165b;  tr  VI,  CH  2  189d-190b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  hi, CH 2-3
216b-217b;  tr  v, ch i, 228c-229c; CH 7 231d-232b; tr ix, ch 7 249b-c /
Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 18, 291a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
lo-ii  15b-16a;  bk  x,  par  8-38 73b-81a / City ofGod, BK VIII, CH 6-7
268d-269d;  bk  xi,  ch  2-3  323a-d;  bk  xix, ch 18 523a-b / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 12 627c-d; bk ii, ch 27-39 650a-655b esp ch 27 650a;
bk  iv,  ch  5,  677b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, A 3
52c-53b;  a 4, ans and rep 3 53b-54c; q 14, A I, ANS 75d-76c; a 2, rep i
76d-77d;  q 18, A 2, ANS and rep i 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b107c; Q 85, A
I, ANS 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 3, REP
3  8b-9a; part ii-ii, q 8, a i, ans 417a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
60a-b;  71c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d; 55b-d 31 Descartes
: Rules, xiv, 29b-31c / Meditations, VI 96b-103d passim / Objections and
Replies,   119d-120c;   124d-125a;   postulate  i-n  130d131a;  AXIOM  v
131d-132a;  136d-137a;  157c-d;  162d-165d;  211d-212a;  217c-d; 218c-d;
219b-c;  228c-229c;  229d-230c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 10
376c-377a;   prop   40,  schol  2-prop  44  388a-390a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 309b-313a passim, esp sect 14 312b-d; ch
III, SECT 2-5 313a-c; ch ix, sect 2 349a; CH XI, SECT 13-14 357d-358c 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect i 405a-b; sect 18 416b-c; sect 27
418a-b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 227 74b-d 53 James:
Psychology,   144b-145a;   157b-167b  esp  157b-161a,  167b;  450a-451b;
453a-457a  esp 453b, 455a 6^(1) Sensitive knowledge: sense-perception as
knowledge;  judgments of perception and judgments of experience 7 Plato:
Phaedo, 224a-225a; 231c-232a / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-398c esp bk vi,
386d387a,   387d-388a,  bk  vii,  389b,  392c-393a  /  Timaeus,  447b  /
Theaetetus, 517b-536a esp 521d-526d, 533a-536a I

[961a]
[6^(1) to 6b{2)
Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 903 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[99*'20-ioo^5]
136a-d / Topics, bk ii, ch 8
[114*18-26] 159d-160a /
Physics, bk i, ch 5
[i88*'26-i89"9]
264b-c / Heavens, bk hi, CH 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c
/ Metaphysics, bk i, CH I
[980*20-^24]
499a;
[981*^10-13]
499d500a; bk iv, ch 5
[1009^1-17]
528d-529a;
[1010^1-1011*2] 530a-c; bk xi, ch 6 [1062^341063*9] 591a-b; ch 7 [1064*4-9] 592b / Soul,
BK  II,  CH 5 647b-648d; bk hi, ch 2 657d659c 9 Aristotle: Generation of
Animals, bk i, ch 23
[731*30-^5]
271c-d / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098*35-^8] 343d-344a; bk
ii, ch 9 [1109^2023] 355c; BK VI, ch 8 [1142*12-31] 391b-c; bk VII, CH 3
[1147*25-^19] 397c-398a 10 Hippocrates: Surgery, par i 70b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv
[379521] 49a-51a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6, llOc-lllc 14 Plutarch: Marcellus,
252b-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 6-7 3c-4a / Fourth Ennead, tr
hi,  ch  23 153d-154b; ch 26, 155c; TR IV, CH 23-25 169c-171b; tr vi, ch
1-2  189b-190b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr v, ch i, 2 28c- 2 29c; tr ix, ch 7
249b-c  / Sixth Ennead, TR III, ch 18, 291a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  hi,  par  lo-ii  15b-16a;  bk  iv,  par 15-17 23a-c; bk x, par 8-1 1
73b-74b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, CH 27-30 650a-651d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 5, A 4, REP I 25d-26c; q 12, a 4, ans and
rep  3 53b-54c; q 14, a i, ans 75d-76c; a 2, ans and rep I 76d-77d; a 6,
rep i 80a-81c; a ii, ans and REP 1-2 84c-85c; a 12, ans 85d-86d; q 16, A
2 95C'96b; q 17, a 2 102a-d; a 3, ans 102d103c; Q 18, A 2, ans and rep i
105c-106b;  a  3,  ANS  106b-107c;  q  54,  a 5 288a-d; q 57, a i, rep 2
295a'd;  a  2, ans 295d-297a; q 59, a i, rep I 306c-307b; q 75, a 3, ans
and  rep  2 380c-381b; a 5, ans 382a-383b; q 76, a 2, REP 4 388c-391a; q
77,  a 5, rep 3 403d-404c; q 78, A I, ans 407b-409a; aa 3-4 410a-413d; Q
79,  A  3,  ANS and REP 1-2 416a-417a; a 6, ans and rep 1-2 419b-420d; q
84, a i, ans and REP 2 440d-442a; a 2, ans 442b-443c; a 4, ans and rep 2
444d-446b;  a  6  447c449a;  q  85,  a i, ans and rep 1,3 451c-453c; A 2
453d-455b;  a  3,  ans 455b-457a; a 6, ANS 458d-459c; q 86, a i, ans and
rep  2,4  461c-462a;  a  3 463b-d; q 87, a 3, rep 3 467b468a 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 82, AA 3-4 971a-974c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, iv
[2848] Ilia
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 49a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 285c-286a 28
Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 332a-335c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i,
aph 41 109c-d; APH 50 111b; bk II, aph 40 170c-173d

[961b]
31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 53b / Meditations, I 75a-77c passim;
11,  80c-81d; iii, 83d 84a; vi 96b-103d passim / Objections and Replies,
119d-120c;  124d-125a;  postulate  iIII  130d-131a;  axiom  v 131d-132a;
162d165d;  211a-b; 211d-212a; 228c-230c; 231a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  axiom  4-5 373d; prop 11-13 377b-378c; postulate 5 380b; PROP 14-17
380c-381d;  prop  19 382b-c; prop 22-29 383b-385a 34 Newton; Principles,
bk  hi,  rule  hi  270b271a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix,
sect  8-10 139b-140b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 9 270d-271a; bk iv, ch ii, sect
14  312b-d;  ch  hi,  sect  14  316b-d; sect 21 319c; ch xi 354c-358c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro, sect i 405a-b; sect 18 416b-c; sect
25-33  417d419a  passim;  sect  135-142  440a-441c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
108a-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 227 74b-d 53 James :
Psychology,   450a-471a  esp  453a-459b,  469a-b,  470b-471a;  502a-525a
passim,  esp  503a-505b,  508a;  564a-b  6b{2)  Memory  as  knowledge  8
Aristotle: Topics, bk ii, ch 4
[111^24-31]
156d-157a; bk iv, ch 4
[125^4-14]
174c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*28-981*1] 499a-b / Memory and
Reminiscence, ch i [449^i]-ch 2
[452*13] 690a-693d
17  Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 25-TR IV, ch 9 154d-163a passim;
tr  vi, ch 3 190b191c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 12-38 74b-81a
/ Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 9 640c-d; BK IV, ch 5, 677b-c 19 Aquinas
:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 54 A 5 288a-d; q 78, a 4, ans and rep 5
411d413d;  q  79,  AA 6-7 419b-421c; q 89, a 6, rep i 478b-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 51, A 3 14b-15a; part hi suppl, q 70, a
2,  rep 4 896a-897d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, v [34-42] 112c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50b-c;  53a-54a  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  3  2d  31 Descartes: Rules, hi, 4c-d; vii, lOb-c; xi 17b-18b;
xii  18b-25a  passim / Meditations, v, 95d-96a / Objections and Replies,
125a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 18, schol 382a-b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, SECT 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch x, sect 2
141b-c;  bk iv, ch I, SECT 8-9 308b-309b; ch xi, sect ii 357b-c; ch xvi,
sect   1-2  366d367a  53  James:  Psychology,  145a;  421a-422a  passim;
424b-427a; 450a-451b

[962a]
904  The  classification  of  knowledge  according to {6b. the faculties
involved  in knowing. 6b{2) Memory as knowledge.) 54 Freud: Unconscious,
428d  /  General  Introduction, 484c-486a 6^(3) Rational or intellectual
knowledge  7  Plato: Phaedrus, 125a-b / Phaedo, 224a-232d esp 224a-225a,
228b-232d  / Republic, bk viVII, 383d-398c esp bk vi, 387a-388a, bk vii,
389b,  393a-c  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536a / Laws, BK X, 765b 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  vii,  ch 3 [247^1-248* 9] 330b-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980^25982^1] 499b-500b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch i
[1139^6-11]
387c; CH 3-7 388b-390d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[469521] 50b-51a
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  53b-c / Marcellus, 252 b-c 17 Plotinus:
Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch i 159a-d; tr vi, ch 2 189d-190b / Fifth Ennead,
tr  v, CH I, 228c-229c; tr ix, ch 7 249b-c / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 18,
291a-b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  10  73d74a; par 16-19
75b-76b;  par  30  79b-c;  par  36 80c-d / Christian Doctrine^ bk ii, ch
31-38  651d-654c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, A I, ANs
75d-76c;  a  2,  ans and rep i 76d-77d; A II, ANS and rep 1-2 84c-85c; a
12,  ans  85d86d; Q 16, A 2 95c-96b; q 17, a 3 102d-103c; Q 18, A 2, ANS
and  rep i 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 54 284d-288d passim; q 57, a
i, rep 2 295a-d; a 2, ans 295d-297a; q 59, a i, REP I 306c-307b; q 78, a
i,  ans  407b-409a;  A  4,  ANS and REP 4-6 411d-413d; q 79 413d427a; qq
84-89  440b-480c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, qq 57-58
35a-45c  23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i, 58a-61a; 65c-d; 71c; PART II,
163a;  part  iv,  267a-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d 31
Descartes:   Meditations,  11  77d-81d  passim;  VI  96b-103d  passim  /
Objections  and  Replies, 119d-120c; 124d-125a; def i-ii 130a-b; axiom V
131d-132a;  162d-165d; 228c-230c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 37-40
386b388b;  prop  44,  corol  2-prop 46 390a-c; part V, prop 29 459b-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv, ch ii, sect 1-8 309b-311a; ch hi,
sect  2-4  313a-c;  ch  IX,  sect  2 349a; ch xi, sect 13-14 357d358c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  i  405a-b; sect 89 430b-c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 227 74b-d 53 James: Psychology,
299a-314b esp 302b-304b, 313b-314a

[962b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  eb(3,)  to  ec{\)  6b{4) Knowledge in relation to the
faculties  of  understanding,  judgment,  and reason; and to the work of
intuition, imagination, and understanding 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-110d
esp 25b-c, 27c, 28d-29d, 32a-c, 34a-c, 37b-39c, 41c-45b, 48c-d, 52c-55a,
57d-59b,  65d-66d,  94b-95a,  99a-101b,  109d-110d;  130b-c;  166c-171a;
193a-195a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282  b-c  /  Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 385a-c /Judgement, 461a-476c; 493c-495a,c: 518a-d;
542b-543c;   570b-572b   53   James:   Psychology,   232b-235a  6c.  The
classification of knowledge according to the methods or means of knowing
6c{l)  Vision,  contemplation, or intuitive knowledge distinguished from
discursive   knowledge   7   Plato:  Phaedrus,  125a-126c  /  Symposium,
150c-151a; 167a-d / Phaedo, 224a-225a / Republic, bk vi-vii, 386d-389c /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 10 [1036*
1-8] 559b-c; bk xii, ch 7 [1072^13-29] 602d603a; ch 9 [1075*5-11] 605c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1178*^20-32]
433b-c 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1083b1084b 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr hi, ch 18 151b-c; TR IV, ch I 159a-d / Fifth Ennead, tr III,
CH  3  216c-217b;  tr  v,  ch  1-2  228b-229d  passim; ch 7 231d-232b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c; bk xii, par 16 102d-103a
/  City  of  God,  bk  IX,  CH  16, 294a-b; ch 22 296d-297a; BK XI, ch 2
323a-c;  ch  7 326a-c; ch2i 333a-d; ch 29 339a-b; bk xvi, ch 6 426c427a;
bk  xxii,  ch  29,  614b-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 12
50b-62b  esp  a 10 59a-d; q 14, a i, rep 2 75d76c; A 7 81d-82b; a 9, ans
83b-d; a 12, rep 1-2 85d-86d; a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; a 14 88d-89b;
a  15,  rep  2-3  89b-90b;  q  16,  a  5,  REP I 97c-98b; q 19, a 5, ans
112d-113c; q 34, A I, REP 2 185b-187b; q 46, a 2, rep 3 253a-255a; q 57,
a  i, rep 2 295a-d; a 3, ans and REP 2 297b-298a; q 58 300b-306b esp A 4
302d-303c; q 59, a r, rep i 306c-307b; q 60, A 2, ANS 311a-d; q 78, a 4,
rep  6  411d413d;  Q  79,  a  4,  ANS 417a-418c; a 8 421c422b; Q 85, a 5
457d-458d; q 86, a 2, 462a-463a; a 4, ans 463d-464d; part Q 14, A I, REP
2  677b-678a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, 416d-423b; Q 9, a
i  AA  3-6  609c-614d;  773d-775a; ANS I-II, Q 8 REP I 423c-424b; q 180,
PART III, Q II, AA 3-4 PART III SUPPL, Q 92, A 3 1034b1037c

[963a]
6c{2) to 6c{?>) 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, parahise, ii [37-45] 108a; XXX
[1-123]
151d-153a; xxxiii
[46145] 156c-157d
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 15 149a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
v   [469-505]  185b186a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5  171a-173a;  277-288
222b'224b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch ix, SECT 2-3 349a-c
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  33a-d;  52c-53b / Practical Reason, 320c-321b;
337a-c;  350c-351b  /  Judgement,  572d-574b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of
History, part iv, 349b350a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 276a-b 54 Freud: Neu/
Introductory Lectures, 874a-875a 6c{2) The distinction between immediate
and   mediated   judgments:  induction  and  reasoning,  principles  and
conclusions  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 1-3 97a-100a; ch
15 109a-b; ch 22
[83^:52-84^2]
114c-115b; CH 23
[84^19-85^1] 115c-116a; ch
31 [88V17] 120b-c; CH 33 [88^30-89^1] 121b-c;
[89*17-22] 121d; bk
II, CH 9 128a-b; ch 13
[97^31-39] 133c; ch
19 136a-137a,c / Topics, BK I, CH 12 148d / Physics, bk viii, ch i [252*
19-^5] 335d-336b / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 2
[994^16-27] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 2 [997*25-32]
515d-516a; bk iv, ch 3 [ioo5^5]~ch 4 [1006* 12] 524c-525b; ch 6
[1011*3-14]
530d; bk vii, CH 17
[1041^9-11] 565d; bk
ix, ch 10
[io5i''i8-io52*4]
577d-578a,c; bk xi, ch i
[1059*29-34]
587b; CH 6
[1063^7-12]
591d; CH 7 [1064*4-9] 592b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098*35-^4]
343d; bk vi, ch 3 [1139^25-34] 388c; ch 6-7 389d-390d; ch 8 [1142*23-31]
391b-c; ch ii
[1143*32-^5] 392d-393a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q i, aa 7-8 7a-8d; q 2, aa 1-2
10d-12c;  q 12, a 8, ANS 57b-58b; q 14, a i, rep 2 75d-76c; a 7, ANS and
rep  2-3 81d-82b; q 17, A3, rep 2 102d-103c; q 19, a 5, ans 112d-113c; q
58,  A  3,  ANS  and  REP 2 301d-302d; a 4, ans 302d303c; Q 60, a 2, ANS
311a-d;  q  79,  a 8, ans 421c-422b; a 12, ans 425c-426b; q 85, a 6, ANS
458d-459c;  q  87,  a  i,  rep  i  465a-466c; PART i-ii, Q I, A 4, REP 2
612a-613a; a 5, ans 613a-614a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
57,  A  2 36a-37b; q 94, a 2, ans 221d-223a; part ii-ii, Q 8, A I, REP 2
417a-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  58d-59a; 65c-d; 71c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  59c;  61  d;  96d-97a  / Novum Organum, pref
105a-106d;  BK I 107a-136a,c esp aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 69 116a-b, APH
103-106 127d-128c; bk II, APH 5, 139a; aph 10 140c-d

[963b]
Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 905 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; in, 4a-d; vii,
lOc  12a;  ix,  14d;  xi  17b-18b; xii-xiv, 20d28b / Discourse, part vi,
62a-b  /  Objections  and  Replies,  123a-b;  125a-b; 224b,d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2PROP  42  388a-c;  prop 47, schol
390c-391a  part  V,  prop  28  459b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-5 171a-173a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii  SECT  I 103d-104a; sect 4
104d-105a;  ch hi SECT 23 119b-120a; bk iv, ch i, sect 9-cH III, SECT 4,
309b-313c;  ch  vii, sect i-ii 337a 342d passim; ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c;
ch  xv  sect  i  365a-c;  sect 3 365d; ch xvii, sect 2-3 371d-372b; sect
14-17  378c-379c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39a-c; 66d-72c esp 67d68a; 99a-b;
109d-lllc;  211c-218d  /  Judgement, 542d-543a 43 Federalist: number 31,
103c-104a;  number  83,  244b-c  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 461c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  la-c  53 James: Psychology, 144a-b; 167b;
453a-457a  esp  453b-454a,  456a  6c(3)  The  doctrine  of  knowledge as
reminiscence:  the  distinction  between innate and acquired knowledge 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  124a-126c  /  Meno,  179d183a;  188d-189a  /  Phaedo,
228a-230d  /  Theaetetus, 515d-517b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch i
[71*26-^9]
97c-d; BK II, CH 19
[99^20-33]
136a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992^24993*11] 511a-c
10  Galen:  Natural  Vacuities,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-b  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk ii, ch ii 150a-151b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch
4,  8b-c  / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 25 154d-155c; TR IV, CH 5 160d-161b
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 10 73d74a; par 16-19 75b-76b; par
26-38 78a-81a / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c / Christian Doctrine,
bk i, ch 9 627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 54, A 4, ans and
rep  i 287b-288a; q 55, a 2 289d290d; Q 57, A I, rep 3 295a-d; q 58, a i
300c301a;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  3  310b-311a;  a 2, ans 311a-d; q 84, a 3
443d-444d;  a  4,  ans  444d446b;  A  6, ans 447c-449a; q 89, a i, rep 3
473b-475a;  q 117, a i, ans 595d-597c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 264d-265b 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  333d-334d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning, Ib-c 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c-d; 6d; vi, 8d-9a; VIII, 13c-d
/  Discourse,  part  v,  54c; part VI, 62a / Meditations, 11 77d-81d esp
81a-d;  III,  83b;  88c-d; vi, 96d-97a / Objections and Replies, 120c-d;
140b-c;  215b-c;  224b,d-225a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 23, schol
458c-d

[964a]
906  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (6c. The classification of knowledge according to
the  methods  or  means  of  knowing. 6c(3) The doctrine of knowledge as
reminiscence:  the  distinction between innateandacquired knowledge.) 35
Locke: Human Understanding, 90d-91b; bk I 95b,d-121a,c passim; bk ii, ch
i, sect 6 122 b-c; CH IX, sect 6 139a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
ii,  div  17,  457b,d [fn i] 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 113b-115a / Practical
Reason,   352c-353a   /   Judgement,  551a-552c  53  James:  Psychology,
633a-635a;  851a-862a  esp  851a-852b,  856a-858a, 859a-860a; 867a-868a;
877b-878a;  879b-880a;  889a-b;  897a-b  54 Freud: General Introduction,
512b-513b;  526c-d;  532b; 599a-b 6c{4) The distinction between a priori
and  a posteriori knowledge: the transcendental, or speculative, and the
empirical  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch iv» SECT 6-8 325a-c;
ch  ix,  sect i 349a; ch xii» SECT 6-13 360a-362d; ch xvii, sect 2, 371d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect iv 458a463d passim, esp div 20-21
458a-c,  div  30,  462a;  sect  v,  div 34-38, 464b-466c; sect x, div 89
490b-c;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d509d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-d;
14a-108a,c  esp  14a-20c,  23a-24a,  25b-26b, 27b'28b, 29d-33d, 35b-36a,
41c-42b,   46a-48d,   57d-59b,  64b66d;  115d-120c;  121a-d;  170d-171a;
172c173a;  177d;  199a  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253c-254d /
Practical  Reason,  307d308b;  309b-d  /  Science  of  Right,  405b-d  /
Judgement,  600d-603d  esp  603a-b  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 445a-447b
passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d158a 53 James:
Psychology,   232b-238b  passim,  esp  235a;  851a-897b  esp  851a-853a,
859a-862a,  865b-866a,  868b-869a,  879b-880a,  889a-b, 897a-b 6c(5) The
distinction  between natural and supernatural knowledge: knowledge based
on  sense  or  reason  distinguished  from knowledge by faith or through
grace  and  inspiration  Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  4:5-6 / / Kings,
3:3-15;  4:29-34-(D) /// Kings, 3:3-15; 4:29-34 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12—
(D) // Paralipomenon, i:j-i2. 1 Job, 28:28 / Psalms, 111:10; 119:97-104—
(D)  Psalms,  110:10;  118:97-104 / Proverbs, 1:7; 2:5-6; 9:10 / Isaiah,
11:1-4—  (D)  Isaias, 11:1-4 f Jeremiah, 8:8-9— (Z>) J^^^' mias, 8:8-9 /
D^^i^U  1-2  esp  2:17-23  Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 6-9 passim, esp
7:7,  7:15-21,  8:21,  9:13-18— (Z)) OT, Boo^ of Wisdom, 6-9 passim, esp
7:7, 7:15-

[964b]
6^(4)   to  6c{5)  21,  8:21,  9:13-18  /  Ecclesiasticus,  i;  6:32-37;
17:6-7,11;   24:23-27—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  156:33-37;  17:5-6,9;
24:32-37  New  Testament:  Matthew, 1 1 :25-27 / Lul{e, 8 :418 esp 8:10;
10:21-22;   21:12-15   I  John,  1:1-18;  8:31-32;  10:37-38;  12:28-30;
14:10-12;  16:1214;  20:24-29  /  Romans,  10:17 / / Corinthians, 1:4-5;
1:17-2:16; 3:18-21; 8:1-2; 12:8-11 / II Corinthians, 1:12; 4:3-6; 12:1-6
/ Ephesians, 1:15-18; 3:1-12 / Colossians, 2:8 / / Thessalonians, 2:13 /
U  Thessalonians,  2:10-14 / Hebrews, 4:2; II :i-i / James, 1:5; 3:13-18
//  Peter,  1:19-21  14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  i  la-b;  bk  IV,  par 25 25c; bk vi, par 6-8
36c-37c;  bk VII, par 16 48c-49a; bk viii, par 28-29 60d-61a; bk ix, par
23-25 68a-c; bk xiii, par 46 123a-c / City of God, bk x, ch 2 299d-300a;
bk  xi, ch 2-4, 323a-324a; bk XIX, ch 18 523a-b; bk xxi, ch 5 563d-564d;
bk  XXII,  CH 4-5 588b-590a; ch 7 591c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch
40  655b-656a;  CH  42 656c-d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q i
3a10c;  Q  2,  A 2, REP I lld-12c; q 8, a 3, ans and rep 4 36b-37c; q 12
50b-62b  esp aa 11-13 59d-62b; q 32, a i 175d-178a; q 46, a 2 253a-255a;
q  56,  a  3  294a-d;  q  57,  a  5  299b300b;  Q 58, A I, ANS and rep 2
300c-301a;  AA  5-7  303c-306b;  q  62,  a  7  322d-323b; q 64, A I, ANS
334a-335c;  q  84, a 5 446c-447c; q 86, a 2, REP I 462a-463a; q 88, a i,
ans 469a471c; A 3, REP I 472c-473a; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; a 2, ans
and  rep  3  475a-d;  a  3,  REP  3  475d-476c;  a 4, ans 476c-477a; a 8
479c-480c;  q 94 501c-506a; q 113, a i, rep i 576a-d; part i-ii, q 3, aa
3-8 624b-629c; Q 4, AA 2-3 630b-631d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 62, A 3 61c-62b; q 67, a 3 83b-84d; q 100, a 4, REP I 253d-255a;
q  108,  a  2,  rep  i  332b333d; q 109, a i 338b-339c; q no, a 3, rep i
350a-d; a 4, ans 350d-351d; q 112, a 5 359c360c; PART ii-ii, q I, AA 4-5
382c-384b;  q  2, AA 3-4 392d-394b; a 10 399b-400b; q 4 402a409d; QQ 8-9
416d-426c;  q  19,  a  7  469d-470c; Q 45 598c-603c; q 188, a 5, rep 2-3
679d681a; part hi, qq 9-12 763b-779d; part hi suppL, Q 92 1025b-1037c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[16-45] 56a-b; xvii [13-45] 78c-79a; paradise,
II
[37-45]
108a; IV
[124-132]
112a; v
[1-12]
112a-b; xix
[22-66]
135b-d; xxiv
[52-147]
]43b-144a;  xxx  [1-123]  151d-153a  23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52a-b;
66a-c;  69b;  83b;  part  n,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c; 163a-b; part in,
165a-166a;  172d-173a;  241c-242a; part iv, 267a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
98b-99a; 208d-209c; 212a-215b; 238c-239c; 250a-b; 267c-268a; 273a-b

[965a]
5^/0  6^(1)  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning, 2c-4c; 17b-c; 19b-c;
39d-40a;  41b d; 54c-55d; 95d101 d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c;
APH  89 124a-d 31 Descartes: Rules, in, 4d-5a / Discourse, PART I, 43c /
Meditations,  69a-71a,c; in, 88d89a / Objections and Replies, 125c-126b;
168b169a; 232b; 284d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk in
[1-55]
135b136b; BK VII
[109-130]
219b-220a; bk xii
[552-587] 331a-332a
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  27a; 147b; 163a166b passim / Pensees,
184-229  205a-213b;  233, 214a-b; 245 218b; 248 219a; 265-290 221b-225a;
425-427  243b-244b;  561-567  272b-273b;  585-588  277a-b  / Geometrical
Demonstration,  440a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ix, SECT
23  291  b-c; bk iv, ch vii, sect ii, 340b-c; CH XVI, SECT 14 371b-c; ch
xvii,  sect  23CH xviii, sect 1 1 380b-384b; ch xix, sect 4 385a-b; sect
14  387d-388a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 55, 474d-475a;
sect  x,  div  86  488d-489b; DIV loi 497a-b; sect xii, div 132, 509c 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  182a-c;  379c-380a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
189b-190d  passim,  esp  190c-d;  307d-309d  42  Kant: Practical Reason,
346b-347a; 349b-351a / Judgement, 579a; 588d-589c; 604d-606d esp 606a-d;
607d-609b  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 455a-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 394a-b;
395a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 349d 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i
[386-481]
llb-14a;  PART  II  [11,441-458]  278b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
196b-197b;  bk  VI,  248d-249a; bk xv, 630d-631c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk i, lla-b; BK VI, 168b-c; bk vii, 177b-180a; bk XI, 338a-b;
bk xii, 396d-397a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 874a-d; 877d-879d
passim,  esp 879c-d 6d. The classification of knowledge according to the
degrees  of  assent  6d{\)  The distinction between certain and probable
knowledge  8  Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d / Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 13
[52'*4-23] 48b-d;
BK  II,  CH  25  91a-b  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk i, CH 2 97d-99a esp
[72^25-^4] 98d-99a; ch 33
[89*4-10] 121c
/ Topics, bk I, CH I
[100*25-
^23] 143a-b; bk v, ch 3 [i3i''i9-3o] 182b-c / Meteorology, bk i, ch 7
[344*5-7] 450b
/ Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 3
[1005^8-34]
524c525a;  bk vi, ch i [1025^1-16] 547b; bk xi, ch 7 [1064*4-9] 592b; BK
XII, ch 8 [1074*14-16] 604c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[1139^14-34]
388b-c; bk vii, ch 3
[i 146*^23-30] 396d-397a

[965b]
b Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 907 / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [i355'i4-i7] 594b; ch
2
[1357*2 v*'24| 596d-597c; bk
ii, ch 25
[1402''
13-1403*171   652b-653a  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly
Spheres,  505a-506a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 3 266a-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q i, A 8, ans and rep 2 7c-8d; q 14,
a  3,  ans  77d78b; A 13 86d-88c; q 32, a i, rep 2 175d-178a; Q 47, A I,
REP 3 256a-257b; q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; q 58, a 7, rep 3 305c-306b; q
79,  A  9,  REP  3-4  422b-423d; q 82, a 2, ans 432d433c; Q 84, a I, ANS
440d-442a;  q  85,  a  6,  ans  458d-459c;  q  86, a 4, ans 463d-464d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; q 57, a 2, rep
3  36a-37b; q 94, A 4, ans 223d-224d; part ii-ii, q i, aa 4-5 382c-384b;
q  4,  a  8  409a-d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i, 60c-61a; 65b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 240c-241b; 271b-273b; 292a-d; 499c-d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  33  161b-d 31 Descartes: Rules, i-ii la-3b; xii,
22a-b;  23a-c  /  Discourse,  part  i,  43d;  part  ii, 47a48a; part hi,
49d-51a;  part  iv,  51b-52a;  53c-d;  part  vi, 63d / Meditations, i-ii
75a81d;  III,  81d-82d;  v, 95b-96a / Objections and Replies, 119d-120c;
123b;  124b-125b;  postulate  i-iii  130d-131a;  postulate  vi-vii 131c;
168b-d;  260d-261a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop ii, schol 358d359b;
PART  II,  PROP  24-45  383c-390b esp prop 43, schol 388d-389b; prop 49,
schol  391d-394d; part hi, prop 17, schol 401d402a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,   27a-44a   /   Pensees^  233-241  213b-217b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, intro 93a-95d passim; bk iv, ch iii, sect 14 316b-d; sect
24-29  320c-323a esp sect 29 322c-323a; CH IV 323d-329a passim, esp sect
6-8  325a-c,  SECT 18 328d-329a; ch vi 331b-336d; ch ix, sect I 349a; ch
xi,  sect  9-12  356d-357d;  CH XII, sect 6-14 360a-363a passim; ch xiv,
SECT  i-cH  XVI, sect 3 364b-367c; ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; sect 14-17
378c-379c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20-21 458a-c; div
30, 462a; sect vi, 469d
[fni]
36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv, 165a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348a,c 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335d-336a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c;
194b-c;  2  lie  218d; 228c-d; 230c-233d; 240b- 243c / Practical Reason,
330d-331a  /  Judgement, 601d; 603a43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b passim 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 50b-c; ADDITIONS, I
115a-d; 91, 131b-c 54 Freud: General Introduction, 463d

[966a]
908  THE  GREAT  IDEAS {6d. The classification of knowledge according to
the  degrees of assent.) 6d(2) The types of certainty and the degrees of
probability  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  25  91a-b  9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^12-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098^25-35] 343d;
bk  ii,  CH  2  [1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 3 [1112*30- *'i2] 358b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q i, A 5, ANs and rep i 5c-6a; q 54,
a  5 288a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 4, A 8 409a-d; q
8,  a 8 422c-423b; q 9, a i 423c424b; A 2, ANs 424b-425a; q 18, a 4, ans
464c465a;  part hi, q 7, a 3, rep 3 747b-748a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i,  53c-54a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 240c-241b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  126  134b 31 Descartes: Rules, iii, 4a-5a / Discourse, part II,
45a;  part  hi,  48b-51a  /  Objections  and Replies, 124d-125a; 126a-b;
206c-207a;  226d;  243c-d  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 102a-108a /
Pensees,  907-924 349a-352a passim 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  ii  309b-313a passim, esp sect i 309b-d, sect 6-7 310c-311a, SECT 14
312b-d;  ch  xi, sect 3 355a-b; ch xv-xvi 365a-371c; ch xvii, sect 14-17
378c-379c;  ch  xix, sect i 384c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vi
469d470d;  sect  ix,  div 82 487b-c; sect x, div 86-91 488d-491c passim,
esp  div 87 489b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348a,c / Social Contract, bk
III,  408a-b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-b; 66d-72c esp 67d68a; 202b-203c;
240b-243c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-d / Judgement, 542d543a;
600d-603d   43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  463d  /  Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 661c-662b / Netv
Introductory  Lectures,  818c-d  6</(3) The distinction between adequate
and inadequate, or perfect and imperfect knowledge 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12,
[2 60d-61c; q 14, a 3 77da 5, ANS 79a-80a; a 6 80a-81c; q 17, a 4,
103c-104b;  q 56, a 3, rep 1-2 294a-d; q 57, A 5, REP 2 299b-300b; q 84,
a  2,  ans  442b-443c; a 7, ans and rep i 449b-450b; q aa 7-8 56a-58b; a
78b  ANS 85, A 3 455b-457a; a 7 459c-460b; a 8, rep i 460b-461b; q 89, a
i,  ans  473b-475a; a 2 475a-d; a 3, ans and rep 2,4 475d-476c; A 4, ANS
and  REP 2 476c-477a; q 117, a i, REP 4 595d-597c; part i-ii, q 27, a 2,
rep 2 737d-738c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67,

[966b]
I 6d(2) to 6e{\) A 3, ANS 83b-84d; part hi, 765b-766b; q 10 767b-772a 28
Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 333b 31 Descartes: Rules, ii-iii 2a-5a /
Objections  and  Replies,  127b-c;  postulate  vi-vii 131c; 152d-153c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def 4 373b; prop Q 9, A 3, REP 2 II, corol
377b-c;  prop  24-43  383c-389b;  part  IV, PROP 64 444b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch XXXI 239b-243c passim, esp sect 6 240d-241d,
sect  13  243a-b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 30-31 276d-277c; sect 37 279b; sect
40  280a-b;  sect  43-47  280c-282b  passim 42 Kant: PureReason,2h-^a,c;
125b[fni];193a-c;  240b-243c esp 240d-241a / Judgement, 498b499c; 603a-b
53  James:  Psychology,  318b-319a;  668a-671a  esp 669a-b; 676a-677a 54
Freud:   General  Introduction,  560c-561b  6e.  The  classification  of
knowledge  according  to  the  end  or  aim  of  the  knowing  6^(1) The
distinction  between  theoretic and practical knowledge: knowing for the
sake  of  knowledge  and  for  the sake of action or production 7 Plato:
Charmides,  7d-8a  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  391d-394d  esp 393c, 394b-c /
Statesman, 581a / Laws, BK VII, 728b-729a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch
6
[145*12-18]
198d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 7
[306*14-18]
397b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2 499a-501c esp CH 2 [982*30-^27]
500c-501a; bk n, ch i
[993^^20-23]
512a; bk iv, ch 4
[1008^2-32]
527d-528b; bk vi, ch i
[1025^18-28]
547d; bk XI, CH 7 [1064*10-19] 592b-c; bk xii, ch 9
[1074^35-1075*2]
605c / Soul, BK I, CH 3
[407*22-30]
636d-637a;  bk  hi, ch 7 663c664b; CH 9 [432^26-433*9] 665c 9 Aristotle:
£/^zW, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 7
[1098*25-35] 343d; BK II, CH 2 [1103^26-1104*
9] 349b-c; ch 4 350d-351b esp [1105^12-18] 351a-b; bk iii, ch 3
[1112*30-^12]
358b-c; BK VI, CH 2
[1139*21-^14] 387d-388b; ch
5 389a-c; ch 7 390a-d; ch 8
[1142*13-19]
391b;  CH  12 [1143^17-1144*5] 393b-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch
26  131b-132b;  BK III, CH 6 181d-182b 14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a
16  Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 4
266d267c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 4 5a-b; a 5, ans
5c-6a;  q 14, a i, rep 2 75d-76c; A 16 90b-91b; q 15, a 3 93b-94a; q 34,
a  3  188b-189a; q 79, a 9, ans 422b-423d; aa ii13 424d-427a; q 84, a 8,
ans  450b-451b;  Q  86, A I, rep 2 461c-462a; a 3, contrary 463b-d; part
i-ii, q i, a 6, rep 2 614a-c; q 3, a 5 626b-627a; q 7, a 2 652d-653c

[967a]
d  6e(2)  to la Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 909 20 Aquinas: Siimma Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  56, A 3, ANS 31a-32b; q 57, a 5, rep 3 39a-40a; A 6, ANS
and  rep  2-3  40a-41a;  q  94, a 4, ans 223d-224d; part ii-ii, q 8, a 3
418c-419a; q 9, A 3 425b-d; q 45, a 3 600c-601a; q 179, a 2, ANS 607a-c;
part hi, q ii, a i, rep 3 772b773a; q 13, a i, rep 3 780a-781b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, x
[109114] 121b-c; XIII [37-111] 125d-126c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 60a-61a; part iv, 267a-b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  55d-62a  esp  56b-57b;  63d-77d  passim,  esp  69d-72a; 327b-d;
520b522a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 16d-17a; 42a-c; 46c-47c;
55b-d;  65d-66a;  69c;  86b-c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3 107b; aph 66
114d-115c;  BK  II,  APH  1-9  137a-140c  31 Descartes: Rules, i la-2a /
Discourse,  part i, 44a-c; part hi, 48b-49b; part vi, 60d-61c; 66d-67a /
Objections  and  Replies,  126a-b;  162d;  206c-207a;  237b-c; 243c-d 33
Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  102a-108a  35 Locke: Human Understanding,
intro,  sect  5-6  94b-95a;  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect i 103d-104a; SECT 3-4
104b-105a;  bk iv, ch xi, sect 8 356b-d; ch xxi 394d-395a,c 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  2 405b; SECT 1 19-122 436c-437c passim;
sect  131  439b-c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a455b esp div
1-5  451a-453b;  sect  vhi,  div  65, 479b-c; sect xi, div 104 498b-c 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 5a-13d; 190c-191a; 234c235a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  253a-d;  260d'261b;  266a-d;  271a-c;  283d284d / Practical
Reason, 291a-297c; 300d [fn i]; 307d-314d esp 310a-b; 329a-330c / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-d;  390b,d-391a / Judgement, 461a-475d esp
463a-467a, 474b475d; 515b-c; 523d-524a; 578a-b 43 Federalist: number 31,
103c-104a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 341d-342d; 346d-347a /
Utilitarianism,  445c46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 227,
74b-c;  additions,  i 115a-d / Philosophy of History, part iv, 360d-361a
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 361d-365c 53 James : Psychology, 656b
6e(2)  The  types  of  practical  knowledge:  the  use  of  knowledge in
production  and  in  the  direction  of  conduct;  technical  and  moral
knowledge  7  Plato:  Charmides,  5c-6d  /  Lysis, 16c-18b / Euthydemus,
70b-c;  74b-c  /  Statesman,  580d582a / Laws, bk i, 649c-d 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[145*12-18]
198d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; bk ii, CH 4 350d-351b; bk
vi, ch 2
[1139*32-^5]
388a; ch 4-5 388d-389c

[967b]
d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 21, A 2, ANS 125c-d; Q 65, A
2,  REP  3  340b  341b;  PART i-ii, 34, A I, REP 3 768c-769d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, AA 3-6 37b-41a; o 58, a 2, rep i
42a-43a;  a  5, REP 2 44d-45c; q 65, a i, rep 4 70b-72a; q 9:5, a I, ANS
215b,d-216c; q 97, a 2, rep i 236d237b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi,
60d-61c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  149d-150a;  234c-235a  /  Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  2  53a-  2 55 esp 253a-254b; 260d-261b; 264b-d;
266b-d;  271a-d;  283d-287d  / Practical Reason, 305d307d; 314d-321b esp
318c-321b: 329a-330c; 354d-355d; 357c-360d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics,  367c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383a-d; 387b; 388a-d;
390b,d-391a  /  Judgement,  463a-467a;  515b-c;  523d-524a; 596c-598b 54
Freud: Psycho-Analytic Therapy, 127a,c 7. Comparison of human with other
kinds  of  knowledge  7a.  Human  and  divine  knowledge  Old Testament:
Genesis,  3:1-7,22  /  /  Samuel, 16:7— (D) I Kings, 16:7 /Job, 11:1-12;
12:1617;  28:12-25;  38-41  / Psalms, 92:5-6; 94:11; 139— (D) Psalms, 91
:6-7;  93 :ii ; 138 / Proverbs^ 2,0:2^ / Ecclesiastes, 3:10-11; 8:16-17;
n'l-^  /  Isaiah,  40:12-31  esp  40:28;  44:24-25; 55:8-9 — (D) Isaias,
40:12-31 esp 40:28; 44:24-25; 55:8-9 / Jeremiah, 10:7-8,12-15; 51:15-18—
\D)  Jeremias,  10:7-8,12-15;  51:15-18  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,
9:13-17—  (D)  OT,  Bool^of  Wisdom,  9:13-17  / Ecclesiasticus, 1:1-10;
23:18-20;  24:24-29; 42:17-22— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:1-10; 23:25-29;
24:3539;  42:17-23  New  Testament:  Romans,  11:33-36  / / Corinthians,
1:17-2:16;  3:18-21  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b /
Prometheus  Bound [526-554] 45b-c 5 Euripides: Iphigenia Among the Tauri
[570575] 416a / Bacchantes [386-433] 343a-b 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 125a-126c
/  Apology, 203a / Parmenides, 489d-490d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i,
ch 2 [982^28983*11] 501a-b; bk xii, ch 7
[1072^14-29]
602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1178^20-23]
433b-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 12, 119d-120a; ch
14  120d-121c; bk iv, ch II, 240d-241a 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr hi,
ch 2-4 216b217d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 5 28b-c; bk XI, par
6 90c-d; par 41 99a-b; bk xih, par 46 123a-c / City of God, bk ix, ch 22
296d297a;  bk  xi, ch 10, 328c-d; ch 21 333a-d; BK XII, CH 18 354b-d; bk
xxii, ch 29, 614b-d

[968a]
(7.  Comparison  of  human  with other kinds of knowledge, la. Human and
divine  knowledge:)  I  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 8-io 626c-627b; CH
12-14 627c-628b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 2 4a-c; A 4
5a-b;  a  5,  ans  5c-6a;  a  6 6b-7a; a 8, REP 2 7c-8d; Q 3, A I, REP I
14b-15b;  a  6, REP I 18c-19a; q 8, a 3, ans and rep 2-4 36b37c; Q 12, A
I,  REP  I  50c-51c;  a  4  53b-54c;  aa 7-8 56a-58b; q 14 75c-91b; q 16
94b-100d  passim;  q  18, aa 3-4 106b-108c; qq 22-24 127c-143c passim; q
27,  aa  1-2  153b-155b;  Q  28,  A 4, REP 1-2 160c-161d; Q 34 185a-189a
passim;  q 44, a 3 240b-241a; q 46, a 2, rep 3 253a-255a; q 55, a i, ans
and  rep  3  289a-d;  A  3,  ans 291a-d; q 57, a i, ans 295a-d; a 2, ANS
295d-297a;  a  3, ans and rep i 297b298a; a 4, ans 298a-299a; q 62, a 9,
ans 324a325b; Q 79, A I, ANS 414a-d; a 2, ans 414d416a; a 4, ans and rep
1,5  417a-418c;  a  10,  rep  2  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  2, ans and rep 3
442b-443c;  q  85, a 4, ans 457a-d; a 5, ans 457d-458d; q 86, a 2, rep i
462a-463a;  a  4,  ans  463d-464d;  q  87,  a i, ans 465a-466c; A 3, ANS
467b-468a;  q  89, a i, ans 473b475a; a 4, ans 476c-477a; q 93, a 4, ans
494c495b; PART i-ii, Q 2, A 3, ANS 617b-618a; q 3, A 8, REP 2 628d-629c;
q 14, a i, rep 2 677b678a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91,
A  3, rep I 209d-210c; q no, a 2, rep 2 349a-d; A 4, ANS 350d-351d; part
ii-ii, q 45, a 6, rep 1-2 602b-603c; q 180, a 8, rep 3 616a-d; PART III,
q  9,  A  I 763b-764c; a 4, ans 766b767b; q 10 767b-772a; q 13, a i, rep
2-3  780a781b; q 15, A 3 789d-790c; a 10, ans 795b796a; part hi suppl, q
92, a 3 1034b-1037c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[124132] 112a; XIX
[22-66] 135b-d; xxi
[73-102]
139a-b;  xxvi  [103-108]  146d-147a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
iv,  stanza  136-154  106a-108b  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 162c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  213a-b; 238c-239c 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
17b-c;  98d99b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 23 108c; BK II, APH 15 149a 31
Descartes: Objections and Replies, 152d-153c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop  17,  schol  362c363c  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk hi [654-735]
149b151b; BK VII
[109-130]
219b'220a; bk viii
[66-197] 233b'236b; [412-418] 241a / Samson
Agonistes  [60-62]  340b-341a  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 793, 326b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 10, 123b; ch x, sect 9 143a-c; ch
xv, sect 12 165b-c; ch xxiii, sect 34 213a-b; bk hi, ch VI, SECT 3 268d;
sect 11-12 271b272b; bk iv, ch x, sect 5-6 350a-c

[968b]
b  910  THE  GREAT IDEAS la to 7c 42 Kant: Fure Reason, 33a-d; 52c-53b /
Practical  Reason,  344a-c;  350c-351b  /  Judgement, 572d-574b; 579a 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1765-1784]  42b 53 James: Psychology, 669a7b.
Human  and  angelic knowledge 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 12,
102a;  par  16 102d-103a; par 20 103c-d; par 23 104b-c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  25 283b-c; bk ix, CH 21-22 296b-297a; bk xi, ch 29 339a-b; bk
XVI,  ch 6 426c-427a; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d587b; CH 29, 614b-d 19 Aquinas
:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, a 4 53b-54c; a 10, ans and rep 2
59a-d;  qq 54-58 284d-306b passim; q 59, a i, rep i 306c307b; Q 60, A 2,
ANS  311a-d;  q  64,  a  i,  rep  2  334a-335c; q 79, a 8, ans and rep 3
421c422b;  A 10, ans 423d-424d; q 84, a 2, ans and REP 3 442b-443c; a 3,
rep  i  443d-444d; a 7, ANS 449b-450b; q 85, a i, ans 451c453c; A 5, ANS
457d-458d;  q  87, a i, ans and rep 2-3 465a-466c; a 3, ans 467b-468a; q
89,  A  3,  ans  and  rep  1,3  475d-476c; a 4, ans 476c477a; qq 106-107
545c-552b  passim;  q  108,  A I, ANS 552c-553c; q 117, a 2 597c-598c 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A I, ANS 12b-13c; PART III,
Q  9, A 3, ANS 765b766b; A 4, ANS 766b-767b; q ii, a 3, rep 3 773d-774c;
a  4 774c-775a; a 6, ans and rep i 775d-776b; q 12, a 4 779a-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, xix
[2266] 135b-d; xxix [70-81] 151a
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 15 149a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi
[654-735]
149b-151b; bk v
[388-505]
183b-186a esp
[404-413]
184a,
[469-490]
185b-186a;
[544576] 187a-b; bk vi [316-353] 203a-204a; bk
VHi [66-75] 233b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 285 224a; 793, 326b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch x, sect 9 143a-c; ch xxiii, sect 36 213c-d; BK
HI,  CH  VI,  sect  3 268d; ch xi, sect 23 305a-b; bk iv, ch hi, sect 6,
315a-b;  sect  23  320a-c;  ch  xvh,  sect  14 378c-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  81  428c-d  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 318b; 394a 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 285a-287d / Practical Reason,
354d-355d  /  Judgement,  572d-574b  7c. Knowledge in this life compared
with  knowledge  in  the  state of innocence and knowledge hereafter Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:19-20;  3:1-22  esp  3:5,  3:22 New Testament: /
Corinthians,  13:12  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-126d  / Meno, 179d180b /
Phaedo, 228a-230c 17 Plotinus : Fowr/A Ennead, tr iv, ch 1-5 159a161b

[969a]
Id  to U Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 911 18 Augustine: Confessions^ bk ix, par
23-25  68a-c;  bk  x, par 7 73a; bk xiii, par 18, 115c / City of God, bk
xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-38 635b-d; BK
II, CH 7 638d-639c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, A 9, REP 3
8d-9c; Q 12 50b-62b esp aa ii13 59d-62b; q 62, a i, ans 317d-318c; g 84,
A 5 446c-447c; q 88, a i, ans 469a-471c; Q 89 473a-480c; q 94 501c-506a;
q  ioi  522c523d  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, AA 2-3
82c-84d;  q  69,  a  2, rep 3 97b-98c; PART ii-ii, Q 180, A 5 611d-613a;
part  hi,  Q II, A I, rep 2 772b-773a; a 2, ans and rep 1-2 773a-d; part
hi  suppl, q 72, a i, rep i 917c-919a; q 82, a 3, rep 4 971a-972d; q 92,
A  I,  REP  3,5,13,15 1025c-1032b; a 2, ans 1032b-1034b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, x
[94-108]
14c-d; PURGATORY, HI
[16-45] 56a-b; paradise,
XV
[37-69]
128d-129a; xix
[22-66]
135b-d; xx
[130-148]
138a-b; xxi
[73-102]
139a-b;  xxvi  [91-108]  146d-147a;  xxx [1-123] 151d-153a 31 Descartes:
Meditations, hi, 88d-89a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 242, 218a; 425-427 243b244b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  90 130b-d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 168a-c 7d. The knowledge of men and brutes 5
Euripides:  Trojan  Women  [669-672]  275d  7  Plato:  Laches, 35b-36a /
Republic, bk ii, 320b-c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*^
25-27] 499b / Soul, BK III, ch 3
[427^7-14]
659d-660a;
[428^20-24] 660c; ch
10
[433^813] 665d
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^24-27]
9d; BK VIII, CH I
[588^18-^4]
114b,d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 23
[73i''3o-^5] 271c-d / Ethics, bk vii, ch 3 [1147^
2-5] 397d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 6, llOc-lllc; CH 9, 114c-d; CH 28, 134b; bk ii, ch
8,  146a-c;  bk  IV, ch 7, 233a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 16
262d263a,c;  bk vi, sect 23 276b; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 18, A 2, ANS and REP I 105c-106b; q 78, a 4, ans
and  REP 4-6 411d-413d; g 79, a 6, rep i 419b420d; A 8, rep 3 421c-422b;
g  84,  a  2,  rep i 442b-443c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b; 53a-b;
53d54a; 63a; 79b-c; part ii, lOOa-c; part iv, 267b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
215a-223b

[969b]
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk r, aph 73 117d118a; bk ii, aph 40, 173c-d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part v, 59c-60b / Objections and Replies, 156a-d
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [506-516] 228a; bk viii [369-451]
240a-242a;  bk  ix [549-566J 259b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 357a-358a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch ix, SECT 12-15 140c-141a; ch xi, sect
4-11  144d146a;  ch xxvii, sect 8 221a-222a; bk hi, CH VI, SECT 12, 272b
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect II 407b-408a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect ix 487b488c; sect xii, div 118, 504c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk i, ld-2a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  164a-165c  /  Practical  Reason,  316c-317a / Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 372a-b / Judgement, 479a-c; 584d-585c; 602b,d [fn i]
48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 244a-245b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 288d-289a;
290c298c   passim,   esp  292a-293a,  294d-295a  53  James:  Psychology,
678b-686b;  704a-b  8.  The use and value of knowledge 8a. The technical
use  of  knowledge  in  the  sphere  of  production: the applications of
science in art Old Testament: Genesis, 5:22 / Exodus, 31:111; 35:30-36:8
5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [442-506] 44c45a 7 Plato: Lysis, 16c-18b /
Protagoras,  43b-45a  /  Euihydemus,  70a-c / Ion 142a-148a,c / Gorgias,
261a-262a  /  Republic,  bk vii, 392a-b; 394b-d / Statesman, 580d-581a /
Philebus,  633a-634b  /  Laws,  bk  IV, 684c-685a 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[100^6-9] 136c / Physics, bk
ii,  ch 2 [194*21- ^13] 270c-271a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i 499a500b; bk
vii, ch 7
[1032*25-1033*4]
555b556a; ch 9
[1034*21-32]
557c; bk ix, ch 2 571c-572a; ch 5
[1047^31-1048*10]
573a-b; CH 7
[1049*5-12] 574c-d; bk
xi, ch 7 [1064* 10-14] 592b-c / Sense and the SensilMe, ch i
[436*16-^2] 673b / Youth, Life, and Breathing,
CH 27 [480^21-31] 726d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch 7
[1098*28-32] 343d; BK
II, CH 4
[1105*17-^4]
350d-351a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  388d-389a  10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine
la-9a,c  esp  par 1-4 la-2c, par 14 5a-c, par 20-22 7b-8d / Prognostics,
par  i  19a-b;  par 25 26a,c / Epidemics, bk hi, sect hi, par 16 59b-c /
Surgery,  par  i 70b / Articulations, par 58, 112d / The Law, par 4 144d
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 9, 195c196a

[970a]
912  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (8.  The  use  and  value  of knowledge. 8a. The
technical use of knowledge in the sphere of production: the applications
of  science  in  art.)  11  NicoMACHus:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 812d-813a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[12411457] 77b-80a,c passim
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 17, 158d159b 13 Virgil: Georgics
31ei-99a. passim, esp 11
[475515] 65a-66a
14  Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  14,  a 8 82c-83b; q 16, a i, ans 94b-95c; q 17, a i, ANs lOOd-lOld; q
19,  a 4, rep 4 lllc-112c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57,
A  3, ANS and rep 1,3 37b-38a; a 4 esp ans and rep 2 38a-39a; a 5, rep 3
39a-40a;  q  95, A 2, ANS 227c-228c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
i,  stanza  153  21a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60a-b; 73b; part IV,
267a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 450d-451a: 523c-524b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
bk  v,  lOOc-lOlc  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 154c155b;
160d'161a;  second  day, 191b-193b 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 289d;
291d292a  /  Circulation of the Blood, 305a-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part i, 145c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 5b-c; 48d49b; 50c-51d;
74b-c / Novum Organum, bk i, APH 3 107b; APH II 107d; aph 81 120b-c; aph
85  121d-122d;  aph  129  134d-135d;  bk  ii, aph 4 137d-138b; aph 44-52
175d-195d  passim  /  New Atlantis 199a-214d esp 210d-214d 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  vi,  61b-d;  66d67a 33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids,
392b-393a  34  Newton: Principles, la-b; corol ii 15a16b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  sect  11-12  361c-362c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,
452d-453b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 97b; 106a-112a 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations, bk i, 5b-6a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 633c; 661c-663c 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 60a-c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 266d-267a /
Practical Reason, 300d
[fni]
/  hitro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, Z^^dfJudgement, 463a-464c; 523d-524a;
526a527b 43 Mill: Representative Government, 369a 45 Lavoisier: Elements
of Chemistry, part i, 45c-d 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 170a; 184a; 213b
45 Faraday : Researches in Electricity, 433a-440a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of History, part i, 218d219a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 19c-d

[970b]
%a to 8^(1) 50 Marx: Capital, 167a-171c passim, esp 170a171a; 176d-178d;
180d-189b esp 188b-189b; 239b-241a; 299b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
ix,  361d-365c; BK x, 424a-c; 425b-426a; 441b-c; 456a-457c; EPILOGUE II,
685a  54  Freud:  Psycho-Analytic  Therapy,  123a-125a  esp 123b, 125a /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 777a-c; 778b-d Sb. The moral use of
knowledge  and  the moral value of knowledge 8^(1) The knowledge of good
and  evil:  the  relation  of knowledge to virtue and sin Old Testament:
Genesis,  2:9,16-17;  3:1-7,22 / Job, 28:28 / Psahns, 37:30; 82:4-5— (D)
Psalms,  36:30;  81:4-5  /  Proverbs,  1:1-23; 2:120; 7-8 esp 8:8, 8:20;
10:8,31;  11:12;  14:9,1618,22,29;  15:21;  19:8;  24:1-14; 28:7; 29:8 /
Ecclesiastes,  2:26 Apocrypha: Wisdom ofSolomon, I'.i-y, 6:12-20; 8:5-7;
9:9-10:14;  14:22-27—  (Z)) OT, Booi{^ of Wisdom, 1:1-7; 6:13-20; 8:5-7;
9:9-10:14;  14:22-27 / Ecclesiasticus, iy:y\ 19:22-24; 50:28-29— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  ij:6;  19:1921;  50:30-31  New  Testament:  Lu\e, 23:34
/John,  ^:iy-2i  /  Romans, 2:17-23; 7 esp 7:15-25; 16:19 / Philippians,
1:9-11 / Colossians, 1:9-11 / Titus, 1:16 / Hebrews, 5:14 / James, /\:ij
/ II Peter, i:i-ii 5 Euripides: Hippolytus [373-387] 228b-c 6Thucydides:
Pelopon?iesian  War,  bk ii, 397b-c; 402d-403b 7 Plato: Charmides, 7b-c;
12a-13c  /  Laches, 31a-b; 33a-37a / Protagoras, 40b-41a; 56b; 57d-64d /
Euthydemus,   69a-71a;   74b-76b   /   Meno   174a-190a,cesp  177d-178b,
183b-190a,c   /  Phaedo,  225d-226c;  230d-234c  /  Gorgias,  256d-259c;
280c-281b  /  Republic,  bk i, 301d302c; 306c-308a; bk ii, 314d-315a; bk
hi,  333b-d;  337b-d;  bk  iv,  354d-355a;  bk  vi-vh,  383d-401d; bk x,
439b-441a,c  / Theaetetus, 530b-531a / Laws, bk i, 643c-d; 645b-652d; BK
III, 670b; bk v, 689d-690c; 696c-697a; BK VII, 724c-728a; bk ix, 748a-b;
754a-b;  BK  XII,  788d-789a;  792c-d;  795c-d  /  Seventh Letter, 801b;
806b-c; 809c-810d esp 810c-d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 25
[69*
20-28] 91a / Topics, bk ii, ch 9
[114^9-13]
160b; BK III, CH 6
[120^26-31] 168a; bk
iv,  ch  2  [121^24-122*2]  169d-170a;  ch 3 [124*1014] 172d; BK v, CH 7
[137*13-17]  189b  /  Metaphysics, bk III, CH 2 [996*21-^13] 514d-515a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-3 339a-340b; CH 4
[1095*30-^12] 340c-d; ch
6
[io96''321097*14] 342b-c; bk
ii, ch 2 [ii03''26-i 104*9] 349b-c; ch 4 350d-351b esp [1105^1-4] 351a,
[1105^13-18]
351a-b; ch 6
[iio6''36-iio7*3]
352c;  BK  III,  ch  i  [1110^17-35]  356b-c;  bk  v, CH 8 [1135^1136*9]
383c-384a; bk vi, ch 5

[971a]
Sbii) to U{2) Chapter 43: 389a c; ch 8
[ii4i''33-ii42'*i()l
391a-b; ch 9-10 391c-392c; ch 12-13 393b 394d; bk vii, CH 2-3 395c-398a;
bk  x,  ch  9  [1179^4-1180'*  13]  434b-d  /  RJietoric,  bk  i,  ch 10
[1368^7-13]  611d;  ch 13 [1373^27-39] 618a 12 RpicTLTUs: Discourses, bk
i,  ch  5  llOb-c;  ch  II  116d-118d;  ch 26-28 131b-134d; bk ii, ch II
150a-151b;  ch  22 167d-170a; cii 26 174c-d; bk III, ch 10 185d-187a; bk
iv,  ch  i 213a-223d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 1 256b, d; bk
III,  SECT 12 262b-c; sect 16 262d-263a,c; bk VII, SECT 22 281b; sect 26
281c;  sect  6263  283d-284a;  bk  vm,  sect  14  286c;  bk  ix, sect 42
295c-296a,c;  bk  xii, sect 12 308b-c 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122a /
Timoleon,  197c-198a  /  Agesilaus,  490d-491b / Alexander, 543b-544a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr ii, ch 6-7 9a-10a; TR III, ch 6-tr IV, ch 3
lld-14a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 54-57 85a-86a; bk xiii, par
46  123a-c  / City of God, bk viii, ch 3 266a-d; ch 10 271a-d; bk ix, CH
20  296a-b;  bk xi, ch 28 338a-d; bk xviii, CH 40 495a-b; bk xix, ch 20,
524a  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 36-37 634d-635c; ch 40 636a,c; bk
ii,  ch 9 640c-d; ch 38 654b-c I 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i,  a  6, ^ REP 3 6b-7a; q 14, a 10 83d-84c; q 15, a 3, rep I 93b-94a; q
18,  a  4, rep 4 107d-108c; q 22, a I 127d-128d; a 3, rep 3 130d-131c; q
54,  a  5  I 288a-d; q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; q 79, aa 11-13 424d-427a;
part  i-ii,  q i, a 6, rep 3 614a-c; q 2, a i, rep i 615d-616c; q 19, aa
3-6  704c-  708a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, AA 2-3
13c-15a;  q 58, a 2 42a-43a; q 76 140di 144d; PART ii-ii, q 18, A 4, ANS
464c-465a:  q  45,  AA  3-5 600c-602b; part hi suppl, q 87 997a-1000c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi [1-18] 4a-b; xxvi
[49-142] 38c-39c; purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b; x
[112-139] 68c-d; xxxii
[37-60]
102d-103a; paradise, xix
[22-66]
135b-d;  XXVI [25-45] 146a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 95d-96b; part
ii,  112a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 208a; 213a-216c; 218c219a; 232b-242d;
478c-480c;  502c-504c;  508a512a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act
i,  so II [11-24] 408b-c 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, sc
IV  [2-17]  184d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 17d-18a; 26c-27a;
79c-80a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c;  part hi, 49d-50b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, pref 422b,d-424a; def 1-2 424a; prop 8 426b-c;
prop  14-17  428a-d;  prop  24  430d;  prop  26-27  431a-c;  prop  35-73
433b-447a; part v, prop 1-20 452d-458a; prop 42 463b-d

[971b]
KNOWLEDGE  913  32  Mh.ton: Paradise Lost, bk vii [519 549] 228b229a; bk
viii  [316-337]  239a-b;  bk ix [677779] 262a-264a; bk xi [84-98] 301a /
Areopagitica,  389a  396a  passim,  csp  390b-391a,  394b395a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  67  180b;  381-385  238b-239a;  425-427 243b-244b; 460 254b 34
Newton:  Optics,  bk hi, 543b-544a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro,
sfct  5-6  94b-95a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, sect 35 186b-d; sect 62 194c-d 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 100 432b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  i,  div i 451a-b; div 3-5 451d-453b passim 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
182a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343b-345c  esp  345a-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  164a-165c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic ofMorals, 260d-261d; 265b;
282b283d  /  Practical  Reason,  318b-319b; 326b327a / Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 365b
[fn i]; 368b-369a / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  388d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b passim; 448d450a 44
Bosv/Ei.h:  Johnson,  151b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par
139140   48d-54a;  additions,  74  127d-128a;  90  130b-d  /  Philosophy
ofHistory,  intro, 168b-d; PART II, 279c-d; 280b-281b; part hi, 304d305b
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 194b-195a; 214c-215b; bk xii, 537c-538a
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 83c-84a; bk v, 122b-125a;
127b-137c;  bk  xi,  335c-336b;  342d-345c; bk xii, 396d-397a 53 James :
Psychology,  806a-807a  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 560c-d; 625a-b
8^(2)  Knowledge  as  a  condition  of voluntariness in conduct 7 Plato:
Latus, bk v, 689d-690c; bk ix, 746a748c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch i
[1110^17-1111* 23] 356b-357a; ch 2
[iiii'^6-9]
357b; bk v, ch 8 383a-384a esp
[ii35^22-*'2]
383b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 [1368^7-13] 611d; ch 13
[1373^27-37] 618a
10   Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173b-c  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect i 256b, d; sect 10 257d-258a; bk vii, sect 22
281b;  sect 26 281c; sect 62-63 283d-284a; bk viii, sect 14 286c; bk ix,
sect  42  295c-296a,c; bk xii, sect 12 308b-c 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead,
tr viii, ch 1-4 342d-344d 19 Aquinas: Sufnma Theologica, part i, q 18, a
3, ANS 106b-107c; q 47, a i, rep i 256a-257b; q 82, A I, ANS and rep 1,3
431d-432c; q 84, A 8, contrary 450b-451b; q 105, a 4, rep 2-3 541c-542a;
part i-ii, q i, a 6, rep 3

[972a]
{8b.  The moral use of knowledge and the moral value of knowledge. 8b{2)
Knowledge  as  a  condition of voluntariness in conduct^ 614a-c; q 6, aa
1-2  644d-646c;  a  8  650d-651c;  Q  7,  A  2, ANs 652d-653c; q 19, a 6
707a-708a; Q 20, A 2, REP 3 712d-713c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  76,  A  2,  ANS 141d-142c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 61a-b;
64b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  v,  sc  ii  [37-255]  68b-70c  31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 228c 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii, ch xxi, sect 5, 179c; sect 7-13 180a-181b esp sect 13 181b; SECT
69  196d'197a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
149d-150a;  164a-165c;  169c-170a / Practical Reason, 333a-334b / Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par
117  42c-d;  par  139  48d-49b;  part hi, par 142-143 55a; additions, 90
130b-d  53  James : Psychology, 767b-768a 8^(3) Knowledge in relation to
prudence  and continence 7 Plato: Protagoras, 59c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk i, ch 3 [1094^29-1095^ 12] 340a-b; ch 13
[1102^13-28]
348a-b;  bk  VI, ch 5-13 389a-394d; bk vii, ch i [1145^8]- ch 2 [1146^8]
395b-396a; ch 3 396c-398a 14 Plutarch: Timoleon, 197c-198a 18 Augustine:
City  of God, bk xix, ch 4, 512a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i,  a  6,  ANS 6b-7a; q 22, a i 127d-128d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  56,  A  3,  ANS 31a-32b; q 57, aa 4-6 38a-41a; q 58, A 3
43b-44a;  a 5, ans 44d-45c; q 77, aa 2-3 145d-148b; part ii-ii, q 181, a
2  617d-618c;  part  hi,  q  ii,  a  I, REP 3 772b-773a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, x
[109114] 121b-c; XIII [37-111] 125d-126c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60a-61a;  84c-d;  PART  IV, 267a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 60c-61c; 327b-d; 520c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop   14-17  428a-d  32  Milton  :  Areopagitica,  389b-391a  42  Kant:
Judgement,  586a-587a  8^(4) The possession or pursuit of knowledge as a
good   or   satisfaction:   its  relation  to  pleasure  and  pain;  its
contribution to happiness Old Testament: I Kings, 10:1-8— (D) III Kings,
10:1-8 / // Chronicles, 9:1-7,22-23— (D) // Paralipomenon, 9:1-7,22-23 /
Job,  28:12-20 / Proverbs, 1:24-33; 3'^3-2o; 10:1; 14:24; 16:16; 19:2,8;
20:15;   23:23-25;  24:13-14  /  Ecclesiastes,  1:13-18;  2:12-21;  6:8;
7:11-13; 9:13-18

[972b]
914  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 8^(3) to U{^) Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 6:18-37;
21:21;  25:5,  10;  37:24;  51:13-28—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus^ 6:18-37;
21:24;  25:7,13; 37:27; 51:18-36 New Testament: / Corinthians, 8:1; 13:2
5   Aeschylus:   Agamemnon   [160-183]  53d-54a  5  Sophocles:  Antigone
[1348-1353]  142d  7 Plato: Charmides, 12a-13c / Protagoras, 59a-] 64d /
Euthydemus, 69a-71a; 74b-76b / Phaedrus, 125a-126c / Symposium, 167a-d /
MenOy  183d-184c  / Republic, bk i, 295d-296c; bk ii, 310c-d; 323c-d; bk
vi,  374a-375a;  bk  ix,  421a-425b  /  Timaeus,  475d-476b  /  Philebus
609a-639a,c  / Laws, bk ii, 655a-656a; 660a662a; bk hi, 669b-670c; bk v,
688c;  bk  vii,  728b-d  /  Seventh Letter, 801b; 808c-809a 8 Aristotle:
Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12 [291^24-29] 383b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2
499a-501c;  BK  XII,  CH  7  [1072^14-29]  602d-603a  / Soul, BK I, CH I
[402^1-6]  631a  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5 [644^
22-645*26] 168c-169a / Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[1098^12-29]
344a-b passim; bk hi, ch 10
[1117^28-32] 364b;
bk vi, ch 12
[1143^171144*6] 393b-c; bk vii, ch 12 [1152^33-1153*2]
404a;  [1153*21-24]  404c;  bk  x,  ch  3  [1173^1518] 427d-428a; ch 4-5
428b-430d  passim;  ch  7-8  431d-434a  / Politics, bk viii, ch 3 [1338*
4-13] 543b; CH 5
[1339*27-32] 544d;
[1339^
17-20]  545a  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1371*3034] 614d; [1371V10] 615a;
[1371^26-28]  615b  /  Poetics,  CH  4  [1448^5-20] 682c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk i
[62-145]
ld-2d;
[921-950]
12b-c; bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  BK III [1053-1075] 43c-d; bk iv [1-25] 44a-b; BK V [1-54] 61a-d;
[1113-1135] 75c-d; bk vi [i42] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch
i  138b,d140c;  bk III, CH 2 177c-178d; ch 10 185d187a; ch 15 190a-191a;
ch 22 195a'201a; CH 23, 202c-203b; bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a; ch 6 230b-232c
12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; sect 9 261d; bk iv, sect
16  264d; bk v, sect 9 270b-c; bk vi, sect 12 274c; bk x, SECT 12 298c-d
13  Virgil: Georgics, 11 [490-493] 65b 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a'122a;
122d-123c  / Alexander, 543b-544a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 6
9a-c;  TR  IV 12b-19b esp ch 3-4, 13d-14b, ch 9, 16d-17a, CH 15 18c-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk i, par 19-27 5d7d; bk III, par 7-8 14c-15a;
bk v, par 7-9 28c-29b; bk vi, par 26 42d-43a; bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c; bk
x, par 33-34 79d-80c; par 5457 85a-86a; bk xi, par 2-5 89c-90c / City of
God, bk viii, ch 8 270a-d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; a 4 5a-b; a 5, ans
and  rep  i 5c-6a; q 5, A 4, REP I 25d-26c; q 12, a i, ans 50c-51c; a 5,
ANS and REP 3 54c-55b; a 6, ans 55b-56a; a 7,

[973a]
8^(4) to %c Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 915 REP I 56a-57b: a 8, rep 4 57b-58b;
q 26 150a152a.c: Q 57, a 5 299b-300b: q 58, a i. ans 300c-301a; q 62, aa
1-2 317d-319c; aa 7-9 322d-325b; q 79, a ii, rep 2 424d-425b; q 82, A 3,
REP I 433c-434c; q 84, a 5 446c-447c; q 89, A 2. ANS and REP 3 475a-d; a
5,  rep 2 477a-478b; part i-ii, q i, a 6. rep 2 614a-c; A 8 615a-c; q 3,
aa  3-8 624b-629c; q 4, aa 1-3 629d-631d; q 27, a i, rep ^ 737b-d; q 32,
a  i,  rep  I  759b-d:  a  2,  ans  759d-760d;  a  3, ans 760d-761c: a 8
764c-765b;  Q  33,  a  3  767a-d;  A  4, REP I 767d-768c: q 34, a 3, ans
770c771c:  Q  35,  A  5  775d-777a;  q  37, a i, ans 783d784c: Q 38, A 4
788d-789b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 8, A 7 421d-422c;
Q 9, a 4 425d-426c: qq 179-180 606a-616d; q 182 620b-624d: part hi, q 9,
a 2 764c-765a: a 3, rep 3 765b-766b: q 10, a 4, ANS and REP I 771b-772a:
q ii, a 3, rep 3 773d-774c: q 15, a 10 795b-796a: part hi suppL, Q 70, A
3,  ANS  and  REP  5  897d-900d:  Q  90, A 3, ANS 1014d-1016a: q 92, a i
1025c1032b:  A 2, REP 6 1032b-1034b; a 3. rep 5,78,12 1034b-1037c; q 94,
a  i 1040d-1041b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi [i-i8]4a-b; IV 5c-7a;
purgatory, hi
[16-45]
56a-b; XX
[i24]-xxi
[75] 84c-85d; xxx-xxxi 99b102b: PARADISE, IV [ii5]-v [12] llld-112b
22 Chaucer: Prologue (285-308] 164a-b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 63a:
78d;  79b-80a  '  24  Rabelais:  Gargantiia and PantagmeL bk i, 26d-27d:
29d-30c  esp  30b:  bk ii, lOlb-d 25 Montaigne: Essa\s, 55d-62a: 63d-77d
passim,  esp  69d-7-2a:'lllb-d:  208a;  213a-215b; 218c-219a: 231d-246a:
448d-452b;  497b-504c;  508a-512a:  516b-524a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd HeTtry
VI, act iv, sc ii
[83-117] 58c-59a; sc
\ti '[34-51] 61c:
[76-81]
61d-62a / Lovers Labour s Lost, act i, sc i
[70-93] 255a-b
28  Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 331c-332a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i,  145d-146a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 2c-7c; 18a-b;
27c-28c: 29a-b: 71a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, i la-2a / Discourse 41a67a, c
passim  /  Meditations, hi, 88d-89a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 53
413a;  prop  58  415c;  part iv, prop 26-28 431a-c; APPENDIX, IV 447b-c;
xxxii  450c-d;  part  v,  prop  24-42  458d-463d 32 Milton: // Penseroso
21a-25a  /  Areopagitica,  383a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, 87a-b;
intro,  sect  5-6  94b-95a;  bk  ii, ch vh, sect 6 132d; CH XV, sect ii,
165a; ch xxi, sect 44 188d189b; SECT 55-56 192c-193b; bk iv, ch xi, sect
8 356b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 2 405b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  i  451a455b  passim,  esp  div  6, 453b 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 236b-238a

[973b]
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 338c 339b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 645c-d
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 523c-527a passim, esp 524a-b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256c-257c / Judgement, 508c-509a; 551 d552a;
586d-587a; 591b-592a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448d-450b passim; 451c452a
44  ^os\\Ei.i.\  Johnson, 112a; 118a; 130b; 256c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part i, 257d258a 47 Goethe: Faust esp part i [354-517] lla-14b,
[602-784] 16b-20b, [i675-i784]40b-42b, part
II
[11,397-419]
277a-b,
[11,434-452]
278a-b,
[11,559-586] 281b-282a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 78a-b; 255a 51 Tolstoy: IVar and Peace, bk i,
33d;  bk  xi,  481d-482a; bk xv, 631a-c 53 James: Psychology, 524b-525a;
729b-730a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 773d774a; 777a-c;
778d-779a  8c.  The  political use of knowledge: the knowledge requisite
for  the  statesman, legislator, or citizen 6 ThuCYDiDES : Peloponnesian
War,  bk i,370a-c; bk II, 402d-403b 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44c-45a / Meno.
188b190a,c  /  Gorgias,  256d-262a  /  Republic, bk IV, 346c-347a; bk v,
369b-d;  375b-376c;  bk  VI.  381b-d;  bk vi-vii, 383b-401d / Statesman,
598b-608d  /  Latvs,  bk  i,  645b-652d  esp  652d;  bk  hi,  669b-670c;
671a-672a;  bk  iv,  679c680d;  bk  vi, 702d-703a; bk vii, 723d-730d; BK
viii,  740d-741a; bk ix, 754a-b; bk xh, 789b-790a; 792c-d; 794c-799a,c /
Seventh Letter, 801b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2 339b-d; ch 3
[1094^28-1095*12] 340a-b; ch
13
[1102*5-25]
347b-c; bk vi, ch 5
[1140^7-12] 389b; ch 8
[ii4i*'23-i 142*11] 390d-391a; bkx,ch9 [1180*
25-1181^25] 435a-436a,c / Politics, bk hi, ch II
[i28i''40-i282*23] 479d-480a; bk
iv, ch i 487a-488b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1359*301360^1] 599c-600d; ch 8 608a-c; bk
ii, ch 22
[1396*4-^19] 644a-c
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c; BK VI, SECT 30 276d-277a
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  41a-b; 43b-d; 46b-c / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d /
Solon 64b, d77a,c / Pericles, 122d-125a passim / Alexander, 542d-544b 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  x  [109144] 121b-122a; xiii [37-111]
125d-126c  23  Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, intro,
47b-d;  part i, 53c-54a; 60d-61a: 67d-68a; 71c-d; 72a-d; 78b-d; part ii,
128c-130a;  140c;  153a-156b;  158c-d; 164a,c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk ii, 85c-87c

[974a]
b  (8.  The  use  and  value  of  knowledge.  8r.  The  political use of
knowledge:  the  knowledge  requisite  for the statesman, legislator, or
citizen.)  25  Montaigne: Essays, 450d-451a; 451d-452d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  40d;  PART  II,  331a-333b  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  ld-2b;  4c7c;  20d-26a  esp 2Z2L'1^2i', 94b-95a 32 Milton: Sr
Henry  Vane 69b / Areopagitica, 383a; 385a35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  hi,  ch  x,  SECT 8-9 293c-294a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28b-29b;
part ii, 77a- 78b; part hi, 112a-115b; part iv, 157a158a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  85b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 329a-331d /
Political  Economy, 371b-c / Social Contract, bk ii, 400c-402a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 337d-338c; 343c-d; 347c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  284a-c;  343a-c  41 Gibbon '. Decline and Fall, 40b; 75d-81c
passim  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: article ii, sect 2 [413-417] 15a;
SECT  3 [440-444] 15b 43 Federalist: number 35-36, 113a-116a; number 53,
168b-169b;  number 56 174d-176d; number 62, 190b-d; number 84, 253d-254b
43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b  /  Representative Government, 330d-331a;
337a;  357b-d;  359a361b;  363b-366a;  374c-377a;  380c-389b; 401a-406a;
410d-412a;  415a-417c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 211
70a-c;  par  215  71c-d;  par 300 100b / Philosophy of History, part ii,
272c-273a  48 Melville: Moby DicJ^, 107a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  242b-243a;  bk  IX,  385c-387a  passim;  bk  xii,  537c-538a 9. The
communication  of  knowledge  ^a. The means and methods of communicating
knowledge 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 47d-48a;
50c-52d  /  Cratylus,  85d-88a  esp  87c-d / Phaedrus, 138c-140b / Meno,
179b-183a  / Apology, 206b-d / Gorgias, 259d-260a; 261d-262a / Republic,
bk   vii,   388a-398c  esp  389d-390a,  397b-398c;  399c  /  Theaetetus,
515d-517b; 549c-550a,c / Sophist, 551d; 556c-558d / Statesman, 590d-591c
/  Laws,  bk  II, 656b-c; bk iv, 684c-685a / Seventh Letter, 809a-811a 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch i 97a-d/ Topics, bki, chi8
[108*17-37] 152b-d/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 2 [i65^38-'^3] 227d228a;
ch 10
[171*27-^2]
235d-236a; ch ii
[172^15-21] 237a
/ Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3 513c-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436^18437^17] 673d-674a

[974b]
n  916  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9/0  9a  ;  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[1139^25-34]  1 388c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1358^3-26] 597d- ' 598b; ch
4
[1359^1-18] 599d; bk
hi, ch i
[1404^1-12] 654a
11  Archimedes:  Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, 403b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [921-950]  12b-c;  bk  IV  [1-25]  44a-b  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  21,  167a-d; CH 24, 172d-173c; bk hi, ch 21-23
193d-203b  passim;  bk iv, ch 4, 225a-226a; ch ii, 241d242d 17 Plotinus:
First  Efjnead,  tr  hi, ch 2-3 lOd-lla 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i,
par  13  4b-c; par 19-20 5d-6a; par 23 6d-7a; bk iv, par 13 22c-d / City
of God, bk xi, ch 25 336b-d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 6 638a-d; ch
36-37  653d-654b;  bk  iv  675a-698a,c  19  Aquinas  : 5Mmmj Theologica,
prologue  lab;  part  i, q I, a 2, REP 2 4a-c; a 5, rep 2 5c-6a; aa 8-jo
7c-10c;  q 27, a i, ans 153b-154b; q 34, a I, ANS and rep 1,3 185b-187b;
q 57, A 4, REP I 298a-299a; q 76, a 2, rep 5 388c391a; q 79, a 10, rep 3
423d-424d;  q  84,  a 3, rep 3 443d-444d; a 7, ans 449b-450b; q 89, A I,
ans  473b-475a; qq 106-107 545c-552b; q 108, A 2, REP 2 553c-554c; q hi,
a  i,  ans  568c-569b;  a  3,  rep  3 570b-571b; q 117, a i 595d-597c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, a 7, REP 2 385c-387a; q 181,
a  3  618c-619b; PART HI, Q 9, A 4, REP I 766b-767b; q 12, a 3 778b-779a
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 101b-106a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 63d-80b passim, esp
65a66b,  73b-74a;  446d-450a  26  Shakespeare:  Richard 11, act ii, sc i
[5-16] 327d 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268c / On Animal Generation,
336d-337a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 14c-15a; 16c; 29c-32c;
62c-68b  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part i, 42b; 42d; part V, 59c-60b 32
Milton:  Areopagitica,  384a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 9-10 173b; 626 286b /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 439b-446b 35 Locke: Human Understaiiding, bk
hi, ch x, SECT 34 299d-300a; bk iv, ch vii, sect ii, 340d-341a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  hi,  109b-112a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-340a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v,
337c-d;  339d-340a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 88c-d; 597a; 601b-c;
669a-670b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 80c-d; 231a; 527c528a,c 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 2d-4a,c / Practical Reason, 335b-c M

[975a]
9b to 10 CuAPTi-R 43: KNOWLEDGE 917 43 Mill: Liberty, 283c-288c passim /
Representative  Government, 424b-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 144c; 257c; 471d
49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 294d-295a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
47b-48d;  epilogue  II,  689c  53  James:  Psychology,  692a-b 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  449a-451a / New Introductory Lectures, 820c-829d
esp  820d, 822b, 829a-c 9b. The value of the dissemination of knowledge:
freedom  of  discussion  6 TnucYDiDESiPeloponnesian War, BKii,397b-c; BK
III,  425a-d;  427a-c  7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  Laws, bk xii,
789b-790a  10 Hippocrates: Articulations, par 47, 107c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch  10  207b-d  14  Plutarch:  Alexander, 543b-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  72b-73a;  bk  xiv, 153b-c 18 Augustine: City
ofGod,  bk xi, ch 25 336b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl,
Q 96, A 7 1061b-1062a; a ii, ans and rep 5 1063d-1064d; a 12 1064d-1065b
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 102d-103a; 114d-115a; 149b-d; ISOc-lSla;
155d-156b;  part IV, 274c-d; conclusion, 282d-283a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
55d-62a  esp  60a-c;  65a66a; 270a-271a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VL act
iv, sc vii
[34-51] 61c; [76-81] 61d-62a
28  Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 273d-274b / On Animal Generation, 331b
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 7a-c; 32a / New Atlantis, 214a-b 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  60d-61a  /  Objections  and  Replies,
283c-284a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp 384b389a, 398a-b 35
Locke:  Toleration,  15b-c; 18c-21c / Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi,
sect  20  319b-c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 5, 453a-b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  xix,  146a,c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
339d-340a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 340c-343d; 347c-d 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 148a-b; 670b-671a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
161c-162b;  300a-b; 334d-335a,c; 523a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 220b-221b;
223a-c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b;  293d;  318a-319b; 322a-323a,c /
Representative  Government, 330ab; 336c-338c; 361b-362c; 418b-d; 424b-c;
425b-c  44 Bosw eel: Johison, 29a-b; 86a-b; 195d; 221d222a; 307d; 512c-d
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 215 71c-d; par 224 73d; par
314-315 104b-c; additions, 135 138c; 141 139c / Philosophy of

[975b]
History,  part  ii,  280a-b; part iv, 347b-d; 350d351a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  ii [10,155-159] 247b 50 Marx: Capital, 239d-241a 54 Freud: Psycho-
Analytic Therapy, 125d 127a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 879b-880b 10.
The  growth  of  human  knowledge:  the  history  of  man's progress and
failures  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  7 Plato: Timaeus, 444a-445d 8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[183^16-184*^8] 253a-d / Physics, bk
i, ch 2-9 259b-268d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3-10 501c511d; BK II, ch I
[993^30-^19]
511b,d'512a; BK XII, ch 8 [1074^1-14] 604d-605a; bk xiii, CH I
[1076^8-17] 607a / Soul, bk
i, ch 2-5 633a-641d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch 3
[513*7-14] 36c-d / Parts ofAnimals, bk
i, ch i
[642^25-30] 165b-c
/ Generation of Animals, bk V, ch I
[778^5-10] 320d
/  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1098*22-25]  343c-d  10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine,  par  1-8 la3b; par 12 4b-c / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par I
26a-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 8, 193b-c; CH 9, 199a,c; bk
hi,  ch  10  207b-d  11  Archimedes:  Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, 403b 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-79]
ld-2a; bk hi [1-30] 30a-b; bk v [i448]-bk vi
[41] 79d-80d
12  ^viCTETVs: Discourses, bk hi, ch 6 181d-182b 14 Plutarch: Marcellus,
252b-255a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i, 6b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
846a-850a  /  Harmonies  ofthe  World, 1009b-1010a 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk vhi, ch i-ii 264b,d-272c esp ch 5 267d-268d, ch io-ii 271a-272c;
bk xix, ch 1-4 507a-513c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40 655b-656a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 75, A I, ans and rep 1-2 378b-379c
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, A I, ans 236a-d; part ii-
ii,  q i, a 7, rep 2 385c-387a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114d-115a;
153d;   164a,c;  part  iv,  267c-269b;  274c-d;  conclusion,  282b-d  24
Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk 11, 81a-83b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
271b-c; 2 76b- 2 78a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, 2b-d 28 Harvey: Motion
of   the   Heart,  267b,d-269a;  274a-b;  279d-280c;  285b-c;  293b-d  /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  306a-c  / On Animal Generation, 331a-332a;
336d-337a,c;  364a365a;  377a-c;  433c;  458a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning  la-lOld  esp  2b-c,  18b,  29b-c,  32a-c,  33b-d, 34b, 42c43a,
51d-54b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 30-31 109a; aph 51 lllc; aph 56 112a;
aph

[976a]
918  THE  GREAT IDEAS (10. The growth of human knowledge: the history of
man'sprogressandfailures  in  thepursuit of knowledge.) 70-115 116b-130d
passim  /  New  Atlantis,  203d-207b  31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv 5a-7d /
Discourse,  PARTI,  42b-44c;  part vi 60d-67a,c 32 Milton: Areopagitica,
404a-b  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  355a-358b  35  Locke: Human Understanding,
88d-89b  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 17 409d-410a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div 5, 453a-b; div 8-9, 454b-455a; sect
vii,  div  48,  471b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, llSa-119a 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 224b-225a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329b-330d; 338c-342c
39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 331b,d343d passim 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 23d-24a,c; 148a-b; 159a-c; 597a; 601b-c; 633c-634a,c; 669a671b
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 75b-80d passim; 225a-b; 274a-d; 298a-300b;
325d'328a,c;  347a,c;  439d-440a,c;  451c-452b; 509d-510a,c; 522b-528a,c
esp 527d-528a,c CWSS-KEFERENCES

[976b]
42 Kant: Pure Reason, ld-2b [fn2]; 5a-8b; 175b
[fni]; 248d-250a,c
/  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 273d-274a / Practical Reason, 299d;
307a-d;  317b-318b;  327c-d; 339b-d / Judgement, 513d-514a; 551b-552a 43
Federalist:  number  9,  47c-d;  number  37, 119b-120b 43 Mill: Liberty,
274b-293b passim / Utilitarianism, 445a-447b 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 129a
45  Fourier: Theory of Heat, 175b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
391  b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  136  138c-d  /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  185a186a;  part  i, 217c-219c; 229b-d;
253b-c;  257d-258a;  part ii, 279d-280b; part iv, 323c-d; 347b-d; 361a-c
48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 95b-105b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196b;
bk xi, 469a-d; epilogue ii, 694d-696d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  xi,  341d  53  James:  Psychology,  37b; 125b-127b 54 Freud: Psycho-
Analytic  Therapy,  125d-126a  / Interpretation of Dreams, 137b-139a esp
138d139a   /   General   Introduction,   550d  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  777a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  880d-881c  For: The
differences  between  human  and other kinds of knowledge, see Angel 3d;
Animal  ia(i)-  ia(2); God 5f; Infinity 7d; Mind 4e-4f; Wisdom id. Other
discussions  bearing  on  the nature of human knowledge, its relation to
truth,  error,  and ignorance, and its distinction from opinion, belief,
and  fancy,  see  Memory and Imagination 6a; One and Many 4f; Opinion i,
3-4b;  Principle 30(2); Same and Other 4a; Truth 2e, 3d; Will 3b(i); and
for  the elements, causes, or principles of knowledge, see Definition 5;
Experience  3;  Form  3,  4;  Idea  la-ic;  Induction  3; Judgment 8-8d;
Principle  2-2b(3); Reasoning 5a-5b(5); Will 3b(i). Other considerations
of  the  limits  of  human  knowledge  and of the knowability of certain
objects,  see  Angel  2b; Being 8a-8c, 8e; Cause 5d; Experience 4a; Form
3b;  God  6-6b; Infinity 6b; Man 2a; Matter 4a; One and Many 4e; Opinion
3c; Principle 5; Science 4e; Soul id; Theology 3c; Time 6e-6f; Truth 7a;
Universal  and  Particular 4e. Matters relevant to the classification of
the  kinds  of  knowledge  by reference to its objects, see Being 8a-8b;
Form  3-3a; Idea la; Mind ia(i); Nature 4a-4c; Necessity and Contingency
4a;  Relation 4d; Religion la; Sense 4a-4b; Universal and Particular 4a.
Matters  relevant  to  the  classification  of the kinds of knowledge by
reference to the faculties Matters relevant to the classification of the
kinds  of knowledge by reference to the methods or means of knowing, see
Experience  2d;  God  6c-6c(4);  Induction  la;  Judgment 8a; Memory and
Imagination  3a;  Opinion  4a;  Reasoning  ib;  Religion 6g\ Theology 2;
Wisdom  ic;  and  for  methodology  in  general  and  the methods of the
particular  sciences,  see  Astronomy  2a-2c;  History  3a;  Logic 4-4f;
Mathematics  3-3d;  Mechanics  2-20;  Metaphysics  2c;  Philosophy 3-30;
Physics 4-4d; Science 5-56; Theology 4c. J

[977a]
For: Matters relevant to the classification of the kinds of knowledge by
reference  to the degrees ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not
included  in  Great  Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea
and  topics  with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into
two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  I.  W. James. The Will to Believe . The
Meaning  of  Truth,  ch  1-2,  4 Augustine. Answer to SJ^eptics . On the
Profit  of  Believing  H*  . On Faith in Things Unseen Sextus Empiricus.
Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism, bk i-ii Aquinas. On the Trinity ofBoethius, qq
5-6  Saadia  Gaon.  The  Boo{  of  Beliefs  and Opinions, . Summa Contra
Gentiles, bk i, ch 48-71 introductory treatise . Quaestiones Disputatae,
De  Veritate  Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Dialogue on Truth Spinoza. Of the
Improvement of the Understanding Maimonides. The Guidefor the Perplexed,
part  hi, Berkeley. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Phich 20-21 lonous
^  Albertus  Magnus.  On  the  Intellect  and  the IntelHuME. A Treatise
ofHuman  Nature, bk i, part iv, ligible sect i-iv Matthew of Aquasparta.
Ten  Disputed  QuesKant.  Prolegomena  to Any Future Metaphysic tions on
Knowledge,  qq  i-ii  . Introduction to Logic, v-vi, ix-x q 4 Hegel. The
Phenomenology  of  Mind, viii Petrarch. On His Own Ignorance . Logic, ch
3-5  Albo.  The  Boo{of  Principles  {Sefer  ha-Ikf(arim),  bk  Faraday.
Observations   on   the  Education  ofthe  Judgiv,  ch  i  ^^"^  Suarez.
Disputationes Metaphysicae, i (6) viii-ix, J. S. Mill. An Examination of
Sir  William  Hamilxiii (6), xx (i), xxii (i), xxiii (7-8), xxx (11ton's
Philosophy, ch 2-3 12), xxxv (4)

[977b]
Chapter 43: KNOWLEDGE 919

[978a]
92a  THE  GREAT  Marlowe.  The Tragical History ofDoctor Faustus John of
Saint  Thomas.  Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, part ii, q
26  Glanvill. The Vafiity of Dogmatizing Malebranche. De la recherche de
la  verite  Leibnitz. Discourse on Metaphysics, xxiv-xxix . ISlew Essays
Concerning Human Understafiding, BK IV . Monadology, par 29-30 Voltaire.
"Ignorance,"  in  A Philosophical Dictionary . The Ignorant Philosopher,
ch  51-55  J.  G. Fichte. The Vocation of Man . The Science of Knowledge
Schopenhauer.  The World as Will and Idea, vol i, BK i-iii; vol II, SUP,
ch  1-7,  18;  VOL  III,  SUP, ch Kierkegaard. Philosophical Fragments .
Concluding Unscientific Postscript J. H. Newman. The Idea ofa University
.  An Essay in Aid of a Gratnmar of Assent Lotze. Microcos?nos, bk v, ch
4  . Logic, BK III T. H. Green. Prolegomena to Ethics, bk i Pearson. The
Grammar  of  Science  Bosanquet.  Knowledge  and Reality . Logic, VOL I,
INTRO,  (2)  ;  VOL  II,  ch  7  . Science and Philosophy, 3 HoDDER. The
Adversaries  of  the  Sceptic  Husserl.  Logische  Untersuchungen Lenin.
Materialism  and Empiriocriticism Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk i,
ch  11-12;  BK  II,  CH  21,  27  . Essays on Truth and Reality, ch 2, 6
Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory  .  An  Introduction  to Metaphysics . The
Creative  Mind, ch 6 T. Veblen. The Vested Interests and the State ofthe
Industrial Arts, ch i

[978b]
IDEAS  M.  Keynes.  A  Treatise  on  Probability,  J. ivi. jveynes. /i I
realise on frooaouity, part Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Marechal.  Le  point  de depart de la metaphysique Santayana. Scepticism
and  Animal  Faith  Whitehead.  An  Enquiry Concerning the Principles of
Natural Knowledge . The Concept of Nature . Process and Reality, part hi
Meyerson.  Du  cheminement  de la pensee p| Maritain. An Introduction to
Philosophy,  part  ii  (4)  . The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 2 Blondel. La
pensee  Gilby.  Poetic  Experience  Simon.  Introduction a Vontologie du
connaitre A. E. Taylor. Philosophical Studies, ch 10 Gill. The Necessity
of  Belief  Dewey  et  al.  Studies  in Logical Theory, i-iv Dewey. "The
Experimental  Theory of Knowledge," "The Significance of the Problems of
Knowledge,"  in  The  Influence  of  Darwin on Philosophy . The Questfor
Certainty  .  Logic,  the  Theory of Inquiry, ch 25 Weiss. Reality, bk i
Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought  Gilson. The Unity of Philosophical
Experience  .  Reason  and  Revelation  in  the  Middle  Ages . Realisme
thomiste  et critique de la connaissance C. I. Lewis. Mind and the World
Order  . An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation B. Russell. The Problems
of  Philosophy,  ch 5, 7-8, "' '3 . . . Mysticism and Logic, ch 10 . The
Analysis  of  Mind,  lect  12  .  Skeptical  Essays, i . An Inquiry into
Meaning  and  Truth, ch 7-12, 18 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits
Dewey and Bentley. Knowing and the Known

[979a]
Chapter  44:  LABOR INTRODUCTION MEN have dreamed of a golden age in the
past  when  the world was young and everything needed for the support of
Ufe  existed in profusion. Earth, Lucretius writes, "first spontaneously
of  herself produced for mortals goodly corn-crops and joyous vineyards;
of  herself gave sweet fruits and glad pastures; which now-a-days scarce
attain  any  size  even when furthered by our labor; we exhaust the oxen
and  the  strength of the husbandmen; we wear out our iron, scarcely fed
after  all  by the tilled fields; so niggardly are they of their produce
and  after  so  much  labor  do they let it grow." When the aged plowman
"com-  ,  pares  present  times  with  times  past," Lucretius adds, "he
praises  the fortunes of his sire" living in the time of earth's plenty.
This  ancient myth of a golden age has sometimes taken the form, as with
Rousseau,  of  an  idealization  of  primitive  society,  uncorrupted by
civilization,   in   which   an   easy,   almost  effortless,  existence
corresponded  to  the  simplicity  of  man's  needs. Rousseau pictures a
situation in which "the produce of the earth furnished
[man] with all he needed, and instinct told him
how to use it," so that "singing and dancing, the true offspring of love
and  leisure,  became the amusement, or rather the occupation of men and
w^omen  assembled  together  with  nothing  else to do." In our own day,
industrial Utopias have been projected into a future made free from toil
by  the  adequacy  of  machines or the efficiency of atomic energy. Long
before  the  industrial  era,  Aristotle  envisioned,  as  a supposition
contrary  to £ict, a society built upon labor-saving machines. "If every
instrument  could  accomplish its own work," he writes, if it could obey
or anticipate commands, if "the shuttle would weave . . . without a hand
to  guide  it,  the  chief  workmen would not want servants, nor masters
slaves." 921

[979b]
In  all  these  conceptions  of  a  better  life,  labor is eUminated or
reduced.  The  impUcation  seems  to  be that the labor required for the
maintenance  of  all  historic societies is an affliction, a drudgery, a
crushing  burden  which deforms the fives of many, if not all. The pains
of  toil  do  not belong to human fife by any necessity of human nature,
but rather through the accident of external circumstances which might be
other than they are. "Work became indispensable," according to Rousseau,
only  when  "property  was  introduced,"  and  then "vast forests became
smifing  fields,  which man had to water with the sweat of his brow." It
was  the  result  of  "some  fatal accident, which, for the pubfic good,
should  never  have  happened."  Man might have reafized his nature more
surely  and  richly  if, like the lilies of the field, he neither toiled
nor  The  contrary  view  would  maintain that work is not a curse but a
blessing,  filling  man's  hours  usefully,  turning to service energies
which would otherwise be wasted or misspent in idleness or mischief. The
sinfulness  of  sloth  implies  the  virtue  of  work.  The principle of
activity,  according  to  Hegel, whereby "the workman has to perform for
his  subsistence,"  gives man a dignity which "consists in his depending
entirely  on  his diligence, conduct, and intelligence for the supply of
his  wants.  In  direct contravention of this principle" are "pauperism,
laziness, inactivity." It is even suggested that useful occupations save
men  from  a boredom they fear more than the pain of labor, as evidenced
by  the  variety of amusements and diversions they invent or frantically
pursue  to occupy themselves when work is finished. The satisfactions of
labor  are as pecufiarly human as its burdens. Not merely to keep afive,
but to keep his self-respect, man is obliged to work.

[980a]
922  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  "In  the morning when thou risest unwilHng," the
emperor Marcus AureHus tells himself, "let this thought be present— I am
rising  to  the work of a human being. Why, then, am I dissatisfied if I
am  going to do the things for which I exist and for which I was brought
into the world ? Or have I been made for this, to lie in the bed-clothes
and  keep myself warm? But this is more pleasant. Dost thou exist, then,
to  take  thy  pleasure,  and  not  at all for action and exertion?" The
perspectives  of theology give still another view of labor. It is not an
accidental  misfortune  which  men  may some day be able to correct. But
neither  is  it a blessing nor the thing for which man was created. When
the golden age of Saturn came to an end, and Jupiter replaced him on the
throne  of  heaven,  then,  as  Virgil  tells the story, labor was first
introduced  into  the  world. "Before Jove Fields knew no taming hand of
husbandmen;  To  mark the plain or mete with boundary-line Even this was
impious;  for  the  common stock They gathered, and the earth of her own
will  All things more freely, no man bidding, bore. He to black serpents
gave their venom-bane, And bade the wolf go prowl, and ocean toss; Shook
from the leaves their honey, put fire away, And curved the random rivers
running wine, That use by gradual dint of thought on thought Might forge
the  various arts, with furrow's help The corn-blade win, and strike out
hidden  fire From the flint's heart. Here, while labor may in some sense
be  a  punishment, or at least a fall from the golden age, it still does
result  in  benefits.  "The divers arts arose" from Jove's "whetting the
minds  of  men  with  care on care, nor suffering realm of his in drowsy
sloth  to  stagnate."  But  although  "toil  conquered all," it is still
"remorseless  toil."  According  to  Christian  doctrine,  labor  is  an
inevitable consequence of man's fall from grace, a punishment for Adam's
disobedience  like  disease  and death. In the earthly paradise of Eden,
the  children  ofAdam would have lived without labor or servitude of any
sort.  But  when Adam sinned, the Lord God said unto him: "Cursed is the
ground  for  thy  sake; in toil shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy
life  ...  In  the  sweat  of  thy face, shalt thou eat bread, till thou
return into the ground." That work should be painful belongs to its

[980b]
I  very essence. Otherwise it would not serve as a penalty or a penance.
But,  in  the Christian as in the Virgilian view, labor also contributes
to  such  happiness  as  man can enjoy on earth. The distinction between
temporal  and  eternal happiness is a distinction between a life of work
on earth and the activity of contemplation in Heaven. This does not mean
the  elimination  of leisure and enjoyment from earthly Hfe, but it does
make  labor  their antecedent and indispensable condition. It also means
that  even  in his highest activities—in the development of his arts and
sciences—man  must  be  perpetually at work. His achievement of truth or
beautv  is never so perfect and lasting that he can rest in it. In these
diverse  conceptions  of the relation of labor to human fife, work seems
to  have  several  different  meanings.  It  always involves activity or
exertion.  Its  clearest  opposite  is  sleep. But other things are also
opposed  to  work— play or amusement, leisure, idleness. When leisure is
not  identified  with  idleness, it involves activity no less than work.
So,  too,  many of the forms of play require intense exertion of body or
mind.  The  difference,  therefore, must lie in the nature or purpose of
the  activity.  Aristotle  suggests  what the difference is when he puts
play,  work,  and  leisure  in  an  ordered relationship to one another.
Nature,  he  writes,  "requires that we should be able, not only to work
well,  but  to use leisure well." Leisure is "the first principle of all
action" and so "leisure is better than work and is its end." As play and
with  it rest (i.e., sleep) are for the sake of work, so work in turn is
for  the sake of leisure. The characteristics of work as the middle term
here  seem to be, first, that work is activity directed to an end beyond
itself  and,  second,  that  it  is  productive of the necessities which
sustain  life  rather  than  of the goods by which hfe is perfected. The
political  or  speculative activity which Aristotle considers the proper
occupation   of   leisure   is  intrinsically  good  or  enjoyable.  For
participation in such activities leisure— in the sense of time free from
labor  is  required;  but since the good life cannot be lived unless hfe
itself  is sustained, labor also is a prerequisite. Work is thus defined
by wealth as its immediate end— the production of the external, eco-

[981a]
nomic,  or  consumable  goods  which  support  Hfc.  Though play has the
immediately  enjoyable  character  of  an activity performed for its own
sake,  Aristotle  subordinates  it  to  work,  assigning  to it the same
utility  which rest has. Both refresh men from the fatigues of labor and
recreate  the  energies  needed  for  work.  "Amusement," he writes, "is
needed  more amid serious occupations than at other times, for he who is
hard  at  work  has  need  for  relaxation,  and  amuse-  >  ment  gives
relaxation."  The  economic  sense  which  connects  work and labor with
wealth  seems  to be the primary ! but not the only sense in which these
terms  are  used  in the great books. There is the more general sense of
human  work as any productive activity in which men exercise some art or
skill.  The familiar distinction between skilled and unskilled labor may
be  only  a  distinction  in degree if there is truth in the theory that
some  degree of skill—some rudimentary art at least —is required for the
performance  of  the  simplest  tasks  of  hand  and eye. Kinds of work,
according to this theory, can be differentiated by reference to the type
of  art  mvolved.  The  ancient  distinction between the servile and the
liberal  arts  also  divides  workers  into  those  who  manipulate  and
transform physical materials and those who employ the symbols of poetry,
music,  or  science  to  produce  things  for the mind. This distinction
between  manual  and  mental  work,  based  on the character of the work
itself,  is  not to be identified with the distinction between slave and
free labor. The latter is based on the status of the worker. Even in the
slave  economies  of  the  ancient  world,  some  freemen were artisans,
farmers, or sailors, and some slaves were philosophers. Nor is mental as
opposed  to  manual  work  necessarily directed to the production of the
goods  of  the  mind. The white-collar workers of an industrial economy,
employed  with  the  symbols  of  finance, accounting, or management, do
mental  work which has its ultimate end in the production or exchange of
material  goods.  There  are  still other traditional distinctions among
kinds  of work and types of workers, all of which cannot be put together
into  a  single  scheme of classification without much overlapping. Some
distinctions, like that between

[981b]
Chapter  44: LABOR 923 hand -work and machine-labor or between healthful
and  unhealthful  occupations,  turn  on the characteristics of the work
itself.  Some  depend  on  the social conditions under which the work is
done or on the relationship between the individual worker and other men.
The  work to be done may be accomplished by an individual working alone,
or by the cooperative labor of many; and, in the latter case, the social
organization  of  the  laboring  group  may  involve  the ranking of men
according  to  the  functions  they  Here  we  get the division into the
mastercraftsmen, who plan and superintend, and all grades of helpers who
execute their directions. One meaning of the word "menial" as applied to
work  signifies the inferior tasks in the hierarchy of functions; but it
is  also  used to express society's opinion of those who perform certain
tasks,  such  as  that  of the domestic servant. The distinction between
what  is  menial  and  what  is  dignified  work varies, of course, from
society  to society. The characterization of labor as productive or non-
productive,  and  of  work  as  useful or wasteful, is based on strictly
economic  criteria and on considerations of social welfare. The sense in
which  work  cannot  be  divorced  from the production of some extrinsic
effect is not violated by the conception of non-productive labor as work
which  in  no way increases the wealth of nations. "There is one sort of
labor  which  adds  to  the  subject upon which it is bestowed; there is
another  which  has no such effect. The former," writes Adam Smith, "may
be  called productive; the latter, unproductive labor . . . The labor of
some  of the most respectable orders in society is . . . unproductive of
any  value  . . , The sovereign, for example, with all the officers both
of  justice  and  war  who serve under him, the whole army and navy, are
unproductive  laborers  .  .  ,  Like  the declamation of the actor, the
harangue  of the orator, or the tune of the musician, the work of all of
them  perishes  in  the very instant of its production." The standard by
which  Marx  judges  the  usefulness  of labor also implies the economic
notion  ofa commodity. "Nothing can have value," he says, "without being
an object of utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labor contained
in

[982a]
924  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  it."  But  Marx  also adds a criterion of social
utility.  "Whoever  directly satisfies his own wants with the produce of
his labor, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order to
produce  the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but use-values
for  others,  social  usevalues." It is by this last criterion that Marx
criticizes  the  capitalist economy for its "most outrageous squandering
of  labor  power"  in  superfluous  or  socially useless production. The
principle  of  the division of labor does not depend upon any particular
classification  of work or workers according to type. Nor does it belong
to  one  system  of  economy  rather  than  another.  But  the ancients,
concerned as they were with its bearing on the origin and development of
the   state,  saw  the  division  of  labor  as  primarily  of  poHtical
significance;  whereas  the moderns are more concerned with its economic
causes  and consequences. Thucydides compares the poverty and crude life
of  the  early  Hellenic  tribes  with  the  wealth,  the power, and the
civiUzation  of  Athens,  Sparta,  Corinth, and other city-states at the
opening  of the Peloponnesian War. The difference is not to be accounted
for  in  terms of the invention of new tools, but rather in terms of the
greater  efficiency  in  production  which  is obtained by a division of
labor.  This  is  both  an  effect and a cause of the enlargement of the
community,  and its increasing population. The greater the number of men
associated in a common life, the greater the number of specialized tasks
which  can  be  assigned  to  different  members  of the community. This
observation  is  formulated  by Plato and Aristotle in their accounts of
the origin of the state. The advantages which the state confers upon its
members  are  in  part  won  by  the  division  of  labor  in which they
participate.  The  isolated family, Aristotle remarks, is barely able to
supply  the "everyday wants" of its members. The tribe or village, which
is  an  association  of  famihes,  can  achieve  a little more than bare
subsistence;  but  not  until several tribes unite to form a city does a
truly  self-sufficing  community  come  into  existence, and one with an
adequate  division  of labor. Some men, if not all, can then acquire the
leisure to engage in the arts and sciences and politics—the

[982b]
. pursuits of civilization which have their material basis in sufficient
wealth.  The  effect of the division of labor on the social structure of
the  state  seems  to be generally agreed upon by all observers, ancient
and modern. Men are divided into social classes according to the kind of
work  they  do—not  only  by  reference  to  the  type  of  economically
productive labor, but also in terms of the distinction between labor and
leisure,  or between economic and other functions in society. All do not
agree,  however,  that  such  class  distinctions  are  as beneficial to
society  as  the  increase  of  wealth or opulence which the division of
labor  affords.  They  not  only  threaten  the  unity  and peace of the
society,  but  tend  to  degrade  the condition of labor by reducing the
individual  worker  to  a  cog  in  the  machine.  The division of labor
frequently   restricts   him   to   a  slight  and  insignificant  task,
repetitively  performed,  and  so makes it impossible for him to develop
his  skill  or to enjoy any pride of workmanship. From a purely economic
point  ofview,  Adam Smith advocates the greatest intensification of the
division  of  labor.  Each  more  minute  sub-division of tasks augments
efficiency in production. But from the human point of view, he sees that
this  method  of  maximizing  wealth  by  dividing  men  into functional
groups—one  man, one task—leads to the mental impoverishment of the men,
who  require  a multiplicity of functions for their development. "In the
progress of the division of labor," Smith writes, "the employment of the
far  greater part of those who five by labor . . comes to be confined to
a  few very simple operations, frequently one or two . . . The man whose
whole  life  is spent in performing a few simple operations . . . has no
occasion  to exert his understanding or to exercise his invention ... He
naturally  loses,  therefore,  the habit of such exertion, and generally
becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to
become."  The situation seems even worse to Marx. The industrial system,
revolutionizing  the mode of work, "converts the laborer into a crippled
monstrosity, by forcing his detailed dexterity at the expense of a world
of  productive  capabilities  and  instincts."  It  makes the individual
worker "the automatic motor of a fractional operation."

[983a]
The  great issues concerning labor seem to be moral and political rather
than economic. The consideration of the division of labor from the point
of view of efficiency in production remains purely economic only when it
is  abstracted  from  any concern about the effect upon the laborer. The
analysis  of  factors  affecting  the productivity of labor ceases to be
merely economic when the hours, conditions, and organization of work are
viewed  in  terms  of the working men. The determination of wages by the
buying  and  selhng  of labor (or, as Marx insists, of labor-power) as a
commodity  subject  to  market  conditions  of  supply  and  demand; the
difference  between real and nominal wages as determined by the level of
wages in relation to the price of other commodities; the so-called "iron
law  of  wages"  according  to  which  wages cannot be reduced below the
minimum  of  bare  subsistence  for the laborer and his family these are
matters which the economist may deal with in a descriptive or historical
manner,  calculating  rates  and ratios without regard to . questions of
justice.  But  in  terms  of  such formulations questions of justice are
raised and beI come the great issues concerning the rights of workmen to
the  fruits of their labor, to the security of full employment and other
forms  of  protection,  to  collective  bargaining,  to  a  voice in the
management  of industry or business. Stated in this way, the issues seem
to  be pecuUarly modern. These are the problems of a capitalist economy,
to  which  the  partisans  of  capital  and  of  labor propose different
solutions.  Yet  the  principles  of  j  ustice  to which the parties in
conflict  appeal  seem  to be no less applicable to earlier conflicts in
other  economic  systems between master and slave or between feudal lord
and  serf. All the institutional differences among these three economies
should not, according to Karl Marx, conceal from us the profound analogy
which  obtains  in  the relation between owners and workers, whether the
workers  are  chattel  slaves,  peons  bound  to the land, or industrial
proletarians  selling  their  laborpower.  "Wherever  a  part of society
possesses  a  monopoly  of  the  means  of  production," he writes, "the
laborer,  free  or  not free, must add to the working time necessary for
his own mainte-

[983b]
Chapter  44:  LABOR  925 nance an extra working time in order to produce
the  means  of  subsistence  for  the owners of the means of production,
whether  this  proprietor  be the Athenian gentleman, Etruscan thcocrat,
civis  Romanus,  Norman  baron, American slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard,
modern  landlord  or  capitalist."  Marx  undertakes  to explain how the
surface  difference  between  slave  labor  and  wage labor conceals the
analogy. "In slave labor, even that part of the working-day in which the
slave  is  only  replacing  the  value of his own means of existence, in
which,  therefore,  he works for himself alone, appears as labor for his
master. All the slave's labor appears as unpaid labor. In wage-labor, on
the  contrary,  even  surplus  labor,  or unpaid labor, appears as paid.
There the property-relation conceals the labor of the slave for himself;
here  the  money-relation  conceals  the  unrequited  labor  of the wage
laborer."   Two   phrases   here—   "unpaid   labor"   and   "unrequited
labor"—indicate  that Marx is thinking in terms of justice. Elsewhere he
calls the industrial proletariat "wage-slaves" to emphasize the presence
in  an apparently free economy of the same unjust exploitation which the
word  "slave"  connotes when it refers to the use of men as chattel. The
essential  similarity  in all forms of economic exploitation—which makes
all  forms  of economic slavery essentially similar — is seen by Marx in
terms  of  the production of a surplus value by the laborer; that is, he
produces a greater value in commodities than he needs to support his own
subsistence.  This  surplus value, when appropriated by the owner of the
materials  and  the  tools  on  and  with which the propertyless laborer
works,  becomes  an  unearned  increment,  or, in other words, an unjust
profit  from the work of another man. The controversy over the theory of
surplus  value  in  Marx's Capital can be separated from the controversy
over  the  revolutionary program of the Communist Manifesto. But neither
can  be  separated  from  issues  of justice. It is questionable whether
those  economists  join  issue  with  Marx who criticize his analysis in
terins  of the facts or conclusions of economics as a purely descriptive
science,  and  who  put  aside  all  considerations  of the fair and the
equitable. Yet those facts or conclusions, especially with regard to the
operation of the capitalist economy.

[984a]
926  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  become  relevant  in  the  dispute as to whether
capitaHst  profits  are intrinsically unjust, because they are incapable
of  accruing  except  from  the exploitation of labor. Those who dispute
this  matter  seldom  deny that chattel slavery is unjust. On that there
may be conflicting opinions, as indicated in the chapter on Slavery, but
they  are not germane to the present issue. Nor do the opponents seem to
argue  their  case  in  terms  of a different theory of what is just and
unjust.  They  themselves  appeal to the common principle of fairness in
exchange  and distribution to defend the rights of the owners of capital
to  a profit in return for their own prior labor in accumulating capital
stock,  as  well  as  for  the  risks  they  take when they invest their
reserves  in  productive  enterprises.  The problem, therefore, seems to
narrow  down  to  such  questions as whether laborers are exploited when
they  receive  in  wages  less  than  the full value their work creates;
whether  capitalist  profits  are entirely reaped from the surplus value
which  is  the  differential  between  what labor creates and what labor
receives;  or whether, if profit is not identical with surplus value, it
always  contains  a  marginal element of unearned increment derived from
the exploitation of labor. The notion of value— the value of commodities
and  the  value  of labor itself— is obviously of central importance. As
indicated  in  the  chapter  on Justice, the formulae of equality, which
determine  fair  exchanges  or  distributions,  require  some measure of
equivalents in value. What determines the intrinsic value of a commodity
according  to  which  it can be compared with another commodity, without
reference to the price of each in the market place ? Adam Smith's answer
to  this  question is labor. It is the answer given before him by Locke,
and  after  him  by  Marx.  "Equal quantities of labor, at all times and
places,"  Smith  declares,  "may  be  said  to  be of equal value to the
laborer.  In  his ordinary state of health, strength and spirits; in the
ordinary  degree of his skill and dexterity, he must always lay down the
same  portion  of  his  ease,  his liberty, and his happiness. The price
which  he  pays must always be the same, whatever may be the quantity of
goods which he receives in

[984b]
return for it. Of these, indeed, it may sometimes purchase a greater and
sometimes  a  smaller  quantity; but it is their value which varies, not
that  of the labor which purchases them." From this Adam Smith concludes
that  "labor  alone, therefore, never varying in its own value, is alone
the ultimate and real standard by which the value of all commodities can
at  all  times  and  places  be estimated and compared. It is their real
price;  money  is  their nominal price only." This labor theory of value
raises  the  further  question  of  the  value  of  labor  itself.  What
determines  its  natural  or  real  price,  as  opposed to its market or
nominal  price? On this Marx and Smith appear to part company, which may
account  for  their further divergence when Marx declares that "the real
value  of  labor is the cost of its production, not the average price it
can  command  in  the market"; and then goes on to explain how a surplus
value  is  derived by the capitalist who pays for labor-power on a basis
of the cost of producing and sustaining the laborer, but uses his labor-
power  to  produce  a  real  value in commodities which exceeds the real
price  of  labor itself. Smith, on the other hand, holds that "the whole
produce of labor belongs to the laborer" only "in that original state of
things,   which   precedes  both  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the
accumulation  of  stock."  When  "land  becomes  private  property," the
landlord  "makes  the  first  deduction"  in  the  form  oirent\ and the
capitalist,   or   the  person  who  invests  some  part  of  his  stock
accumulation,  "makes  a  second  deduction" in the form oiprofit. After
rent and profit are taken, the laborer's wage represents what is left of
"the  whole produce of labor." Yet Smith also says of the landlords that
"as  soon  as  the land of any country has all become private property,"
they,  "like  all  other  men, love to reap where they never sowed." The
implication  of unearned increment in this remark suggests that Smith is
neither  disinclined  to  mix moral judgmicnt with economic description,
nor  at  variance  with  Marx on the principle of economic justice. That
Smith  regards  profit as the price properly paid for the use of capital
and  that he does not see reaping without sowing as an essential element
in  profit-making  may perhaps be read as a challenge to Marx's develop-
-L

[985a]
mcnt  of  the  labor  theory of vakie into a theory of surplus value and
unearned  increment. It is possible, of course, that the difference in I
he  conclusions of Smith and Marx from a common premise can be explained
by  the different directions their analyses take. It may not represent a
direct opposition on a point of fact. The proposition that value derives
from  labor  seems to yield a number of theoretical consequences. Locke,
for  example,  holding  that  it  is labor which "puts the difference of
value  on  everything,"  makes  this  the basis for the right to private
property, certainly in its original appropriation from the common domain
which  is  God's  gift  to  mankind.  "Though the earth and all inferior
creatures  be common to all men, yet every man has a property in his own
person.  The  labor of his body and the work of his hands we may say are
properly  his. Whatsoever, then, he removes out of the state that nature
hath  provided  and left it in, he hath mixed his labor with, and joined
to  it  something  that  is his own, and thereby makes it his property."
This  view  seems  to  be  shared  by  Rousseau.  "It  is  impossible to
conceive,"  he  says,  "how  property  can come from anything but manual
labor;  for  what  else  can  a  man  add  to  things  which he does not
originally  create,  so  as  to make them his own property?" In the same
vein,  Smith  declares that "the property which e\ery man has in his own
labor,  as it is the original foundation of all other property, so it is
the  most  sacred  and inviolable." What further conclusions follow from
this  justification  of private property as a right founded upon labor ?
How  is  the  original  right  to  property  extended  into  a  right of
inheritance ? How does this conception of the origin of property bear on
the   Marxist   conception   of  the  origin  of  the  proletariat—  the
propertyless  workers  who  have  nothing  but their laborpower to sell?
Denying  the  charge  that  communists  desire  to abolish "the right of
personally  acquiring  property as the fruit of a man's own labor," Marx
and  Engels  make  the  countercharge that the development of industrial
capitaUsm  "has  to  a  great  extent  already destroyed it and is still
destroying  it  daily."  They  propose  pubUc  ownership of the means of
production to protect the property rights of labor;

[985b]
Chapter  44:  LABOR 927 they seek to abolish only "the bourgeois form of
private  property" which, in their view, is a use of property to exploit
labor.  The rights of labor seem to be central in any formulation of the
problem  of  a  just  distribution  of wealth. But when other rights are
taken  into  consideration, the problem of economic justice becomes more
complex;  and  different  solutions result from differences in emphasis.
Even  with  regard  to  one group of solutions, J. S. Mill observes that
"some communists consider it unjust that the produce of the labor of the
community  should  be  shared  on any other principle than that of exact
equality;  others  think  it  just  that those should receive most whose
wants are greatest." To weigh the merits of competing solutions, as well
as  to  reach  an  adequate  statement of the problem, the discussion of
labor must be connected with the discussion of related considerations in
the  chapters  on  Justice,  Revolution, and Wealth. There are issues of
justice  concerning  labor  other  than the strictly economic problem of
distribution. In the ancient world, for example, not only chattel slaves
but  also  free  artisans  were  frequently  regarded  as  incapable  of
participation  in  political  life.  Only  men of independent wealth had
enough  leisure  for  the  activities of citizenship which, in the Greek
citystates,  was  almost  a  full-time  occupation.  This,  according to
Aristotle,  is  one  reason  for  the  disfranchisement  of the laboring
classes who must devote a great part of their energy to earning a living
and  who have neither the time nor training for liberal pursuits. "Since
leisure  is  necessary  both  for  the  development  of  virtue  and the
performance  of  political duties," citizens, he maintains, cannot "lead
the  life  of  mechanics  or  Against this oligarchical view (which also
involves  the  notion that wealth deserves special pohtical privileges),
the  Greek  democrats  take  the  position  that  all free men should be
citizens on an equal footing, regardless of the amount of their property
or their conditions of labor and leisure. But the oligarchical principle
still  tends  to prevail among repubhcans in the i8th century. Kant, for
example,  holds  that citizenship "presupposes the independence or self-
sufficiency of the individual citizen among the peo-

[986a]
928  THE  GREAT IDEAS pie." On this basis he exchides from the suffrage,
as  only "passive" citizens, "the apprentice of a merchant or tradesman,
a  servant  who is not in the employ of the state, a minor {naittraliter
vel  civiliter), all women, and, generally, everyone who is compelled to
maintain  himself  not  according  to  his  own  industry,  but as it is
arranged  by  others  (the  state  excepted)."  They  are "without civil
personality,  and  their  existence  is  only,  as it were, incidentally
included  in  the  state."  The  preference  shown by the writers of The
Federalist  for  a  republican  as  opposed  to  a  democratic  form  of
government—  or representative government as opposed to direct democracy
rests partly on their fear of the political incompetence, as well as the
factional  interests, of wage earners and day-laborers. While expressing
"disapprobation"  of  poll  taxes,  they  still  defend the right of the
government  to  exact  them, in the belief that "there may exist certain
critical  and tempestuous conjunctures of the State, in which a poll-tax
may  become  an  inestimable  resource." Yet such a tax would seem to be
primarily  a device for disfranchising working1. Labor in human life id.
The  social  necessity of labor and the moral obligation to work tion of
arts  for the conquest of nature serfdom, and industrial wage slavery 2.
The  nature  of  work  3.  The  kinds  of  work  and the relationship of
different types of workers and free, menial and honorable work

[986b]
men  of  no property and small income, and in the opinion of a later day
it  is  so  regarded. The democratic revolution does not begin until the
middle of the 19th century. But even then. Mill, who advocates universal
suffrage,  argues  for  the  disqualification of paupers or those on the
dole,  without  raising the question whether the right to work— to avoid
poverty and involuntary indigence— is not a democratic right inseparable
from  the  right  to  citizenship. It is "required by first principles,"
Mill  writes,  "that the receipt of parish relief should be a peremptory
disqualification  for  the franchise. He who cannot by his labor suffice
for  his own support has no claim to the privilege of helping himself to
the  money  of others. By becoming dependent on the remaining members of
the  community  for  actual subsistence, he abdicates his claim to equal
rights  with  them  in  other  respects."  The  historic  connection  of
democracy  with  a  movement  toward  political justice for the laboring
classes seems to suggest that political democracy must be accompanied by
economic  democracy  in order to attain its full realization. OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  PAGE  lb. Labor, leisure, and happiness: the servile, political,
and  contemplative  life \c. The pain of labor and the expiation of sin:
the  discipHnary  and  penal use of labor 931 le. ITie honor of work and
the  virtue  of  productivity:  progress  through  the  inven932 if. The
degradation  of  labor:  the afienation of the laborer's work in chattel
slavery,  2a.  The ends of work: the good of the product and the good of
the  workman  93: la. The differentiation of work according to the human
talent or ability required: 3^. The differentiation of work according to
the social status of the worker: servile

[987a]
^c. The classification of occupations by'reference to lx)dily and mental
concomitants  of  3^.  Types  of  work distinguished by reference to the
manner  in which the work is done: solitary and group work; the relation
of  mastcr-craflsmcn and helpers 934 3d'. Types of work distinguished by
reference to their effect on the increase of wealth: productive and non-
productive  labor  3/".  The  differentiation  of  work  in terms of its
relation  to  the  common  welfare;  socially  useful  and  wasteful  or
siiperfluous  work  4. The division of labor 4^. The economic causes and
effects  of  the  division  of  labor:  its  relation  to  the exchange,
production,  and  distribution  of  goods  and  services; its bearing on
opulence  4^.  The  social  consequences  of  the division of labor: the
development  of classes 4<r. The moral aspects of the division of labor:
the  acquisition  of  the  virtue  of  art;  the  5. The organization of
production: the position of labor in different economies 5^. Domestic or
chattel  slavery in a slave economy 5^. Serfdom or agrarian peonage in a
feudal  economy  5^:.  The  wage  earner  or industrial proletariat in a
capitalist  economy  936  5^. The condition of the worker in a socialist
economy  6.  The  wages  of labor: kinds of wage payments 6a. Labor as a
commodity:  the labor market 61?. The iron law of wages: the subsistence
level  and the minimum wage 6c. The distinction between real and nominal
wages:  variable  factors affecting wage levels 6d. The natural wages of
labor and the labor theory of value 7. Economic and political justice to
the  laborer  ya.  Fair  wages,  hours,  and  working  conditions: labor
legislation  yb.  The  right  to property: the ownership of the means of
production   937   yc.   The  consequences  of  economic  inequality  or
oppression: the class war (i) The economic determination of antagonistic
social  classes:  slaves  vs.  freemen;  laboring  vs.  leisure classes;
propertyless  vs. propertied classes (2) The organization of workmen and
the  formation  of  trade  unions  to  protect  (3) The proletariat as a
revolutionary  class:  its  revolutionary  aims  yd. The underprivileged
condition  of  workers:  the  exclusion  of slaves from citizenship; the
disfranchisement  of the laboring classes ye. The problem of poverty and
pauperism:  unemployment  and  the  right  to  work  yf. The relation of
economic   to   political  freedom:  economic  democracy  8.  Historical
observations on the condition of labor 939

[987b]
Chapter 44: LABOR 929 PAGE labor's rights and interests 938

[988a]
930 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1, Labor in human
life  la. The curse of labor: myths of a golden age and the decay of the
world  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 3:17-19,23 / Psalms, 90:10— (D) Psalms,
89:10  /  Ecclesiastes,  1:32:11;  2:17-24; 3:9-13; 4:4-8; 5:15-16; 6:7—
(Z))  Ecclesiastes,  1:3-2:11;  2:17-24;  3:9-13;  4:4-8; 5:14-16; 6:7 /
Jeremiah,  20:18—  (D)  Jeremias, 20:18 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 7:15;
31*3-4;  40-1— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:16; 31:3-4; 40:1 New Testament:
II  Thessalonians,  y.y-i^  7 Plato: Statesman, 588a-589c / Laws, bk hi,
664a-665c; bk iv, 681b-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 4
[1253^33-40]
447b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[11051174] 29a-30a,c; bk v [195-217] 63c-d
13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv [16-47] 14b-15a / Georgics, I
[i 18-159]
40a-41b / Aeneid, bk vhi
[306-336] 267a-268a
18 Augustine : City ofGod, bk xiv, ch 10 385b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxii
[130-154] 87d-88a; xxviii [91-96] 97a
27  Shakespeare: Tempest, act 11, sc i [143-168] 532d-533a 29 Cervantes:
Don Quixote, part i, 27b-28a

[988b]
1  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d of page 12. Page Sections : When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columms, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x
[1046-1104]
297a-298b; bk xi
[84-98]
301a;
[162-180]
302b-303a;  [251-262]  304b-305a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 348b,d-353b;
362b-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 125 137a 48 Melville:
Moby Dic\, 316a-b; 355b-356a 50 Marx: Capital, 199c-200a esp 199d [fn 4]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  275a  lb.  Labor, leisure, and
happiness: the servile, political, and contemplative life Old Testament:
Proverbs, 6:6-11; 13:4; 15:19; 18:9; 19:15,24; 20:4; 21:25-26; 24:30-34;
26:13-16;  28:19  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 11:11-14; 38:24-34— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  11:11-14;  38:25-39  New  Testament:  LuJ{e, 10:38-42 5
Aristophanes:  Plutus  [415-618]  633d-636d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
86b; bk v, 161a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-d / Republic, bk vii, 390b-391b
/ Critias, 479d / Statesman, 581 b-c / Laws, bk vii, 710c; 722d-723c; bk
viii, 740d-741a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[981^1324] 500a; ch 2 [982^11-28] 500d-501a
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  6-7 430d-432c / Politics, BK I, ch 4
[1253^33-40] 447b-c; ch 5

[989a]
Icto \d CuAPTi-R 44: LABOR 931
[i2S4^i5-i255*2l
448b-c; ch 7 449c; BK II, CM 6 [i265''28-37] 460c-d; cii 9
[i2()<)''^ V^'i^l 465c-d; bk
hi, cm 4 (i277*:^o- ^6] 474b-c; bk vii, ch i-:^ 527a-530a esp ch 3
[i325*'i6-33] 529b.
[i ^25*'i4-3o] 529d; ch
5 (1326^27-32] 530d 531a; ch 9 533a-d esp
[1328^33-1329*11 533b;
ch 14
[i333*i6]-ch
15
[1334^8] 538a-539c; bk
viii, ch 3 542d543d; CH 4
[i^:59'''6-io] 544c; ch 7
[1^41^:52i342»28]
547c-548a esp
[1342*19-28]
547d548a  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 10 116b-d; CH 29, 137c-d; BK
IV,  ch  4 225a-228a AuRELius: Meditations, bkiii, sect 12 262b-c; BK V,
SECT  I  268b,d;  bk vi, sect 12 274c; SECT 33 277b Plutarch: Lycurgiis,
44d-45b  /  Alexander,  560b-d  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, Q
187,  A  3  666a-669b  Chaucer:  Prologue [285-308] 164a-b / Second Nuns
Prologue   461a-463a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  57-59  528b-529a  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  267c-268b  Montaigne: Essays, 14c-15a; 107a-112d;
486b-489b; 490c-d; 538d-540b Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv, sc ii
[1-22] 57d-58a / Henry V, act iv, sc
i [247301] 554a-c Shakespeare: Tempest, act 11, sc i [143-168] 532d-533a
Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 368c-d Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
6c-d;  18a-b;  69d-76a  / Novum Organum, bk i, APH 129 134d-135d Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk iv
[610-633]
165b-166a Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xx, sect 2 389a-b Smith:
Wealth  ofNations, bk v, 332a-c Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 89d; 597a-598a
esp  598a  Kast: Judgement, 524a-b; 586a-587a Boswei^l: Johnson, 171a-b;
201b-c;  216c  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part ii, 267d268b Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[5199-5262]
128b130a  Melville: Moby Dic{, 214a-b; 355b-366b Darwin: Descent of Man,
324b  Marx:  Capital,  112b;  262a  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii, 275a
Freud:  Civilization and Its Discontents, 772d; 774b [fn i] Ic. The pain
of  labor  and  the  expiation of sin: the disciplinary and penal use of
labor  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:17-19,23  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
33:24-28;  40:1  —  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 33:25-30; 40:1 5 Euripides:
Heracles Mad
[1-25]
365a-b;
[348-429] 368a-c; [1255-1280] 376a-b

[989b]
6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 78b 13 Virgil: Georgia, i
[i 18-159] 40a 41b
14  Plittarch:  Pompey,  512c-d  /  Alexander^ 560b-d 18 Augustine: City
ofGod,  bk xix, ch 15 521a c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92,
a  I,  rep 2 488d-489d; o 96, a 4 512d-513c; part i-ii, q 32, A I, rep 3
759b-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  187, A 3, ANS
666a-669b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[16-60]
9d-10a; purgatory, x [ioo]-xi
[72] 68b-69c;
xxviii [91-96] 97a 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Prologue [15,469-489] 461a /
Parson's  Tale,  par 57-59 528b-529a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 147a
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x
[1046-1104]
297a-298b; bk xi
[84-98]
301a;
[162-180]
302b-303a; [251-262] 304b-305a; bk xi [334]- BK xii
[649] 306b-333a
/ Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[1-46]
339b-340b,
[356-380]
347b-348a,
[667-709] 354a-355a,
[11 56-1177]
364b-365a,  [1391-1409]  370a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 597a 42 Kant:
Judgement, 524a-b 44 Bosyx ell: Johfison, 385a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
316a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 354b-c; 364a-366a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  47b-c; bk vi, 266c-d; bk vii, 275a; bk xiv, 606a-607a Id. The social
necessity  of  labor  and  the  moral  obligation to work Old Testament:
Exodus, 20:9-11 / Deuteronomy, 5:13-14 / Proverbs, 21:25 / Ecclesiastes,
9:9-10  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 7:15; 22:1-2— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
j:i6;  22:1-2 New Testament: Ephesians, 4:28 / / Thessalonians, 4:11-12—
(D)  /  Thessalonians,  4:11  / // Thessalonians, y.y-i^ 5 Aristophanes:
P/«/W3  [415-618] 633d-636d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-317b; bk vii,
390b-391b  / Laws, bk vii, 710c; 722d-723c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv,
ch 4
[1290^37I29r''i9] 490a-b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 10 116b-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  v,  sect  i 268b, d; BK VI, sect 33 277b; bk viii, sect 12 286b-c 13
Virgil: Georgics, i [11 8-1 59] 40a-41b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 44d-45b /
Solon,  72d  /  Aristides-Marcus  Cato,  291c-d  /  Alexander, 560b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, Q 187, A 3 666a-669b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b  23  Hobbes: leviathan, part ii, 157a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
iv  [610-633]  165b166a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 415b-c; bk
iv, 428d

[990a]
932  Labor  in  human life. Id. The social necessity (1 of labor and the
moral  obligation to work.) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 597a-b 43 Mill:
Representative  Government, 339d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  189  65d-66a;  par  194 66c-d; par 196 67a / Philosophy of History,
part iv, 333c; 353b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 316a-b 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man,  324b  50  Marx: Capital, 17a; 88c-d; 253a-255a passim 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 426d427a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
197b'C; bk VII. 275a; bk xiii, 572d-573b 54 Freud: General Introduction,
573c  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 772d; 781d-782c le. The honor
of  work  and the virtue of productivity: progress through the invention
of  arts  for  the  conquest  of nature Old Testament: Proverbs, 6:6-11;
14:23;   31:10Apocrypha:   Ecclestasticus,   10:27;  38:25-34—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 10:30; 38:26-39 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xviii
[541-589] 135d-136c
5  Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [442-506] 44c45a 7 Plato: Charmides, 6c /
Laws, bk hi, 664a665c; BK vii, 722d-723c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v,
sect i 268b,d; BK VI, SECT 33 277b 13 Virgil: Georgics, i
[i 18-159] 40a-41b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  44d-45b  /  Solon,  64d-65b;  72d / Marcellus,
252a-255a  esp  253d  18  Augustine  :  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30
651c-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  6c-d  / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp pref 105a-106d, BK I, aph
II  107d,  APH  81 120b-c, aph 124 133c-d, aph 129 134d-135d, bk ii, aph
49-51  188b-194c / New Atlantis, 210d-214d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi,  61b-d  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [610-633] 165b166a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii, 78a-b; part hi, 106a-ll5b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xviii, 126c-d 38 Rousseau: hiequality, 339b-c; 352a-d; 363b /
Social  Contract,  bk iv, 428d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, intro, la-d;
bk  i,  6a-d; 8b-10b passim 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c-23c passim;
633d-634a,c;   655d-656a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,
243d244c; 245a; part ii, 267a-b; 268a-b; part IV, 333c; 353b-c

[990b]
THE GREAT IDEAS \e to la
["059-586J
281b47  Goethe:  Faust, part 282a 50 Marx: Capital, 87a-b; 292d 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 420d421a; 421d 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  772d;  777a-779a passim 1/. The degradation of labor:
the  alienation  of  the laborer's work in chattel slavery, serfdom, and
industrial  wage  slavery  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  1:8-14 14 Plutarch:
Marcus  Cato,  278d-279a  / Crassus, 439a-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
53a-56a;  part  iv, 154b-155b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 355a-b; 365d-366a
39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 20b-21c; 27b-28d; 43a-b; 52b-53b; bk
hi,  165b-171c; bk IV, 239c-240a; 253c-254a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
144b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 421c-422d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part i, par 67 29c 50 Marx: Capital, 82d-83a; 88d-89b; 104b105c; 150a-c;
161b-163c; 174b-c; 176a-178d; 194b-195c; 199b-200a; 206c-208a; 226a-236c
passim;  238c-240b;  251c-253b; 261d-262a; 263b-d; 266b-267c; 280c-286a;
288b-290c;   319c-321b;   354a-355d;  369c-371c;  383d  50  Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto,  420c421a;  422c-423a;  424c-425a  52  Dostoevsky:
Brothers  KaramazoVy bk vi, 165b-167b 2. The nature of work 2a. The ends
of  work:  the  good of the product and the good of the workman 7 Plato:
Charmides,  6c  / Republic, bk i, 303a306h/ Laws, bk viii, 733b-d; bkxi,
774a-775a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 8 [1328*22-35] 532c 13
Virgil:  Georgics,  i  [i 18-159] 40a-41b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36c-d /
Pericles,  121a122b / Marcellus, 252a-255a / Pompey, 512c-d / Alexander,
560b-d  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30, 651c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  187, A 3 666a-669b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, viii [115148] 118b-c 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Prologue
[15,469-489]  461a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 6c-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part iv, 154b-155b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 54d-55a;
bk V, 332a-c 42 K.xyiT. Judgement, 524a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 196 67a / Philosophy of History, part ii, 259a-b

[991a]
lb  to  ?>c  Chapter 44: LABOR 933 50 Marx: Capital 16a; 18d: 113c 114a;
251c-d; 253a; 254c-255a; 292d; 307c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
426b  2b.  The process of work: the relations of art, hand, machine, and
matter 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 319a-c / Statesman, 591d-593d; 596a- b;
596d  /  Philehus, 633a c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 8 [432'*il 664c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i 348b,d-349b / Politics, BK I, CH 4 447b-c
18  Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch ^o 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  91,  A  3,  REP  2 486b-487d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 85, A 6, ANS 182d-184a; part ii-ii, q 187, a 3,
ANS  and REP I 666a-669b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 73b 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  407c  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch v, sect 42-43
34a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
4d-5a;  54d55a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 68 29d-30a;
part  hi,  par 196 67a; additions, 126 137a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
278c-d  50  Marx:  Capital, 16d-17a; 31a-b; 85a-88d; 180d-188c esp 184b,
188b-c;  197a-198a;  251a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 576b577a
54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 778b-c 3. The kinds of work
and   the   relationship   of   different   types  of  workers  ^a.  The
differentiation  of  work  according  to  the  human  talent  or ability
required:  skilled  and  unskilled  labor;  manual and mental work ,j. 7
Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-320c / Timaeus, 442b / Statesman, 581c-582a
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i [981*31-^7] 499d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 7
[1255^20-37]
449b-c; ch ii
[1258*^35-39] 453b; bk
vhi, CH 4 [1339^6-10] 544c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13501360] 78c-d
14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a esp 253d 19AquIxNas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 91, A 3, REP 2-3 486b-487d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii,  q  187,  A  3  666a-669b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
[115148]  llSb-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60a-c; 110c-112a; 156d158a,c;
460a-461a 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 6c-d

[991b]
36  vSwijt:  Gulliver,  part  r,  29b-31a: pakt iv, 158b; 164b 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk i. 42d 43c; 54c-55a; 56b 57b 40 CiniBON! Decline
and  Fall,  597a  598a  42  Kam  : Judgement, 524a-b; 586a-587a 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  306d-367a;  385b-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part i, par 68 29d-30a; part hi, par 200 67c-68a; par 204 68c-d;
additions,  44 123c; 126 137a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 324b 50 Marx:
Capital, 17b-18a; 95c-96a esp 95d-96b
[fn2]; 165d-166b; 170c-171b; 176d-178a; 186bd; 212a-c; 251b-d
3^.  The  differentiation  of work according to the social status of the
worker:  servile  and  free,  menial  and  honorable  work  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  ii,  84d-85b  7  Plato:  Laivs, bk vii, 722d-723c; bk vni,
740d-741a; bk xi, 774a-775a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, cei i
[981^31-
^7] 499d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 7
[1255^20-27]
449b-c; ch ii
[1258^35-39]
453b; ch 13
[1260^33-^2] 455a; bk
hi, ch 4
[1277*30-^6]
474b-c;  bk  iv, ch 4 [1290^37-1291*19] 490a-b; BK VI, ch 4 [1319^20-27]
522d;  bk  vii,  ch  8-9  532c-533d;  bk viii, ch 2 [1337^3-23] 542c-d /
Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 9 [1367*28-32] 610a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 44d-45b /
Solon,  64d-65b  / Pericles, 121a-122b / Demetrius, 733b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 110c-112a: 459c-462a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv, sc ii
57d-59d  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 23 30a-b; ch vii, sect
85  43c-d  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, I34a-b; 256b-c 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  iv,  428c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 42b-d;
44c45c;  56b-58b; bk hi, 164c-d; 169c-171c 42 Kant: Judgement, 524a-b 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 44 123c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  420d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-167b 3c.
The  classification  of  occupations  by  reference to bodily and mental
concomitants  of  the  work: healthy and unhealthy occupations; pleasant
and unpleasant tasks 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch ii
[1258^^5-39]
453b; bk viii, ch 2 542b-d; ch 4
[1339*6-10]
544c  14  Plutarch:  Pompey,  512c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 110c-112a;
459c-462a passim 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365b-c

[992a]
934  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3.  The  kinds  of work and the relationship of
different  types  of  workers. 5 c. The classification of occupations by
reference  to  bodily  and  mental concomitants of the work: healthy and
unhealthy occupations; pleasant and unpleasant tasks.) 39 Smith-: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk i, 42b-d; 54d55a; bk hi, 164a; bk v, 340c-343d 42 Kant:
Judgement,  524a-b  50  Marx:  Capital, 85c-d; 117c-130c passim; 166b'C;
176d-178a; 194b-195c; 200a-204c passim, esp 204a-c; 206b-209a; 227d-231b
53  James : Psychology, 79b 5d. Types of work distinguished by reference
to  the  manner  in which the work is done: solitary and group work; the
relation of master-craftsmen and helpers 7 Plato: Statesman, 581c-582a 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[981^31-
^7] 499d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 4
[i2y'j^T,o-^6]
474b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 3d-5b; 35c36a; 50a-c; 51b-53b;
109a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  385b-d  50  Marx: Capital,
157a-164a  esp  158d-159d,  160d-162a;  165d-166b; 170c-171b; 186b-188c;
251b-c  3^.  Types of work distinguished by reference to their effect on
the increase of wealth: productive and non-productive labor 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  365b-366b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 142d151c esp
142d-143c;  bk  iv,  288c-292a; 294b296a 50 Marx: Capital, 16b-17a; 17c;
86d-87d  esp  87b  [fn  2]; 96a-97a; 219a-d; 251a-252a; 290d292a 3/. The
differentiation  of work in terms of its relation to the common welfare:
socially  useful  and wasteful or superfluous work 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ii, 318b-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1290^371291^33] 490a-c; bk vii, ch 8-9 532c-533d
12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk vii, sect 5 280a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36c-d  /  Marcellus,  255d-256b  /  Demetrius,  733b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  Q  187, A 3, REP 3 666a-669b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365b-366b  /  Social Contract, bk iv,
428c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 142d-151c esp 142d-143c 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324b 50 Marx: Capital, 16a-18d esp 16a, 18d;
31a32c esp32a-c; 34d-35c; 48b-d; 174a-b; 261d262a

[992b]
3d  to  ^b.  4.  The  division  of labor 7 Plato: Charmides, 5d; 12a-b /
Republic^ BK II, 316a-319c; bk iv, 349a-350a / Timaeus^ 442b-c; 445c-d /
Critias,  480a-481b / Laws, BK VIII, 740d-741a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
iv, ch 4
[1290^201291^29] 489d-491a; bk vii, ch 8-9 532c-533d
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk vii, ch 4 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part Q 187, A 3, REP I 666a-669b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
246d  ii-ii,  .115-  ,  148] 118b-c 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 210d-214d 35
Locke:  Civil Government, ch v, sect 42-4 34a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
352a-353c  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 3a-10b; BK II, 117a-d 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253c-d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  420a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 198-208
67b-69c; par 243 77b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 278d 50 Marx: Capital,
164a-180d  esp  164a-165c,  171d-176a, 178d-179c 4a. The economic causes
and  effects  of  the  division  of labor: its relation to the exchange,
production,  and  distribution  of  goods  and  services; its bearing on
opulence 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  v,  sect  42-43  34a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 154b-155b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xxiii, 191a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
352a-353c;  365b-366b  39  Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk i, 3a-10c; bk ii,
117a-d;  bkiii, 163a-c; bkiv, 191a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c-23b;
655d656a  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 198199 67b-c / Philosophy of History,
part i, 250a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 16c-d; 17b-c; 31a-37c esp 32ac 34c-35a;
48b-50b; 80b-81a; 164a-165b; 167a-170b; 171c-175c; 176a-d; 178a-180d esp
178c-179c;   218c-219b;  251a-255a  passim;  377c-378a  4b.  The  social
consequences  of  the  division  of  labor: the development of classes 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii, 84d-85b; bk vi, 196c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ii-iv, 316c-356a / Laws, BK viii, 740d-741a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i,
ch  4  447b-c;  bk  II, CH 5 [1264*1-^25] 459a-460a; ch 8 [i268'*i6- ^4]
464a-b; bk hi, ch 5
[1277^33-1278*25]

[993a]
4r  to  5b Chapter 44 475a-c; bk iv, ch 4 [1290^21-1291^29] 489d491a; bk
vi,  ch  i [1317*17-291 520b-c; hk vii, ch8-io532c-534c1 26 Shakespeare:
2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii  57d-59d  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
154b-155b;  158a-b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  xv,  111c  38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 353a-355b; 365b-366a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i,  7d-8b;  55d56a;  109d-110d;  bk hi, 169c-170b; bk v, 301a-309a,c
passim,  esp303d-304a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 89d; 498c-d; 501b-c;
655d-656a  42  KAi>iT:  Judgement,  586a-587a  43 Federalist: number 35,
113b-114a;  number  36,  114c-115a  43  Mill: Representative Government,
369b-370a 44 BoswELL:/o^«io/;, 127b-c; 140b-141a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  198208 67b-69c; par 243 77b-c; additions, 128129
137b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  222a-d;  250a-c; part ii,
275b-276a;  part  iv,  335a-336c  50  Marx:  Capital,  16c-d; 165c-166a;
170c-176a   esp   170c-172c,   174c-175c;   179a-c;  186b-d;  205c-206c;
218c-219d;  239d-240c;  261d-262a;  317c-319a  50 MarX'Engels: Communist
Manifesto, 422b424c esp 422c-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
165b-167b  54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures, 882c-d 4c. The moral
aspects  of the division of labor: the acquisition of the virtue of art;
the attenuation of art by insignificant tasks 13 Virgil: Georgics, i [11
8-1  59]  40a-41b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, Q 187, A 3,
REP  I  666a-669b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a; 353b-d 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8a;  54c55a;  109d-110d;  bk  iv, 291a-c; bk v,
340d342a  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals 253c-d / Judgement,
524a-b  50 Marx: Capital, 164b-c; 165a-166c; 170c-171a; 173b; 176a-178d;
205c-208a;  226d-231b;  249a-250c;319d-320a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  422c-d  5.  The  organization of production: the position of
labor  in  diflferent  economies  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 365b-366a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  intro, ld-2a,c; BK I, 50a-c; 109a 50 Marx:
Capital, 33b-36c esp 36c-d
[fn 2];
79c-81a  esp  79d-80b  [£n  4],  80b-c; 104b-105a; 113c-115c esp 113c-d;
149a-150c;  157a-164a  esp  158d-160d, 162d-164a; 171d-176a; 266c; 267c;
283c-d;   354c-355d;  377c-378d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
^20a'd; 425b-429c esp 426b-c, 429b-c

[993b]
c  :  LABOR  935  5a. Domestic or chattel slavery in a slave economy Old
Testament:  Exodus,  i  :8-i4;  ^^  :i-i2, 16,2021,26-27,32 / Leviticus,
25:44-55   /   Deuteronomy,   15:12-18;  23:15-16;  24:14-15  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   33:24-31   —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  33:25-33  New
Testament:  Colossians,  3:22-4:1  /  TituSy  2:9-11 / Philemon 4 Homer:
Odyssey, bk xiv [55-71] 260d; bk xv
[351-379] 269c-d
5  Aristophanes: Plutus [507-526] 635a-b 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 709a-710a
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252*26-''i3]  445c-d;  ch 3-7
446d-449c  passim;  ch 13 454a-455a,c passim; bk ii, ch 9 [i269*33-*'i2]
465c-d; bk vii, ch 10
[1330*25-34] 534d
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1361*12-14] 601c 14 Plutarch: Marcus Cato,
278d-279a;  287b-d  / Crassus, 439a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  105, a 4, ans and rep 1-4 318b-321a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  llOb-llla;  part  IV,  261d-262a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xiii, 96d97b; BK XV, 109a-d; llld-112c; bk xvi, 116a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  hi, 167a-d; bk IV, 239c-240a; 253c-254a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 16c-17d; 144b; 498b-500b passim, esp 500a-b; 620a-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 81d-82b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 9
[260-266] 13d; article iv, sect 2 [529-535] 16b; amendments, xiii 18c 43
Federalist: number 42, 137b-c; number 54, 170b-d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  339d-340c  44  Bos^  "EiA.:  Johnson,  363b-364c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 66 29a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 95a-b [fn
i];  113c-114a;  128d129a;  266c; 267c; 283c-d; 354c-355d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-167b 5b. Serfdom or agrarian peonage in
a  feudal  economy  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xiii, 96d97b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk hi, 165b-170c esp 167a-170c; 175d-179a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 144b-c; 628c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
404c-d;  452d453a,  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  351d-352b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  66  29a-c / Philosophy of
History, part iv, 335a336c; 352a 50 Marx: Capital, 34b; 79d-80b
[£114];
114a115c;  266c;  354c-355d;  355d-364a passim 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto, 420a-d

[994a]
(5.  The  organization  ofproduction:  the position of labor indifferent
economies.  5b.  Serfdom  or  agrarian  peonage  in a feudal economy^ 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; BK VI, 235a; bk x, 410c-411a;
epilogue   i,  654a-655c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,
165b-166a  5c. The wage earner or industrial proletariat in a capitalist
economy  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365d-366a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i, 20b-21c; 27b-37b passim; 42a-62a passim 42 Kant: Science ofRight,
436d-437c   43   Mill:  Liberty,  309b-c  /  Representative  Government,
345c-346a;  366d-367b;  369b-370a  /  Utilitarianism,  473b-c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofRight,  part  hi,  par  251256  78d-80a  50 Marx: Capital,
79a-256a  esp  82d-84a,c,  88d89b,  104b-105c,  112c, 115c-131a, 150a-c,
161b162d,  176a-178d,  192d-250c,  254c-255a;  261d-262a;  279a-383d esp
280c-286a,   287b290c,  303b-305a,  311c-353a,c,  354c-355d,  364a-368b,
377a-378b   50   Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c423a;  424b-c;
426b-428a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 165b-c 5d. The
condition  of the worker in a socialist economy 43 Mill: Liberty, 309b-c
50  Marx  :  Capital,  34d-35c  50  Marx-Engels:  Comfnunist  Manifesto,
425b429c  esp 426b, 429b-c 6. The wages of labor: kinds of wage payments
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b; 42a-62a 43 Mill: Liberty,
309b-c   /   Representative  Government,  366d-367a  /  Utilitarianisfn,
472d473a   50  Marx:  Capital,  82d-83c;  264a-278a,c  6a.  Labor  as  a
commodity:  the  labor  market  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 124c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 154b-155b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365d-366a
39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 13a-16d; 20b-21c; 27b-37b esp 28a-d,
29b-33c; 42a62a; 107b; bk iv, 243b,d-244a; bk v, 380b,d 42 Kant: Science
of   Right,  424b-425a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d  50  Marx:  Capital,
79a-84a,c; 91a-95a passim, esp 93b-94a; 112c-113c; 211a-219d esp 211a-c,
216a-d;   302d-317c   esp  303b-305a,  315c-317c;  379a-383d  esp  381b,
382c-383d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 422c423a

[994b]
I  936  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5c  to  la  6b.  The  iron  law of wages: the
subsistence level and the minimum wage 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk i,
28d-29a;  41b;  BK V, 383b-384c 50 Marx: Capital, 81a-82c; 256b 50 Marx-
Engels   :   Communist   Manifesto,  422c-d;  424d-425a;  426b  6c.  The
distinction  between  real and nominal wages: variable factors affecting
wage  levels  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 13a-20b esp 14b-d;
23c-27b  passim;  27b-37b esp 28a-32b; 39d-40b; 42a-62a; 82d-83a; 87b-c;
bk  ii,  123b-124a;  bk  iv,  265a-d;  bk  v,  380b,d382a,c;  383b-387b;
391b-392a  50 Marx: Capital, 171a-c; 223a esp 223b [fn i]; 256b-260c esp
258b-c;     267d-268c;     302d-307c;    315c-316c    50    Marx-Engels:
Cowm«;2/^/M^«;/^^/o,422c-d;  423c; 425a-b 6d. The natural wages of labor
and  the  labor theory of value 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353a-b  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i,
13a-14d;  16a;  20b-21c;  27b-28a 42 Kant: Science ofRight, 424b-425a 50
Marx: Capital, 13a-25d esp 14c-16a, 24c25d; 32c-33b; 35d-36a
[fn i];
36a-b
[fn
i];  78c-d;  93b-96a;  lOOa-lOlc;  112c-113b;  264a267d esp 265a-266a 7.
Economic and political justice to the laborer la. Fair wages, hours, and
working  conditions:  labor  legislation  Old  Testament: Exodus, 12:16;
20:9-10;  21:112,16,20,26-27,32;  31:14-17  /  Leviticus,  16:29; 19:13;
23:3-8,21,25,27-36;    25:1-12,39-55    /    Numbers,    28:16-18,25-26;
29:1,7,12,35  / Deuteronomy, 5:12-15; 15:12-18; 16:8; 23:15-16; 24:14-15
/  Jeremiah,  17:22,24;  22:13— (D) Jeremias, 17:22,24; 22:13 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  4:14—  (D) OT, Tobias, 4:15 / Ecclesiasticus, 7:20-21; 33:24-31;
34:20-22  —  {D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:22-23;  33:25-33; 34:24-27 New
Testament:  Matthew, 10:10; 20:8 / Lu^e, 3:14; 10:7 / Ephesians, 6:5-9 /
^  Timothy,  5:18  /  //  Timothy,  2:6 7 Plato: Laws, bk viii, 741b-d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch i 416b,d-417c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 105, A 2, rep 6 309d-316a 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
30c-d  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 154b-155b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xv,  lllb-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 353b; 365b-d 39 Smith:
Wealth ofNations, bk i, 13a-14d; 20b-

[995a]
7bto7c{\)  23b esp 20b-21c; 27b-37b esp 28a-29b, 33c35b; 42a-62a passim,
esp 52b-c, 56b-57a, 58b61d; 106c 107a; bk iv, 200c 201a; 287b-c 42 Kant:
Science   of  Right,  424b-425a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  309b-c;  310c-d  /
Representative Government,' 3^5c-346a; 366d-367b / Utilitarianism, 467b;
472d-473c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 236 76a-c;
additioxNS,  145  140b  50  Marx:  Capital,  81a  84a,c;  102b-156d  esp
104b-105c,  112c-113c,  127c-146c, 150a-c, 156c-d; 192d-209a passim, esp
193a-194b;  226a-248d  esp  236c-242a;  256b-275c passim, esp 261c-262a,
263c-d,  266a-267c;  296b307c passim, esp 296c-298a, 305c-307c; 366a368a
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 422c423a; 423c-d 7b. The right to
property: the ownership of the means of production 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iii-iv,  341c-342d  /  Laws,  BK  V,  692d-693a;  695a-696b 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  458a-460a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 36a-37b /
Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c esp 675b-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
v 30b-36a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339c-d; 353a / Social Contract, bk i,
394a  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 165b-170c; bk IV, 239c-240a;
243b,d-244a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 86d-87a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  404a;  409d-410d;  414c-415c; 426b-428a; 431a-432a; 441d-443b 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  366d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  52  25a-c;  par 67-69 29c-31a; additions, 32 121d-122a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  295a-297a  50  Marx:  Capital,  88d-89b; 113c-d;
149a-151a,c  passim, esp 150b-c; 160d-162d; 173c-174a; 280c-283d passim,
esp  282b-c;  288b-290c;  319c-d;  354a-364a  esp  354a-355d, 359c-361d;
369c-370b;   377c-378d   50   Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424c;
425c-427b   esp   426a-b;  428d-429c  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  787d788b passim, esp 787d-788b [fn 3] 7c. The consequences
of  economic  inequality or oppression: the class war 7c(l) The'economic
determination  of  antagonistic  social  classes:  slaves  vs.  freemen;
laboring  vs.  leisure  classes;  propertyless  vs. propertied classes 5
Euripides: Suppliants [228-245] 260b-c 5 Aristophanes : Plutus [507-526]
635a-b  6 Herodotus: History, bk vi, 203a-b; bk vii, 243b-c 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 423a-c; 427d-428a; 428c-d; 434c-438c; bk

[995b]
Chapter  44:  LABOR  937 IV. 458d 459c; 463a-465c; bk v, 482d-483a; 502d
504b;  bk  vi, 520a-d; 524d-525d; 533ac; hk viii 564a-593a,c passim, esp
568d-569a, 575c-576c, 577b-d, 579c-583c, 584b-585a, 585d 586b, 587a-590c
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  343c-d;  bk  viii, 405c-416a 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265^6-12]
461a; ch 7 461d-463c; ch 9
[1269*33-^12]
465c-d; bk hi, ch 10 [1281*11-29] 478d-479a; CH 15
[1286^8-22] 484d-485a;
bk iv, ch 4
[i29i''2-ii]
490d; ch 6
[1293*12-34]
492d493a; ch 11-12 495b-497b; bk v, ch 3 [1303*^ 5-8] 505a; ch 4
[1304*^1-6] 506a; ch 5
[1304''
i8]-cH  6  [1305^22]  506b-507c;  ch  7  [i3o6''221307*2]  508c-d;  ch 9
[1310*19-25] 512c; ch 10
[1310^9-15]
512d-513a; ch 12
[1316*39-^22]
519c-d;  BK  VI, CH 3 521c-522a; cii 7 524c525b / Athenian Constitution,
ch  2-6  553a555c  esp  ch  5 554d-555a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37c /
Solon,  68d71c  /  Cafnillus, 117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Agis
648b,d-656d  / Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi,
97b  /  Histories, bk II, 224d-225a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch ix, 14c-d
26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act iv, sc ii 57d-59d 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus,  act  i, sc i [1-167] 351a-353a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
154b-155b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws, bk xi, 77b-83c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  355a-356a  /  Political Economy, 375b-d; 381c-382b / Social
Contract,  BK  IV,  429c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 28a-d;
55d56a;  109d-110d;  bk hi, 169c-170b; bk iv, 239c-240c; 243b,d-244a; bk
v,  309a-311c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 126d-127c; 144a-d; 501b-502c
43  Federalist:  number  10,  50b-51b;  number 35, 113b-114a; number 36,
114c-115a;  number  60,  185b-186a  43  Mill: Representative Government,
345c-346a;  366d-367b;  369b-370a  /  Utilitarianism,  473b-c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 244 77c; additions, 149 140d-141a /
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 193b-c; part i, 250a-c; part ii, 263c-d;
275b-276a;  part hi, 287d-288b; 295d-297b; part iv, 335a-336c; 356c-357a
50  Marx:  Capital, 6d-9c; 63b-c; lllc-146c esp 113c, 130a-131a, 134c-d,
141b-c,  145a; 209c215a esp 209c, 214a-215a; 262a; 282d-286a; 354a-364a;
378d   50   Marx-Engels:   Communist  Manifesto,  415b416d  esp  416c-d;
419b,d-425b   esp   419b,d420a,   421a,  422c-425b;  428c-d;  429c-430d;
432d-433a;  434a-d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-c 54
Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 882b-884d

[996a]
938  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (7c.  The consequences of economic inequality or
oppression:  the  class  war.) 7c(2) The organization of workmen and the
formation  of  trade  unions  to protect labor's rights and interests 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 28a-d; 51a56b; 61c-d 43 Mill : Liberty,
309b-c  /  Representative  Government,  345d-346a;  366d-367b  50  Marx:
Capital, 121c-122b; 137b-138c; 146a-c; 317b-c; 367c-368b 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist Manifesto, 415a416c; 423b-d; 425b-c 7c(3) The proletariat as a
revolutionary  class:  its  revolutionary  aims  50  Marx:  Capital, 9c;
294b-295a  esp  295a;  377c-378d  esp  378d-379b  [fn 2] 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto, 415b417a,c esp 416b-d; 422c; 424a-d; 425b-434d esp
425b-c,  428d-430a, 434c-d Id. The underprivileged condition of workers:
the  exclusion  of  slaves from citizenship; the disfranchisement of the
laboring  classes  5  Aristophanes: Fro^i- [686-705] 572a-b 6 Herodotus:
History, bk hi, 107d-108a 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 405c-407a / Latvs,
BK  VIII,  740d-741a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk ii, ch 7 [1267^14-19]
463b-c; ch 8 [1268*16-33] 464a-b; bk iii, ch i
[1275^5-10] 471d; CH 4
[1277*30-^6] 474b-c;
CH 5
[1277^33-1278*34] 475a-c; bk
iv, ch 6
[1292^22-1293*10] 492b-c; bk
vi, ch 4 522a523b; cH 7
[1321*27-32] 525a; bk vii, ch
8
[i328*-35-38]
532c; ch 9 533a-d; ch 10
[1330*25-34] 534d / Athenian Constitution, ch
2-5  553a-555a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv, 114c115b 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 412b-c; bk IV, 429c-d 39 Smith: Wealth
ofNations,  bk  i,  27b-37b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 17a-b; 144b 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 73b; 81d-82b; 404cd;452d 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  436d-437c  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: amendments, XIII, SECT
I-XIV,  SECT I ISc; XV 19b 43 Federalist: number 54, 170b-171b passim 43
Mill:   Representative   Government,   339d340c;  345c-346a;  351d-352b;
383d-387d  passim;  394a-395c  passim  / Utilitarianism, 473b-c 50 Marx:
Capital,  137b-141b  passim,  esp  138b,  140a-b;  283d-286a; 316d-317c;
364a-368b  esp 367c-368b 50 Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto, 424c425a;
428a

[996b]
7r(2)  to  If le. The problem of poverty and pauperism: unemployment and
the  right to work 7 Plato: Laws, bk v, 695a-c; bk xi, 783b 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  vi,  ch  5 [1320*17-^13] 523d-524b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-37b  /  LycurgusNuma, 62b-c / Pericles, 127a-128a / Lucullus^ 409b-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  157a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv,
154b-155b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xx, 147a; BK xxiii, 190a-b;
191b-c;  199b-200a,c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366a  / Political
Economy,  375b-d  /  Social  Contract, bk hi, 415b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk i, 27b-37b esp 28a-d, 30b-31b; 58c-62a; bk iv, 239c-240a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  501c-d;  658c  43  Mill: Liberty, 322c-d /
Representative  Government,  383d-384a  44  BoswEisi.:  Johnson, 428b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 230 75c; par 241-245 76d-77d;
par  254  79c;  additions, 148-149 140c-141a 50 Marx: Capital, 209c-225d
passim,  esp  211a-c,  215d-217c;  302d-366a  esp  303d-305a,  311c325c,
354b-355b,  358a-d, 364a-c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 424d425a
7/.  The relation of economic to political freedom: economic democracy 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch 9 477c-478d; BK IV, CH 4 [1291^30-38]
491a-b;  ch  6  492b493a;  ch  ii  [1295^2-1296^2] 495c-496c; bk v, CH 5
[1305*29-34]  507a;  bk  vi, ch 4 [1318^61319^2] 522a-523a; bk vii, ch 9
533a-d  14  Plutarch:  Solon, 68d-70d / Poplicola- Solon, 87a / Tiberius
Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  esp  675b-d  /  Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  v, 19d-21d; BK VII, 44d-45b; bk xiii,
99b-100c;  bk  xv,  114c-115b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353c-355b passim;
355d-356a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405b-c esp 405b [fn i]; bk hi,
422c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 51a-62a passim, esp 52b-c,
61b;  109d-110d;  bk  iv,  287c288c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 144b 41
Gibbon  :  Decline and Fall, 73b; 452d-453a,c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
436d-437c  43  Federalist:  number  10, 50b-51d; number 35, 113b-114a 43
Mill:  Liberty, 309a-c / Representative Government, 369b-370a; 382c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 243 77b-c; additions, 44 123c;
145  140b  /  Philosophy  of History, part hi, 287d-288b; part iv, 352a;
364d 50 Marx-Ei^gei.s: CommunistMamfesto, 426b-c; 428d-429c esp 429b-c

[997a]
,  Historical  observations  on  the  condition  of  labor 6 HiLRODOTUs:
History,  bk ii, 84d 85b; bk vi, 196c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
(i2()9"33-^7l 465c 13 Virgil: Georgics, i [118-159] 40a-41b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-37c  /  Solon,  72d  /  Pericles, 127a-129b/ Marcus Cato,
278d-279a;  287b-d  /  Crassus,  439a-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,
151d-152c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, A 4, ANS and
rep  1-4 318b-321a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 411a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  30c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348b,d-353b / Social Contract,
bk  iv, 428d; 429d CKOSS-KEFEKENCES For: Other discussions of the golden
age,  see  Man  9a;  Progress ic; Time 8b. Other considerations of penal
labor,   see  Punishment  4b(3).  Matters  relevant  to  the  nature  of
productive  work  and  the  factors influencing productivity, see Art 4,
9a-9b; Education 6; Science ib(i)-ib(2); Wealth 3a. Other discussions of
the  division  of labor and its consequences, see Family 3a-3b; Progress
3a;  State  5c; Wealth 3d. Other discussions of the position of labor in
different  economic  systems,  see  Slavery 4a-4c; Wealth 6a, 7b(i). The
general theory of wages and the relation of wages to profits, see Wealth
4C-4d,  6d(i)-6d(2). The problem of economic justice to the laborer, see
Democracy  4a  (2); Justice 8b-8c(2); Progress 3b; Wealth 6d(2); and for
the  relation  of  economic  to  political  liberty, see Liberty 2d, 6b;
Revolution  4a. The discussion of property rights and the problem of the
ownership  of  the  means  of  production,  see Wealth ya-ye, 8a-8c. The
problem  of  the  political status of the laboring classes and the issue
concerning  the  extension  of  the  suffrage to workmen, see Citizen 3;
Constitution  5a;  Democracy 4a(i); Liberty if; Oligarchy 4, 5a; Slavery
5a-5b.  Another  discussion of the problems of poverty and unemployment,
see  Wealth  8c-8d.  The general theory of the class war as it occurs in
different  economic  systems, see Opposition 5b; Revolution 5a-5c; State
5d(2)-5e; War and Peace 2c; Wealth 9h.

[997b]
Chaptmr 44: LABOR 939 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b esp 27b
28a,  29d-33c;  42a-62a  passim, esp 50a53a, 56b 58b, 59a-62a; 88c-d; bk
hi,  165b173b;  175d-179a;  bk iv, 200c-201a; 239c240a; 287b c 40 (7 1 H
BON  :  Decline  and  Fall,  16c-17d;  113c; 144b-c; 498b 501c passim 41
Gibbon  :  Decline and Fall, 404c-d; 452d-453a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  149  140d-141a 48 Melville: Moby Dickj, 295a-297a 50
Marx:   Capital,   63b-c;  113c-115c;  127c-146c;  162d-163c;  333c-377a
esp355d-368b  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 415a425b passim, esp
415b-416c,   419b,d,   424d425a;   429c-433d   52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-c

[998a]
940  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Augustine.  Ofthe WorJ^ of Monies Hegel. The
Phenomenology  of  Mind,  iv  (a)  Marx. The Poverty of Philosophy, ch 2
(2,5)  J.  S.  Mill. Principles of Political Economy, bk i, ch 1-3, 7-8,
10;  BK  II, CH II-I4; BK HI, CH 6; BK IV, CH 7 . "The Claims of Labor,"
in  vol  ii.  Dissertations and Discussions Engels. The Condition of the
WorJ^ing  Classes  in  England  .  Herr  Eugen  Diihring's Revolution in
Science,  PART  II  Tolstoy. "On Labor and Luxury," in What Then Must We
Do?  II. Hesiod. Worlds and Days Langland. Piers Plowman T. More. Utopia
Paracelsus. The Miners' SicJ^ness and Other Miners' Diseases Dekker. The
Shoemaker's  Holiday  Ramazzini.  De  Morbis  Artificum {The Diseases of
Worl{ers)  Franklin.  Poor  Richard's Almanac\ Fourier. Social Destinies
SouTHEY.  Essays,  Moral  and  Political,  iv RicARDo. The Principles of
Political  Economy  and Taxatiofi, esp ch i, 5, 16 Malthus. A7i Essay on
Population  .  Principles  of Political Economy, esp bk i, ch 1-2, 4; BK
II,  CH  I, SECT 10 Skidmore. The Rights of Man to Property! T. Carlyle.
Sartor  Resartus  Hess. Sozialistische Aufsdtze Proudhon. The Philosophy
of  Misery  Kierkegaard.  Christian  Discourses,  part  iv  (2) Thoreau.
Walden,  ch  i  RusKiN. Time and Tide . Munera Pulveris . Fors Clavigera
George.  Progress  and  Poverty  Stevenson.  "An Apology for Idlers," in
Virginibus  Puerisque  Jevons.  The  State  in  Relation to Labour Zola.
Germinal  Smiles.  Life  and Labor Nietzsche. The Dawn of Day, aph 173 .
The Joyful Wisdom, aph 42, 329, 348

[998b]
IP  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are works not included in Great
Boo\s  ofthe  Western  World,  but  relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups: II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of The Great Ideas. Nietzsche. Beyond Good and Evil, ch hi (58)
.  The  Genealogy  of  Morals,  iii  (18)  A.  Marshall.  Principles  of
Economics,  esp  bk  iv,  ch 6, 9; BK VI, CH 3-5 Leo XIII. Rerum Novarum
(Encyclical  on  the Condition of Labor) DuRKHEiM. The Division of Labor
iii  Society  BiJCHER.  Arbeit  und  Rhythmus S. and B. Webb. Industrial
Democracy,  esp  part iiIII Groos. The Play of Men . The Play of Animals
Kropotkin.  The  Conquest  of  Bread  .  Fields, Factories and Workshops
Sinclair.  The  Jungle  Peguy.  Basic Verities (The Honor of Work) Nexo.
Pelle  the  Conqueror SoREL. Reflexions on Violence, ch 7 Troeltsch. The
Social  Teaching  of the Christian Churches Bradley. Essays on Truth and
Realityy  ch  3  J. A. Hobson. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism . Wor\
and  Wealth T. Veblen. The Theory of the Leisure Class . The Instinct of
Worl^manship, and the State of the Industrial Arts Hamsun. Growth of the
Soil MiCHELs. Economia efelicita Tawney. The Acquisitive Society Briefs.
The  Proletariat,  a  Challenge  to  Western Civilization De Man. Joy in
WorJ^ Beveridge. Unemployment Pius XI. Quadragesimo Afino (Encyclical on
the  Reconstruction  of  the  Social  Order) Berle and Means. The Modern
Corporation   and   Private   Property  E.  Chamberlin.  The  Theory  of
Monopolistic  Competition  Dunkmann.  Soziologie  der Arbeit B. Russell.
Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom,  ch  4 . Freedom Versus Organization A. R.
Burns.  The  Decli?ie  of  Competition  Borne and Henry. A Philosophy of
Worl{  Gill.  Wor}{  and Leisure . Worl^and Property Simon. Trois legons
sur  le  travail Steinbeck. The Grapes of Wrath Maritain. Freedom in the
Modern  World,  appendix  i  .  Scholasticism and Politics, ch vii J. M.
Clark. Alternative to Serfdom

[999a]
Chapter ^y. LANGUAGE INTRODUCTION THE liberal arts of grammar, rhetoric,
and  logic  are  all  concerned with language. Each of these disciplines
establishes  its own rules for the use of language, each by reference to
a  special standard of excellence or correctness which measures language
as  an instrument of thought or communication. Together these three arts
regulate  discourse as a whole. Their relation to one another represents
the  relation  of  the  various aspects of discourse— the emotional, the
social,  and  the  intellectual. The tradition of the great books is the
tradition  of the liberal arts. Their greatness consists not only in the
magnitude  of  the  ideas  or problems with which they deal, but also in
their  formal  excellence  as products of liberal art. Some of the great
books  are  expositions  of  logic  or  rhetoric.  None is a treatise on
grammar. But they all plainly exemplify, even where they do not expound,
the  special  refinements  of  the  arts  of language; and many of them,
especially the works of science, philosophy, and theology, and even some
of  the  poetical  works,  deal  explicitly  with  the  difficulties  of
discourse,  and  the  devices  that  have  been  used  to overcome them.
Language  is  their instrument, and they are consciously critical in its
use.  One of the great books—Augustine's treatise On Christian Doctrine—
is  directly and explicitly concerned with grammar in the broad sense of
the  art  of  reading.  Addressed  to "earnest students of the word," it
attempts to "lay down rules for interpretation," and, in so doing, it is
compared by Augustine to "one who teaches reading, that is, shows others
how  to read for themselves." It is not reading in general, however, but
the  reading  of one book— the Bible— with which Augustine is concerned.
We  shall  return later to this special problem of interpreting the word
of God, or language which is thought to be inspired. 941

[999b]
In our day, there is a lively interest in the problems of language. This
is  partly  because  of  the  development  of historical and comparative
studies  of  the various human languages, and the scientific formulation
of what is common to all languages in origin, structure, and change. But
it also results in part from the claims of a discipline popularly called
"semantics" to have discovered the properties of language as a medium of
expression,  and  especially  to  have  discovered  its limitations. The
claims of semantics often go so far as to find in the misuse of language
the  origin  ofmany  human ills. The novelty of semantics is supposed to
lie  both  in  the  diagnosis and in the remedies proposed. Of these two
sources  of  current interest in language, the second calls attention to
the  vitality  of the liberal arts, of which semantics is a contemporary
formulation.  It  might  almost  be said that there is nothing new about
semantics  except  the name. Hobbes, Bacon, and Locke, for example, deal
explicitly  with the abuses of language and the treachery of words. Each
makes  recommendations  for  the  correction  of these faults. Plato and
Aristotle,  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  Berkeley  and  Hume, are similarly
concerned  with  ambiguity  in speech, with the multiple senses in which
discourse  of  every  sort  can  be interpreted, and with the methods by
which  men  can  approximate precision in the use of language. The other
interest  in language is also represented in the great books. Though the
science  of  linguistics  and the history of languages are researches of
recent  origin,  speculation  about  the origin of language and, in that
context,  consideration  of  the  natural  and  conventional  aspects of
language extend throughout the tradition. At all times the discussion of
the nature of man and society considers language as one of the principal
characteristics of the specifically

[1000a]
942 THE GREAT IDEAS human world or compares the language of men with the
speech  of  brutes. In addition there is the broad philosophical inquiry
into  the nature of signs and symbols in general. This is not limited to
the  problem  of  how  written  or  spoken  words get their meaning. The
general  question  calls  for an examination of every type of signifying
and every sort of symbol, verbal and non-verbal, natural and artificial,
human  and  divine.  Though  these  matters  are  closely related to the
problems  of language and may therefore be touched upon here, their main
treatment  is reserved for the chapter on Sign and Symbol. The treatment
of language seems to have a different tenor in ancient and modern times.
The philosophers of antiquity appreciate the need to safeguard discourse
from  the  aberrations  of  speech.  Plato and Aristotle usually preface
their  discussion of a subject with an examination of the relevant words
in  current  use. Discovering the variety of meanings attached to common
words, they take pains to enumerate the various senses of a word, and to
put  these  meanings in some order. They pursue definitions or construct
them to control the ambiguity that is latent in the language anyone must
use  to  express  or communicate ideas. But they do not expect to remove
ambiguity entirely. They tend to accept the fact that the same word will
have to be used in a number of senses; and they discriminate between the
occasions  when it is desirable to be precise about a word's meaning and
those times when the purpose of discourse is better served by permitting
a  word  to  carry  a  whole  range  of  meanings.  They  see no special
difficulty in abstract as opposed to concrete words, or in general names
as  distinguished  from the proper names which designate individuals, or
in  words  which  refer to purely intelligible objects like ideas rather
than to the objects of sense-experience. The mood of the ancients, which
also  prevails  for the most part among the philosophers and theologians
of  the  Middle  Ages,  seems  to  express  a  certain  tolerance of the
imperfections  of  language. If men do not think clearly, if they do not
reason  cogently or argue honestly, the fault is primarily the result of
the misuse of their faculties, not of the betrayal of their in-

[1000b]
tentions by the intractable character of language as an instrument. Even
when  men  misunderstand  one  another,  the inadequacy of language as a
medium  of  communication  is  not solely responsible for the failure of
minds  to  meet  through  the interchange of words. With greater effort,
with  a  more  assiduous appUcation of the liberal arts, men can succeed
even  if  language  works against them. Some things are inexpressible in
human  speech even as they are incapable of being fully grasped by human
thought.  "My  vision,"  Dante  says  when he reaches the mystic rose of
Paradise,  "was  greater than our speech." Such knowledge as we can have
of "the highest matters and the first principles of things" Plato thinks
"does  not admit of exposition like other branches of knowledge." In his
Seventh  Letter,  he  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  "no man of
intelligence   will  venture  to  express  his  philosophical  views  in
language."  With  these  exceptions the ancients seem to adopt a mood of
tolerance  towards  language.  This does not imply an underestimation of
the  difficulties  of  using  language  well. It simply does not make of
language  an  insidious  enemy of clarity and truth. The deficiencies of
language  are like the weaknesses of the flesh. As man can in large part
overcome  them  through  the discipline of the moral virtues, so through
the  discipline  of  the liberal arts—by skill in grammar, rhetoric, and
logic—he  can  make  language  express  almost  as  much truth as he can
acquire,  and  communicate  it almost as clearly as he can think it. Men
need not succumb to the tyranny of words if they will make the requisite
effort  to  master language to serve their purpose. But the liberal arts
do   not   guarantee   purity  of  purpose.  Obscurantism,  obfuscation,
deception,  and falsification are sometimes the aim. Men try to persuade
others  at  all  costs,  or  to win the argument regardless of where the
truth  lies.  They  try  to  confuse  their  opponents  or mislead their
audience.  The  use  of language for such ends requires as much skill as
its  employment  in  the service of truth. If such use is a misuse, then
language is equally available for use or misuse. It is an ancient saying
that   only  the  competent  in  grammar  can  make  grammatical  errors
intentionally. So, as Plato recognizes, the dif-

[1001a]
ference between the sophist and the philoso-
[iher is not one of skill but of purpose. When he
criiicizes  the  trickery  of sophistical argument, he also acknowledges
the  cleverness  with  which  I  he  sophists  juggle words and propound
absurdities  under  the  cover  of superficially significant speech. The
sophistical  fallacies  which Aristotle enumerates are seldom accidental
errors.  Far  (mm  being  the  result  of the impediments which language
places  in  the  way  of  thought,  they  are  m  large measure artfully
contrived  equivocations. They are ways of using language against logic.
According  to  Aristotle,  they represent "loul fighting in disputation"
and  are  resorted  to  only  by  "those  who are resolved to win at all
costs."  In  the  modern  treatment  of  language  there  is  more of an
imputation  that  words  cause  men unwittingly to deceive themselves as
often  as  they enable one man intentionally to deceive another. Men are
duped or tricked by the tendency of words to counterfeit a reality which
does  not exist. This, in the view of Hobbes or Locke, Berkeley or Hume,
is particularly true of general or universal names—or words that signify
nothing  which  can be perceived or imagined. We cannot imagine anything
infinite,  says Hobbes. Hence a word like "infinite" is a form of absurd
speech  "taken  upon  credit  (without  any  signification  at all) from
deceived   philosophers  and  deceived,  or  deceiving.  Schoolmen."  In
addition  to  the  deceptions  of ordinary ambiguity and of metaphorical
speech,  Hobbes  pays particular attention to the absurd, insignificant,
or nonsensical use of words "whereby we conceive nothing but the sound";
he  gives  as  examples,  not  merely  "round  quadrangle," but "infused
virtue,"  "free  will,"  and "immaterial substance." In the light of the
examples,  this  theory  of insignificant or meaningless speech explains
what Hobbes means when he says that "words are wise men's counters, they
do  but  reckon  by  them;  but  they  are  the money of fools." It also
indicates  how  Hobbes  uses  the susceptibiUty of men to self-deception
through  language  as  a  way  of  explaining  the  errors—he calls them
"absurdities"—into  which  his  predecessors  have fallen. What is novel
here is not that he disagrees with

[1001b]
Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE  943 earlier thinkers on points of psychology and
metaphysics  or  theology, but that he reduces what might be supposed to
be  an  issue  between  true  and false opinions to a difference between
significant and absurd speech. His opponents might reply that unless his
own views about matter and mind are true, his semantic criticism of them
does  not hold. They have been seduced by language into talking nonsense
only  if  Hobbes  is  right  in  his metaphysics and psyThe criticism of
arguments  which  seem to rely on metaphors is not peculiarly modern. In
his  attack  on  the  Platonic  theory of ideas, Aristotle dismisses the
statement  that  the Forms "are patterns and other things share in them"
as  a  use  of "empty words and poetical meta phors." But Hobbes carries
this  method  of  crit  icism much further. He frequently rests his case
against  other philosophers entirely on the ground that they are talking
nonsense.  Though he himself catches the imagination, almost as often as
Plato  does,  by  his skillfully wrought metaphors, he would insist that
what  he says can always be rendered literally, whereas the metaphors of
others  conceal  the  insignificance  of  their  speech.  Bacon provides
another  illustration of the modern attitude which ascribes a diabolical
character  to  language. "There arises from a bad and unapt formation of
words,"  he  writes,  "a  wonderful obstruction to the mind. Nor can the
definitions  and  explanations  with which learned men are wont to guard
and  protect themselves in some instances afford a complete remedy words
still   manifestly   force  the  understanding,  throw  everything  into
confusion,  and lead mankind into vain and innumerable controversies and
fallacies."  He  goes  on  to  say  that  "the  idols  imposed  upon the
understanding by words are of two kinds. They are either names of things
which  have  no  existence  ... or they are names of actual objects, but
confused,  badly  defined,  and  hastily  or irregularly abstracted from
things."  Here, as in the case of Hobbes, a theory of reality and of the
way  in which the mind draws its ideas from experience seems to underlie
the  charge that language tangles the mind in a web of words, so that it
deals with words rather than with things. In the same spirit, though not
from the same premises, Locke tells his reader why

[1002a]
944  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  he  found  it  necessary to include in his Essay
Concerning  Human  Understanding  the long third book on language, which
examines in detail the imperfections as well as the abuses of words, and
the  remedies  therefor.  "Vague  and insignificant forms of speech, and
abuse  of  language,"  he  says,  "have  so long passed for mysteries of
science; and hard or misapplied words with little or no meaning have, by
prescription,  such  a right to be mistaken for deep learning and height
of  speculation,  that  it will not be easy to persuade either those who
speak,  or  those  who  hear  them,  that  they  are  but  the covers of
ignorance, and hinderance of true knowledge. ... So few are apt to think
they  deceive,  or are deceived in the use of words or that the language
of  the  sect  they  are  of  has any faults in it." Without judging the
fundamental  issues  involved concerning the nature of things and of man
and  his  mind,  one  point  seems  to  be  clear. According as men hold
different  conceptions  of  the  relation of language to thought (and in
consequence  assume  different  attitudes  toward  the  imperfections or
misuse  of  language),  they  inevitably  take  opposite  sides on these
issues.  Whether  the  discipline of language is called semantics or the
liberal  arts,  the  standards  by which one man criticizes the language
ofanother seem to depend upon what he holds to be true. The present work
on  the  great  ideas  aims,  in  part,  to  record  the  agreements and
disagreements  among  the  great minds of the western tradition. It also
records  how  those minds have used the same word in different senses or
have  used  quite  distinct  words  for  the same thing. It could not do
either unless it did both. This indicates the basic relationship between
language  and thought which the great books exemplify, even when they do
not  explicitly  make  it  the basis of their discussion of the relation
between  language  and  thought.  The  ideal  of a perfect and universal
language  seems  to  arise in modern times from dissatisfaction with the
inadequacy  of  ordinary  language  for  the  analytical  refinement and
precision of mathematics or science. As Descartes holds up the method of
mathematics  as  the procedure to be followed in all other inquiries and
subject matters, so his conception of a "universal mathe-

[1002b]
sis"  calls  for  a  language  which shall be. the perfect instrument of
analysis  and demonstration. It is sometimes supposed that the symbolism
of  mathematics  is  itself  that  perfect  language.  Lavoisier  quotes
Condillac  to  the effect that algebra, "in the most simple, most exact,
and  best  manner,  is  at  the  same  time a language and an analytical
method."  Of  the analytical equations "which Descartes was the first to
introduce  into  the study of curves and surfaces," Fourier remarks that
"they  extend  to all general phenomena. There cannot be a language more
universal  and  more simple, more free from errors and obscurities, that
is  to  say,  more worthy to express the invariable relations of natural
things.  .  .  .  Its  chief  attribute is clearness; it has no marks to
express confused notions. ... It follows the same course in the study of
all  phenomena; it interprets them by the same language." This praise of
mathematical  symbolism  indicates  that  one feature of the ideal is an
exact correspondence between words and ideas. "Like three impressions of
the same seal," Lavoisier says, "the word ought to produce the idea, and
the  idea  to be a picture of the fact." If there were a perfect one-to-
one  correspondence  between physical symbols and mental concepts, there
would  never  be  any  failures  of  communication. Men would be able to
understand  each  other  as well as if they could see directly into each
other's  minds.  Though  they  still  used external signs as a medium of
communication,  they would approximate the immediate communication which
the  theologians  attribute  to  angels.  In  addition,  the  process of
thinking  itself,  quite  apart  from  communication, could be perfectly
regulated  by  the rules of grammar— the rules for manipulating symbols.
In  the  sense  in  which  Lavoisier  says that "the art of reasoning is
nothing  more than a language well arranged," the rules of thought might
be  reduced  to the rules of syntax if there were a perfect language. If
the symbols of mathematics lack the universaUty to express every sort of
concept,  then it may be necessary, as Leibnitz proposes, to construct a
"universal characteristic" which would make possible a symbolic calculus
for  the  performance  of all the operations of thought. This conception
seems  to  contain  the  principle  and  the  motivation for the various
logistical schemes which accompany the

[1003a]
modern  development  of  symbolic  or mathematical logic, from Boole and
Venn  to  Pcano,  C^outurat,  Russell,  and  Whitehead.  The hopes to be
realized  by  an  algebra of logic find expression in Jevons' plan for a
logical  abacus which, like an adding machine or comptometer, would be a
thinking  machine able to solve all problems that can be put in suitable
terms.  Is  THE IDEAL of a perfect and universal language a genuine hope
or  a  Utopian  dream?  Not  all  modern  scientists  seem to agree with
Lavoisier's  point that the improvement of a science and the improvement
of  its  language are inseparable. Faraday, for example, apologizing for
the invention of new words to name electrical phenomena, says that he is
"fully  aware that names are one thing and science another." The Utopian
character  of the ideal seems to be implied in Swift's satirization of a
universal language. On his voyage to the cloud-land of the scientists in
Laputa,  GulUver  learns  of  a project which is being considered by the
professors  of  language.  "Since  words are only names for * things, it
would  be more convenient for all men to carry about them such things as
were  necessary to express the particular business they are to discourse
on."  The  substitution  of  things  for  words  would  thus  provide  a
"universal  language  to be understood in all civilized nations." In the
ancient world the imperfection of ordinary speech gives rise, not to the
conception  of a perfect language which man should try to construct, but
to  the  consideration of the distinction between a hypothetical natural
language  and  the  existing  conventional languages actually in use. If
there were a natural language, it would not only be the same for all men
everywhere,  but its words would also be perfect images or imitations of
things.  That  human language is conventional rather than natural may be
seen  not  only  in  the plurality of tongues, but also in the fact that
existing  languages  embody  contradictory  principles of symbolization.
This fact, Plato suggests in the Cratylus^ indicates that human language
does  not  originate  as a gift from the gods, for if the gods had given
men  the  names  they  use,  signs  would  be perfectly and consistently
adapted  to  things  signified. The hypothesis of a natural or god-given
language is not proposed as an ideal to inspire

[1003b]
Chaptkr  45:  LANGUAGE  945  men to try to invent a perfect language for
themselves.  It functions rather as a norm for the criticism of man-made
language  and  for  discovering  the  natural  elements  common  to  all
conventional  languages.  Like human society, human language seems to be
partly  natural,  partly  conventional.  As  there are certain political
principles,  such  as  that  of natural justice, common to all societies
despite  the  diversity  of  their  customs  and  institutions,  so  all
conventional  languages have certain common characteristics of structure
which   indicate   their  natural  basis  in  the  physical  and  mental
constitution  of  man.  In the tradition of the liberal arts, the search
for  a  universal  grammar,  applicable  to  all conventional languages,
represents  not  the hope to create a universal or perfect language, but
the  conviction  that  all  languages  have a common, natural basis. The
hypothesis  of  a  natural  language  takes another form and has another
impHcation  in  the ludaeo-Christian tradition, where it is discussed in
the  light  of  certain  portions of revelation. Yet it retains the same
fundamental  relevance  to the problem of the origin and characteristics
of the many conventional languages which now exist. Genesis relates how,
after  God formed every beast of the field and every fowl of the air, He
"brought  them  to  Adam  to see what he would call them; and whatsoever
Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof." The names
which  Adam devised constituted a natural language, at least insofar as,
according  to Augustine's interpretation, it is the one "common language
of the race" both before the flood and for some time after. But there is
the  further  question  whether the names which Adam gave to things were
their  rightful  or  proper names—whether they were natural signs in the
sense  of  true  representations of the natures of the things signified.
Hobbes suggests one answer when he says that "the first author of speech
was  God  himself,  who instructed Adam how to name such creatures as he
presented   to   his   sight";  Augustine  suggests  another  answer  by
identifying  the  original language of man with Hebrew, and by affirming
the  continuity  of  the Hebrew spoken after Babel with the language all
men spoke before the confusion of tongues.

[1004a]
946  At  the  time  when men began to build "a tower whose top may reach
unto heaven," Genesis tells us that "the whole earth was of one language
and  one speech. . . . And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and
they  have  all one language; and this they begin to do; and now nothing
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let
us  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language,  that they may not
understand  one another's speech." This, according to Hobbes, means that
the  language "gotten and augmented by Adam and his posterity, was again
lost  at  the  tower  ofBabel,  when  by  the  hand of God every man was
stricken for his rebellion, with an oblivion of his former language." If
the  further implication is that the lost language was unlike any of the
conventional languages in the historical record, then it may be supposed
to  have  been  that natural form of speech in which each thing is named
according  to  its  nature.  The modern ideal of a perfect and universal
language  may even be looked upon as an impious wish to achieve what God
took away from men at Babel. The problem of the origin of human language
is  not  an  easy one for the theologian. It is more difficult still for
those  who  speculate  about  it  in purely naturalistic terms. Rousseau
tries to expose some of the perplexities in such speculations. If speech
did  not  become a social necessity until men passed from isolation in a
state  of  nature  to  living  together  in society, how, he asks, could
societies  have been formed before languages had been invented ? "If men
need  speech  to  learn  to think," he remarks, "they must have stood in
much  greater  need of the art of thinking, to be able to invent that of
speaking." The development of languages already in existence, or the way
in  which  the  child  learns  to speak through living in an environment
where speech exists, "by no means explains how languages were originally
formed."  Rousseau  imagines  a primitive condition in which men uttered
instinctive cries "to implore assistance in case of danger, or relief in
case  of suff^ering"; he supposes that to such cries, men may have added
gestures to signify visible and

[1004b]
THE GREAT IDEAS movable objects, and imitative sounds to signify audible
ones.  Such  methods  of  expression  being insufficient to convey ideas
about absent or future things, men had at last to invent "the articulate
sounds  of the voice" and to institute these as conventional signs. But,
as  he  observes,  "such  an  institution  could  only be made by common
consent  .  .  .  itself  still more difficult to conceive, since such a
common  agreement must have had motives, and speech, therefore, seems to
have  been  highly  necessary  in order to establish the use of it." The
problem  of  the origin of human language is not only connected with the
problem of the origin of human society, but also with the problem of the
origin  of  man  himself.  The  faculty  of  articulate speech does not,
according to Darwin, "offer any insuperable objection to the belief that
man has been developed from some lower form." Though the habitual use of
articulate  language  is  peculiar  to man, "he uses, in common with the
lower  animals,  inarticulate  cries  to  express  his meaning, aided by
gestures  and  the  movements  of the muscles of the face." The songs of
birds  and the speech of parrots show that animals can learn to make and
repeat  certain  definite sounds, and even to connect words with things.
It  seems  to Darwin quite credible that man's articulate language "owes
its  origin to the imitation and modification of various natural sounds,
the  voices  of other animals, and man's own instinctive cries, aided by
signs and gestures." Such an account of the origin ofhuman speech is not
credible,  however,  to  those who disagree with Darwin's statement that
"the  lower  animals  diff^er  from  man solely in his almost infinitely
larger  power  of  associating  together the most diversified sounds and
ideas."  Those  who  hold that human rationality differs in kind, rather
than  degree,  from  animal  intelligence  tend  to find a corresponding
difference  in  kind  between  human  language and the sounds of brutes.
Aristotle,  for  example,  says  that man is the only animal whom nature
"has  endowed  with  the  gift  of  speech.  Mere vocahzation is only an
indication  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  is  therefore  found  in other
animals,"  but men alone have the power to discuss the expedient and the
iust, and this fact distinguishes human

[1005a]
association from the companionship of gregarious animals. 1 luman speech
is,  for  Descartes, one of the I wo criteria by which we can "recognize
the  thftercnce  that  exists  between  men and brutes. For it is a very
remarkable fact that there are none so depraved and stupid, without even
excepting  idiots,  that  they  cannot arrange different words together,
forming of them a statement by which they can make known their thoughts;
while,  on  the  other hand, there is no other animal . . . which can do
the  same. It is not the want of organs that brings this to pass, for it
is  evident that magpies and parrots can utter words just Hke ourselves,
and yet they cannot speak as we do, that is, so as to give evidence that
they  think  of  what they say. . . . This does not merely show that the
brutes  have  less reason than men, but that they have none at all." The
difference  between men and other animals is more fully discussed in the
chapter  on .\ Ian. Here we are concerned with opposite opinions on that
subject  only  in  relation to opposite • Mews of human language and its
origin.  When,  as m Descartes' view, human language is distinguished by
syntax  and  grammar  or,  as  in Locke's, by man's special power to use
sounds  "as  signs  of  internal  conceptions, and to make them stand as
marks  for  ideas  within his own mind," the origin of human speech does
not seem expHcable in evolutionary terms. The relation of grammar to the
other  liberal arts and to the various uses of language is considered in
the chapters on Logic, Poetry, and Rhetoric. Isolated from these others,
grammar  is  primarily  concerned  with  the distinction of the parts of
speech,  such  as noun and verb, or particle and adjective. "By a noun,"
says Aristotle, "we mean a sound significant by convention, which has no
reference  to  time,  and of which no part is significant apart from the
rest."  In contrast to the noun, the verb is defined by Aristotle as the
sort  of word which, "in addition to its proper meaning, carries with it
the  notion  of time. . . . Moreover," he continues, "a verb is always a
sign  of  something said of something else." The grammatical function of
nouns and verbs is, in Locke's opinion, more generally

[1005b]
Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE  947  recognized  and better defined than that of
particles,  prepositions,  and  conjunctions.  Such words, Locke writes,
"show  what  connexion,  restriction, distinction, opposition, emphasis,
etc.
[a man]
gives  to  each  respective part of his discourse. ... He who would show
the  right  use of particles, and what significancy and force they have,
must  take a little more pains, enter into his own thoughts, and observe
nicely  the several postures of his mind in disGrammar is also concerned
with  the  difference  between  words (or phrases) and sentences, or, in
Aristotle's  terms,  between  simple and composite expressions; and with
the  rules  of  syntax  which  govern  the  order and agreement of words
according  to  their  function as parts of speech. By reference to these
rules  the  grammarian  critizes the misuse of language and classifies a
great  variety  of  common  errors.  One  test  of  whether grammar is a
universal  art  applicable  to all languages—not just a set of rules for
using  a  particular conventional language correctly— is the naturalness
of  its  theoretical  distinctions. Does Aristotle's distinction between
noun  and  verb,  for  example,  respond  to  something  natural  in all
discourse,  or  is  it  peculiar  to  the  Greek  or to the IndoEuropean
languages?  There  is a meaning of language which includes more than the
speech of men and brutes. From Hippocrates on, the physician regards the
symptoms  of  disease  as  if  they  were a connected system of signs, a
language   for   which   his   diagnostic  art  provides  a  grammar  of
interpretation.  This  is  particularly  true in the psychological realm
where,  in  the psychoanalysis of the neuroses and especially in Freud's
interpretation  of  dreams, both symptom and dream-symbol are treated as
an  elaborate  language. That language serves to express the unconscious
thoughts  and desires which cannot be expressed in the ordinary language
of  social  intercourse over which consciousness exercises some control.
These  medical  examples represent a conception of language according to
which  the  whole  of  nature  is a book to be read by the scientist. He
penetrates  the  mysteries  of nature by learning the grammar of natural
signs. To know the relation of natural things as cause and effect or

[1006a]
948  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  whole  and  part is to discover nature's syntax.
According  to another conception, expressed by Gahleo, the book ofnature
"is  written  in  mathematical  language,  its  symbols being triangles,
circles,  and  other  geometrical  figures,  without  whose  help  it is
impossible  to  comprehend  a single word of it." The book of nature may
also  be  read  as the language of God. Prophecy or divination is such a
reading of dreams or of other events as omens and portents which bespeak
the  divine  purpose.  When he reaches the highest heaven Dante finds in
the vision of the Trinity, "bound up with love in one volume, that which
is dispersed in leaves through the universe." Berkeley goes further than
this. All of the ideas which man gets by sense-perception are words in a
divine vocabulary. The uniform appearances of nature "may not unfitly be
styled  the  Language of its Author, whereby He discovers His attributes
to our view and directs us how to act for the convenience and feUcity of
life."  God  speaks  to  man  in  still  another way. Within the Judaeo-
Christian  tradition  at least, God is believed to have revealed himself
to  man  through  the  vehicle  of  human language. Written by men under
divine  inspiration,  Sacred Scripture is the word of God. Because it is
at once human and divine, this language is the most difficult for man to
interpret. The art of interpreting the Bible involves the most elaborate
theory  of  signs,  and  of the types and levels of meaning. It involves
special rules of reading. The development of this theory and these rules
by Augustine and Aquinas, Maimonides and Spinoza, Hobbes and Pascal, has
deepened  the liberal arts and enlarged the scope of man's understanding
of  other  languages—his own or nature's. Since the heart of this larger
consideration  of language lies in the analysis of meaning and the modes
of signification, the discussion of the symbolism of nature and the word
ofGod belongs to the chapter on Sign and Symbol; and, in its theological
aspects,  to  the  chapters  on Prophecy and Religion. The discussion of
language, as we have seen, cannot be separated from the consideration of
human  nature and human society. Because He "designed man for a sociable
creature," God, according to Locke, "made him not only with

[1006b]
an  inclination,  and under a necessity to have fellowship with those of
his  own kind, but furnished him also with language, which was to be the
great  instrument  and common tie of society." It is not merely that the
fellowship  of  men  depends upon speech. According to Locke, men cannot
enjoy  "the  comfort  and  advantage  of  society  .  .  .  without  the
communication  of thoughts." The fact that "man had by nature his organs
so  fashioned  as  to  be  fit  to frame articulate sounds . . . was not
enough  to  produce language"—at least not human language, "for parrots,
and  several  other  birds,  can  be  taught  to  make articulate sounds
distinct  enough,"  and yet, Locke writes, they are "by no means capable
of  language.  Besides  articulate  sounds,  therefore,  it  was further
necessary,"  he  insists,  that  the  sounds  men  formed  should be the
instrument whereby "the thoughts of men's minds
[are] conveyed from one
to  another." Rousseau, on the other hand, seems to think that under the
primitive  circumstances  surrounding  the  origin  of  both society and
language, the association of men "would not require a language much more
refined  than  that of rooks or monkeys, who associate together for much
the  same  purpose.  Inarticulate  cries,  plenty  of  gestures and some
imitative  sounds,  must  have  been  for  a  long  time  the  universal
language,"  he  writes;  "and by the addition, in every country, of some
conventional articulate sounds . . . particular languages were produced;
but  these  were  rude  and  imperfect, and nearly such as are now to be
found  among  some  savage  nations."  The  plurality  of  conventional,
historic  languages  seems  to  parallel  the pluraHty of the nations or
societies into which mankind is divided. But underlying the diversity of
tongues there is also a unity which implies the possibility of mankind's
unification.  To  the  extent  that  language expresses thought, diverse
languages  are  but different mediums for the same thing. "All men [may]
not  have  the  same speech sounds," Aristotle declares, "but the mental
experiences,  which these directly symbolize, are the same for all." The
human  community  conceived  in  terms  of  the communication of thought
extends as far

[1007a]
as  the  bounds  of  such communication among participate. The extent of
this conversation men. It is not hmited by pohtical boundaries. measures
the  range  of  western  thought.  The  voh overcomes bv translation the
barriers set up cabulary of its language is the stock of ideas with h\ a
diversity  of  tongues. It includes the living which each individual can
begin  to  think  for and the dead and extends to those as yet unhimself
when  he  turns  from  dialogue  to  soliloborn.  In  this  sense, human
civilization  can  be  quy;  for, as Plato observes/ 'thought and speech
described  as  the  civilization of the dialogue, and are the same, with
this  exception,  that  what  is the tradition of the great books can be
conceived  called  thought  is  the  unuttered conversation of the great
conversation  in  which all men can the soul with itself." as OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  1.  The  nature and functions of language: the speech of men and
brutes  950  i^. The role of language in thought 951 il?. The service of
language  to  society  2. Theories of the origin of language 952 2a. The
hypothesis  of  one  natural  language  for  all men 2I?. The genesis of
conventional  languages:  the  origin  of  alphabets  3.  The  growth of
language  3<:7. The invention of words and the proliferation of meanings
j 3^. The spoken and written word in the development of language 953 ^c.
Tradition  and  the  life of languages 4. The art of grammar 4«. Syntax:
the parts and units of speech 4^. Standards of correctness in the use of
language:  grammatical  errors  5. The imperfections of language 95^ 5a.
The  abuse of words: ambiguity, imprecision, obscurity 5^. Insignificant
speech: meaninglessness, absurdity 955 6. The improvement of speech: the
ideal  of  a  perfect language 7. Grammar and logic: the formulation and
statement  of  knowledge  8.  Grammar and rhetoric: the effective use of
language  in  teaching  and persuasion 956 9. The language of poetry 10.
The  language of things and events: the book of nature; the symbolism of
dreams;  prophetic  signs 9^7 11. Immediate communication: the speech of
angels  and the gift of tongues 959 12. The language of God or the gods:
the  deliverances  of  the  oracles;  the  inspiration,  revelation, and
interpretation of Sacred Scripture

[1007b]
Chapter 45: LANGUAGE 949 PAGE

[1008a]
950 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. The nature and
functions  of  language:  the  speech  of  men and brutes Old Testament:
Genesis, 11:1-9 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 4:24— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
4:29  New  Testament:  /  Corinthians, 14 / Ephesians, 4:29 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk ii, 61a-b 7 Plato: Cratylus 85a-114a,c / Theaetetus, 547c-d
/   Sophist,   575d-577b   /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 6 [4^32-36] 9b / Interpretation, cH I
[16^4-8] 25a / Soul, bk
ii,  ch 8 [420^5-421^6] 651d-652c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i,
ch i
[488^33-^3] 9b-c; bk IV, CH 9 62a-63c / Parts
of Animals, bk ii, ch 16
[659^28]-ch
17
[660^3]
186d-187c / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253^7-18]
446b-c / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2
[1404^1-3]
654c; CH 10
[1410^9-28]
662c-d / Poetics, CH 6
[1450^10-15]
685a; ch 19
[1456^33-^8] 691d-692a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10281090] 74c-75b
14  Plutarch:  Demosthenes, 692a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 3,
8a / Fourth Efinead, tr hi, ch 18 151b-c

[1008b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 19 76a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  13  627d; bk ii, CH 3 637c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
13,  A  I,  ans  62c-63c;  q 34, a i, ans 185b-187b; Q 107, A I, rep 1-3
549b-550b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  60,  A 6, ans
851b-852b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxvi
[124-138] 147a-b
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 54c-55b; part ii, 100b; PART IV, 270a 25
Montaigne:  Ei^a^^  215b-216b;  218a-c;300c;  323c-324b  26 Shakespeare:
Richard II, act i, sc hi
[154173] 325b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 62c-63a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 14
107d-108a  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59c-60b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk viii
[369-451]
240a-242a;  bk  ix  [549-612] 259b-260b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 45 178b; 912
349b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, SECT 8-11 145b-146a;
ch  xviii,  sect  7  174d175a;  ch  xxii,  sect 5 201d; ch xxvii, sect 8
221a-222a;  ch  xxviii,  sect 2 228c-229a; CH xxxii, SECT 7-8 244c-d; bk
hi, ch i 251b,d-252d; ch ii 252d-254c passim; ch hi.

[1009a]
la  to  \b Chapter 45: LANGUAGE 951 SECT 1-5 254d-255c; sect 20 260a; ch
vi,  SECT 22 273d-274a; ch ix, sect 1-4 285a-c; CH X, SECT 13 294c-d; bk
iv,  ch v, sect 10 331a; ch vhi, sect 7 347b-c; ch xxi, sect 4 395a,c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  19-21  410c-411b  36  Swift:
Gulliver,  part hi, llla-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339d-342c; 349d-350a
43  Federalist:  number  37, 120a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
pref,  la-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 182b-c 49 Vy.KKWi^:
Descent  ofMan,  297c-300c;  349d i: 53 James: Psychology, 18b; 35b-37b;
683b-685a; I 715b-716a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 512d-513a la. The
role  of  language  in  thought 7 Plato: Cratylus 85a-114a,c / Phaedrus,
138c139d / Timaeus, 447c-d / Critias, 478c-d / Theaetetus, 520b; 524c-d;
526b;  537d-538a;  547c-d  / Sophist, 575d-577b / Statesman, 590d-591a /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle : Interpretation, ch 1-5 25a-26c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 10
[76^22-27]
105c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  525a-528b  /  Soul,  bk  II, CH 8
[420^28-33]  652b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 10 [1410^9-28] 662c-d
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  5  90b-c;  bk XII, par 32-36
107a-108c;  par  41-43  llOa-d;  BK  XIII,  par  36  120c-d  / Christian
Doctrine,  BK  I, CH 13 627d; bk ii, ch 3 637c-d; ch 36 653d 19 Aquinas:
5«fwmj  Theologica, part i, q 13, a i, ans and rep 3 62c-63c; q 34, a i,
ans  and  rep  1-3  185b-187b;  a  3,  ans  188b-189a;  q 63, a 8, rep I
332c-333b;  q  107, a i, rep 1-2 549b-550b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 6, a 6, rep 3 744d-745b; q 60, a 6, ans 851b852b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 54c-58c; part iv, 270a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 75c-d;
253c-254a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  61b-c; 62c63a / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  14  107d-108a  31 Descartes: Rules, xiii, 26b-c /
Discourse,  part  V,  59c-60b  / Objections and Replies, 137a; 290c-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop 40, schol i 387b-388a; prop 47, schol
390c-391a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 22-23 175b; 392 239b-240a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i,  SECT 15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch xvi, sect 5-7
166b-167b;  ch  xxii,  sect 3-9 201b-203a; ch xxxii, sect 7-8 244c-d; ch
xxxiii,  sect  19  251c-d; bk hi 251b,d-306d esp ch i, sect 6 252c-d, CH
III,  SECT  1-5 254d-255c, sect 10 256c-257a, sect 20 260a, ch v, sect 4
264b,  sect  io-ii 266b-d, ch ix, sect 1-2 285a-b, sect 21 290c-291a, ch
x, sect 13 294c-d; bk IV, ch III, sect 19 318b-319a; ch iv, sect 17

[1009b]
328d;  ch  v,  sect  3-4  329b d; ch vi, sect i-^ 331b-d; ch xxi, sect 4
395a,c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 19 410c; sect 21-25
411b-412a,c;  sect 121122 436d-437c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  418a-419b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339d-342c
esp340d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 4a-5c; 7c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 173a-b 45
Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 362c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  78 32d-33a / Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 182 bc; part I,
218a-c 47 Goeth-e: Faust, part i [1995-2000] 47a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  299b-300a;  349d;  592a  53 James: Psychology, 36b-37a; 127b-128b;
153b154a;  156b;  159a-b;  161a-176a;  333a-334a; 447b-448a; 608b; 650b;
689a-b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  385  b-c / Unconscious,
442a-443a  /  Ego and Id, 700b- 701d; 714b-c lb. The service of language
to society Old Testament: Genesis, 11:1-9 5 Aeschylus : Prometheus Bound
[442-461]  44c-d  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-375] 134a-b 5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [201-210] 260a-b 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120a-b / Gorgias, 270d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*7-18]
446b-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 23 201a203b 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  xvi, ch ii 429d431a; bk xix, ch 7 515a-c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  II,  ch  4-5 637d-638a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 90, A 4 207d-208b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[34-81]
46b-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 54c; 55a-b; part II, 132d-133a;
157c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  253c-254a;  323c-324b  26  Shakespeare:
Richard II, act i, sc hi
[159173] 325b /
1st  Henry  IV,  act  hi,  sc  i [192238] 452a-c / Henry V, act v, sc ii
[98-306]  564b-566a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 23a-26a ^ 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xviii, sect 7 174d-175a; ch xxii,
sect  5-7  201d-202b;  ch  xxviii,  sect 2 228c-229a; ch XXXII, sect 7-8
244c-d;  bk  hi, ch i, sect i 251b, d; ch ii, sect 1-2 252d-253c; sect 4
253d; CH iii, sect 3-5 255a-c; sect 20 260a; CH V, SECT 7 265a-c; ch vi,
sect  51  282d283a;  ch  ix, sect 1-4 285a-c; ch x, sect 13 294c-d; sect
23-31 298a-299a; ch xi, sect I 300a-b; sect 5 300d; bk iv, ch v, sect 10
331a

[1010a]
(1.  The nature and functions of language: the speech of men and brutes,
lb.  The  service of language to society.) 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect  19-21  410c-411b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  parti, 25b-26a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 340a-342c; 349d-350a; 350d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  15d-16c  passim  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 300a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  ofHistory,  part iv, 347b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 278a;
294d-295a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 450a-c / Group Psychology,
668c; 685a 2. Theories of the origin of language Old Testament: Genesis,
2:19-20; 11:1-9 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[442-461]
44c-d  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-375] 134a-b 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[201-210] 260a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49a-d 7 Plato: Protagoras,
44c  /  Cratylus  85a-114a,c esp 106b'C / Phaedrus, 138c-139b / Gorgias,
271b-272b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10281090] 74c-75b
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xvi, ch 4 425b426a / Christian Doctrine,
bk ii, ch 4-5 637d638a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[34-81]
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi [70-142] 146c-147b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
54d-55a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 218a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning,
2d-3a; 17d18b 32 MiL.TOf< : Paradise Lost, bkviii [267-277] 238a;
[338-356] 239b-240a; bk xii
[1-62] 319a-320b
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch i, SECT 5 252b-c; ch ii, sect i
252d-253a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  340a-342c;  350d  44  Bosw  Ei.h:
Johnson,  509b  49  Darwin:  Origin  ofSpecies, 211b-c / Descent of Man,
298a-301c;  349d  53  James:  Psychology,  685b [fn i] 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  512d-513b  2a. The hypothesis of one natural language for
all  men  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:19-20;  11:1-9  7 Plato: Cratylus
85a-114a,c  esp llOc-lllc 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*4-9] 25a
18  Augustine: City of God, bk xvi, ch ii 429d431a / Christian Doctrine,
bk ii, ch 4-5 637d638a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[34-81]
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi [70-142] 146c-147b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
54d-55a  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 164a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 2d-3a; 18b

[1010b]
11  952  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2  to 3a 32 MiL,To^ : Paradise Lost, bk viii
[267-277] 238a;
[338-356] 239b-240a; bk xii [1-62] 319a-320b
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ii, SECT I 252d-253a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  hi,  div  18  457c-d  2b.  The  genesis  of
conventional languages: the origin of alphabets Old Testament: Geitesis,
10:5;  11:1-9 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 12a-b; bk ii, 60a-d; 80a-c; bk
v,  171a-b  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  107c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  138c139b  /
Philebus,  612d-613a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk xi, 103c-d 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 4 637d-638a; ch 24 648d-649a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[34-81]
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi [70-142] 146c-147b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
54c-55a  30  Bacon:  Advancement ofLearning, 62d-63a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii [38-62] 320a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch m
XXII, SECT 2 201a-b; sect 5-7 201d-202b; ch XXVIII, SECT 2 228c-229a; bk
hi,  ch  ii, sect I 252d-253a; sect 8 254b-c; ch v, sect 8 265c-266a; ch
vi,  sect  43-51  280c-283a  passim,  esp sect 51 282d-283a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  340a-342c; 349d-350a; 350d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, lOd
esp 675d
[n 83]; 756a [n 43]
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  225a-b;  338b;  342b-c; 706c [n 22] 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  509b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part i, 221a 49
Darwin: Origin of Species, 211b-c / Descent of Man, 300c-301c; 329a-b 53
James:  Psychology,  685b  [fn  i]  3.  The  growth of language 3<». The
invention  of  words  and  the proliferation of meanings 5 Aristophanes:
Ecclesiazusae
[1167-1182]
628c-d  6  Herodotus: History, bk iv, 128d 7 Plato: Cratylus, 89a-107b 8
Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i, ch ii [i04''34-i05"i] 148c / Metaphysics, bk
iv, ch 4
[i 006*2 9-''4]
525c-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2 [i405*3-''2i] 655b-656a; ch 3
[1406^5-19] 657c-d; ch
10
[1410^5-15] 662c; CH
II
[1412^18-21]
664c  /  Poetics,  CH  21 [1457^1-1458*7] 693a-d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 10 640d-641a; ch 16, 644b-d; bk hi, ch 5 659d660a;
ch  24-25 666d-667c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 2, REP
2 63c-64d; a 8 70d-71b; q 37, a 2, ans 199a-200c; Q 67, a i 349d-350b 24
Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,

[1011a]
3b  to  4^ Chapter 45: LANGUAGE 953 30d-3Ia; bk ii, 77b-78b; bk hi, 178b
179c;   182c-184c;  202d-204c;  bk  iv,  280d  281d  Montaigne:  Essays,
422c-423c  Gilbert:  Loadstone, pref, 2b-c Harvey: On Animal Generation,
336d-337a,c  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 42c-43a / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph 59 112b-c Descartes: Objections and Replies, 290c-d Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xviii,  SECT  7  174d-175a; ch xxii, sect 2
201a-b;  sect  5-7  201d-202b; ch xxviii, SECT 2 228c-229a; bk hi, ch i,
sect  5  252b-c; ch III, SECT 6-9 255c-256c; ch v 263d-268a; CH VI, SECT
25  274d;  sect  43-51 280c-283a passim, csp sect 51 282d-283a Rousseau:
Inequality,  341a-342b;  349d-350a  38  / Social Contract, bk hi, 419b-c
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 775c-776a,c [n 17340 174] Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  106b-c; 773d [n 23] Kant: Pure Reason, 113b-c / Practical Reason^
294b-c;   337c-338a  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  467b-c  BoswEiA.:  Johnson,
59d-60d; 191a; 353c-354a; 410a-b; 454a Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
pref,  4a5d;  PART I, 24c-d; 25c-29d Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
361a362d; 829d-830a Darwin: Descent of Man, 300c-301b James: Psychology,
689a-b Freud: General Introduction, 509d; 512c513b; 516b-c; 517c-518b 41
42  43  44  45  45  49  I  53  54 3^. The spoken and written word in the
development  of  language  6  Herodotus:  History, bk v, 171a-b 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  85a-107c  esp  lOOd-lOla,  102c-d  /  Phaedrus,  138c-139a  8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i
[16*3-8] 25a
9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch i
[1404*^1534] 654b-c
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xviii,  ch  39 494c-495a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 4 637d-638a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxvi
[70142]  146c-147b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54c  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  341a-b  I  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 88c-d 44 B0SWEL.1.:
Johnson,  253a-b;  330d-331a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro,
182b-c;  part  I, 218a-c; 247d-248c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 329a-b 54
Freud:  General  Introduction,  540b-541a  5c. Tradition and the life of
languages  Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 6:4-9 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi,
ch   10  [148^16-23]  202d-203a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v  533a-547a,c  18
Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch ii 641a-c

[1011b]
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, A 9 388d 389d 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk ii, stanza 2-4 21b-22a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
conclusion, 282c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81d-83b
25  Mo^TKiGti-E'. Essays, 77c-79a; 422c-423c; 476b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  llb-12b;  42c-43a  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies,
290c-d  35  Locke:  Toleration,  22c-d  / Human Understanding, BK II, CH
XXII,  SECT  7  202a-b  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 128a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 350d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 334c-335b 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  15d-16c;  628a-b; 629a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
106b-c;   152a;   300a-b;   325c-328a,c  esp  325c-326a,  327a-b;  338b;
522b-528a,c  esp  522c-523a,  526a-c,  527d-528a,c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
113b-115c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 467b-c 44 BoswEL.1.: Johnson, 151c-d;
166d;  307c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 182b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  ofSpecies,  211b-c  /  Descent  of  Man, 300c-301a 4. The art of
grammar  4a.  Syntax:  the  parts and units of speech 7 Plato: Cratylus,
105d-106a;  109a-b  /  Sophist,  575d-576b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[1*17-19]  5b;  ch  4  [2*4-10]  6a;  CH  7 [6^6-8] 11a; [6^31-36] lie /
Interpretation,  ch  1-5  25a-26c / Metaphysics, bk V, ch 3 [1014*26-32]
534c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2
[1404*^
26-1405*2]  655a-b  /  Poetics,  ch  19-21  691d694a  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 13, A I, rep 3 62c-63c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 64c-65a; part hi, 182b; part iv, 270a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 70d-71a
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  44a-b;  62c-63c  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  vii  283a-284b esp sect 2 283b-c 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  287b-288a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342c esp 341
b-c,  342b-c  44  BoswEiA.'.  Johnson,  23d-24b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  i,  229b-c  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 516b-c 4^.
Standards  of  correctness  in the use of language: grammatical errors 5
Aristophanes:   Clouds  [635-693]  496c-497a  8  Aristotle:  Sophistical
Refutations, ch 14 239a-d; ch 32 250d-251c

[1012a]
(4.  The  art  of  grammar.  4b.  Standards of correctness in the use of
language:  grammatical  errors.)  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  hi, ch 2
654c-656b;  CH  5  657d-658c  /  Poetics,  ch  22 694a-695a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations, bk i, sect 10 254a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch   13   642b-643a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  70d-71a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  XXX,  SECT  4  238d-239a; ch xxxi, sect 4-5
240b-d;  bk  hi,  ch vi, sect 51 282d-283a; CH IX, SECT 8 286c-d; ch xi,
sect  ii  302b-c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 287b-288a 44 BoswEL,!.:
Johnson, 361d-362a 53 James : Psychology, 164a-b 5. The imperfections of
language  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv, 131d-132a 7 Plato: Euthydemus
65a-84a,c  / Cratylus, 108c-110b / Phaedrus, 138c-140a / Republic, bk V,
369b  /  Critias, 478b-d / Theaetetus, 526b; 534a / Sophist, 561d-563b /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics^ bk iv, ch 4 525a528b
9  Aristotle:  Poetics, ch 25 [1461^9-^18] 697c698b 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk i [136-139] 2d 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch 6,
242c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 13 349b-d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 6 626a'b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13,
aa 1-2 62c-64d; a 3, ans 64d-65c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxviii
[1-6]
41b; XXXIV
[1-27] 51b-c; purgatory, xxxi
[133-145] 102b; paradise,
i [38-81] 106c-107a; X
[28-48]
120c-d; XXIII
[40-69]
141d-142a; XXX [19-36] 152a; xxxiii 156b-157d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  57d-58a  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 101d-102a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  253c-254a;  422c-423c;  476b  28  Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 336d337a,c 30 Bacon : Advancement ofLearning, 60b-c; 65b-c /
Novum Organum, bk i, aph 43 109d-110a; APH 59-60 112b-113a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  11,  80d-81a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 47, schol
390c-391a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c;
bk  hi,  ch  v, sect 16 267d268a; ch vi, sect 43 280c-d; ch ix, sect iCH
XI,  sect  7  285a-301c  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 21-25
411b-412a,c; sect 52 422d-423a; sect 74 427c; SECT 143-144 441c-d

[1012b]
954  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5 to 5a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 307b-308b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  340d-341a; 342a-c / Social Contract, bk ii, 401c
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 40c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 400d 44
BoswELi.:  Johnson,  70d-71b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro,
182b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3432-3468]
84a-b esp
[3451-3458]
84b; part ii
[8691-8692]
211b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vii, 302c-d 53 James: Psychology,
127b-128b;  153b-154a;  159a-b  54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
662a-b  5a.  The  abuse of words: ambiguity, impreci-l sion, obscurity 5
Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1178-1200]  503a-b  / Frogs [923-991] 575a-576a;
[1119-1197]  577d578d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  192b-c 7 Plato:
Euthydemus 65a-84a,c esp 68c-d / Phaedrus, 138c-140a / Theaetetus, 520b;
526b;  534d  /  Sophist,  552b-c / Seventh Letter, 809c810d 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7
[6^^36-7^14] 11c12b /
Topics, bk i, ch 15 149d-152a; ch 18
[108*18-36] 152b-d; bk
ii, ch 3 154d-155d; BK V, CH 4 [133^15-134*4] 184d-185b; bk vi, CH I
[i39^i2]-CH 2
[140*22]
192b-193b;  ch 14 [151^3-11] 206c; BK vni, ch 3 [158^8-159*2] 215b-c; CH
7  217c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  CH  I  [165*5-19]  227b-c; ch 4
[165^24-166^19]  228b-229c;  ch  19-23 243d-247a; ch 24 [179^ 38-180*22]
247d-248b; ch 33
[182^13-32]
251d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4 525a-528b; BK VII, CH II [1037*5-9] 560c
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648*37]-CH
3
[649^22]
172d-174b / Ethics, BK V, CH I
[1129*26-31] 376d /
Politics,  bk  II,  CH  3  [1261^16-31]  456c  / Rhetoric, bk hi, CH 2-5
654c-658c  passim  /  Poetics,  ch  25 [1461* 9-^19] 697c-698b passim 17
Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 6, 242c 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  10  640d-641a;  ch  12  641c-642b; bk hi, ch 1-4
657b,d'659d  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida, bk ii, stanza 37 26b;
stanza 147-149 40b-41a; bk v, stanza 257 153b-154a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i, 55b; 57d-58a; 78a-b; part ii, 135c; 157c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 66b-67d; bk n, 77b-78b; 101b-106a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  75a-77d; 148a-149a; 253c-254a; 284d-285c; 422c-423c; 448d-449a;
517b-519a  26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew, act i, sc II [1-44]
205b-c  /  Romeo and Juliet, act ii, sc IV [38-140] 297d'298d / Merchant
of Venice, act II, sc II [34-120] 412b-413a / Julius Caesar, act i, sc i
[5-36] 568b,d

[1013a]
5^/0 7 Chapter 45: LANGUAGE 955 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc i
[29-68]
64d-65b;
[123-154] 65d-66a
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  hi, 73d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
llb-13c; 60b-c; 61b-c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 43 109d-110a; aph 59-60
112b-113a  31 Descartes: Rules, xiii, 26b-c / Meditations, II, 80d-81a /
Objections  and  Replies,  208c-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40,
schol  i  387b-388a;  prop  47,  schol  390c-391a  33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,   la-14a   /   Vacuum,  370b;  374b;  376b-377a  /  Geometrical
Demonstration,  432a-434a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch ii, sect 12
27d28a  /  Human  Understanding,  89a-c; bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c;
sect  28 155a-b; ch XXIX, SECT 6-12 234d-236c; ch xxx, sect 4 238d-239a;
bk  hi,  ch  v,  sect 16 267d-268a; CH VI, SECT 30 276d-277b; sect 48-51
282b283a;  ch  ix,  sect  i-ch  xi, sect 7 285a-301c esp ch X, sect 5-13
292d-294d;  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 19, 318c-d; sect 30 323a-c; ch iv, sect
13-17  326d-328d  esp sect 17 328d; ch viii, SECT II 348b-c 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  21-25 411b-412a,c; sect 52 422d-423a 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vh, div 48 470d-471c; sect viii, div
62-63  478b-d;  div  74  484a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 234b-236b 37
Fielding:  Tom Jones, 38c-39a; 264b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xii,  89c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 342a-c / Social Contract, bk hi,
419b-c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 123b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
113b-c  /  Practical Reason, 315d-316a 43 Federalist: number 37, 120a-b;
number  41,  135c-136a passim 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref,
6d7a,c   45   Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  851a-b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part i, 218a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1995-2000]
47a-b; part ii [8691-8692] 211b 50 Marx : Capital, 104d [fn 4] 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  517c-518b;  540b541b  5b.  Insignificant speech:
meaninglessness,  absurdity  7  Plato:  Cratylus, 107c-108c 8 Aristotle:
Sophistical Refutations, ch 13 238d-239a; ch 31 250c-d / Metaphysics, bk
IV,  CH 4 [1006*12-^11] 525b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49d; 54b-c;
56bd;  57c;  59a-60a; 71a-b; 78a; part iv, 269b272c; 274a-b 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 77b-78b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 370b; 374b /
Geometrical Demonstration, 432b

[1013b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, 89a-c; bk hi, CH II, sect 7 254a-b; ch
iv,  sect  8-10 260d261d passim; ch v, sect 16 267d-268a; ch x, SECT 2-4
291d-292c; sect 26 298c; sect 31 299a; ch xi, sect 8 301c-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro, sect 2^-24 411c-412a; sect 54 423b; sect 79-81
428b-d;  sect  88  430a-b  47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1948-1963] 46a-b 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 534a-c; BK XIV, 612d-613a; bk xv, 620b-c
53  James: Psychology, 168b-172a 6. The improvement of speech: the ideal
of  a  perfect  language  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  107c-114a,c 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7 [6^26-7^14] 11b12b / Topics, BK I, ch 18
[108*18-36] 152b-d
/  Sophistical Refutations, ch 19-23 243d-247a 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk
hi,  ch  1-12 653b, d667b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch i 167a-b
18  Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 7 515a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk
hi,  ch  1-4  657b,d659d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 56b-d; 60c 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 142d-143a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  12b-c;  60b-c; 62c-64a esp 63a-b 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies, 290c-d 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 430b431b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch i, SECT 6 252c-d; ch xi 300a-306d esp
sect  827  301c-306d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 109b-lllb 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  340d-341a  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  294b-c; 339b-d 43
Federalist:  number  37,  120a 44 BoswELi.: Johnson, 70d-71b; 81b-82c 45
Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, la-c; 4a-5d; 6d-7a,c 45 Fourier:
Theory  of  Heat, 173a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 218a-c
49  Darwin:  Descent ofMan, 301a-b 7. Grammar and logic: the formulation
and  statement  of  knowledge  7  Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Cratylus
85a114a,c  / Phaedrus, 138c-139d / Symposium, 172b-c / Theaetetus, 534d;
541d-542a / Sophist, 561d-563b; 569d-577b / Seventh Letter, 809a811a esp
809a-c  8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  1-4 5a-6a / Interpretation, ch 4
[17*1-7]  26b  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  I, ch 34-41 66b-68c / Posterior
Analytics, bk II, ch 13
[97^38-39] 133c /
Topics, bk i, CH 15 149d-152a; ch 18
[108*17-37]
152b-d; BK II, CH 3 154d-155d; ch 9
[114*26-^14]
160a-b; bk iv, ch 3
[124*10-14]
172d; ch 4
[124^35-125*4] 173d; bk
V, ch 2
[130^11-15]

[1014a]
d  (7.  Grammar  and logic: the formulation and statement of knowledge.^
180d; CH 4
[133^15-134*4] 184d-185b;
ch 7
[136^15-32] 188c-d; BK VI, CH
i [i39^i2]-ch 3
[141*22] 192b'194c; ch 10 202b-203a; ch
14
[151^3-11] 205c; BK vni, ch 3 [158^8-15] 215b;
CH 7 217c-d / Sophistical Refutations, ch i
[165*1-18] 227b-c; ch 4 [165^24-166^21] 228b229c; CH 10 [170^11-41] 234d-235b; ch 13-14
238d-239d;  ch  19-23  243d-247a;  ch 31-32 250c-251c; ch 33 [182^13-31]
251d / Vhysics, BK I, CH 8
[191*33-^9] 267b / Metaphysics, bk
IV, CH 4 525a-528b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[1147*17-24]
397b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 32-36 107a-108c; par 41-43
llOa-d; bk xiii, par 36 120c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 13 627d 23
HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part i, 55a-57c; 58a60b; 65c-d; part hi, 172a; part
iv,  269b-c;  270a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 18d 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 253c-254a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 56b-66a
esp  58C'59a  31 Descartes: Rules, xiii, 26b-c / Discourse, PART I, 43b;
PART  VI, 66d / Objections and Replies, 137a; 290c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii,  prop  47, schol 390c-391a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 22-23 175b; 392
239b-240a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b-434a  35  Locke:  Humaii
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxxiii, SECT 19 251c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 10,
256d-257a;  ch vii 283a-284b; bk iv, ch IV, SECT 17 328d; ch v 329a-331b
passim; CH VI, SECT 1-3 331b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
19  410c;  SECT 52 422d-423a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339d-342c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, la-c;
4a-5d; 6d-7a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 182b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species, 40c51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 672a-b 53
James  :  Psychology,  144a-b  54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Pri72ciple,
662a-b  8.  Grammar  and  rhetoric:  the  eflFective  use of language in
teaching and persuasion New Testament: / Corinthians, 14 5 Aristophanes:
Knights
[1373-1383]
486d487a  / Clouds 488a-506d esp [882-1105] 499b502a 7 Plato: Euthydemus
65a-84a,c  /  Phaedrus,  131b-141a,c  /  Symposium,  172b-c 8 Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch i
[16*4-8]
25a; CH 4 [17*1-7] 26b

[1014b]
956  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  8/0  9  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk hi, ch 1-12
653b,d667b  /  Poetics, ch 21 [1457^1-1458*7] 693a-d; CH 22 694a-695a 13
Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [142-156] 107a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 42c-43b /
AlcibiadeSy  159a-b  /  Marcus  Cato,  279d-281b  /  Phocion,  606c-d  /
Demosthenes,  692d-695d  passim  /  Marcus Brutus, 803 b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi, par 7-8 14c15a; BK V, par lo-ii 29b-30a; par 23-24
33c34b  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 6 638a-d; BK IV 675a-698a,c 19
Aquinas:   Summa  Theologica,  prologue  lab  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and
Cressida, bk ii, stanza 2-4 21b-22a; stanza 147-149 40b-41a / Prologue
[725-746]
171b-172a  / Franklin's Prologue 351a / Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a /
Manciple's Tale
[17,154-186]
491a-b / Parson's Prologue [17,341-375] 494a-b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
ii, 127d; 128d; PART IV, 270a; conclusion, 282c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and Pantagruel, bk ii, 77b-78b; 101b-106a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 75a-77d;
309c-310c;  422c-424c; 448d-449c; 482b-483b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref,
2b-c  29  Cervantes : Don Quixote, part i, Ib-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  lb-2b;  12b-c;  16c;  31a-d;  39b-d;  58c-59a;  64b-c; 65a-c;
66b-68b;  83d-84a  31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b; part vi, 66d 32
Milton:  Vacation  Exercise  [1-58]  59a-60b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 14-16
174a-b;   22-23,25-27   175b;   48-59  178b-179b;  797-798  327b-328a  /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  439b-446b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi, ch x, SECT 34 299d-300a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 20
410d-411a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 287b-289b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341a-b;  342b-c  /  Social Contract, bk ii, 401c-402a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  343a-b;  529d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 327a-c; 526a-c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 3c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 292b-293b passim 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  59c-61d;  284b; 353c354a; 381d-382a; 454a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  40c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk ix, 347b348a 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  450b  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 662a-b 9.
The   language   of  poetry  5  Aristophanes:  C/ow^/i  [331-340]  492a;
[13511378]  504d-505b  /  Peace  [734-764] 534c-535a / Birds [1373-1409]
559b-c / Frogs [755-1533I 573a-582a,c / Thesmophoriazusae
[99-172]
601c-602b

[1015a]
10  Cmaptf.r 45: LANGUAGE 957 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52d-57a / hm, 143a c;
144b  d  /  Republic,  bk  mi,  328b  333a;  bk  x,  430bc  8 Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch 4 [17*5-7] 26b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 8
[1128*18-25]
375b-c / Politics, bk viii, ch 7
[i342*32-''i8J
548a,c / RJjetoric, bk hi, ch 1-12 653b, d667b / Poetics, ch i
[i 447*^29-^23] 681 b-c; ch
6  [i45o'*i3-i5] 685a; ch 19-22 691d-695a esp CH 22 694a-695a ; ch 24 [i
460*^2-5],  ch  25  [i  460*^  7-13]  696d;  [1461  V^i8]  697c-698b  18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk xi, ch 18 331d332a / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii,  ch  6  638a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 9, REP I
8d-9c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxii
[1-12]
47c; PURGATORY, xxiv [49-63] 90a-b; paradise, X [28-48] 120c-d; XXIII
[40-69]
141d142a;  xxx  [19-36]  152a; xxxiii 156b-157d 22 Chaucer: Troiliis and
Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza  1-4  21b-22a;  stanza 147-149 40b-41a; bk v,
stanza  256-257  153b-154a  /  Prologue  [725745]  171b-172a  /  Clcr}(s
Prologue [7888-7932] 295a-296a / Fra7j{lin's Prologue 351a / Prologue to
Melibeus  400b-401a  /  Manciple's  Tale  [17,154-186] 491a-b / Parson s
Prologue
[17,341-375] 494a-b / UEnvoi 550a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 67b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 62b-c; 76b-c;
104d105c;  195d-197a; 309c-310c; 422c-423c 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV,
act  hi,  sc  i  [121135]  451b-c  27  Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii,sc ii
[454-466]  45a  /  Sonnets,  xxi  589b-c; lxxvi 597d-598a; lxxviii-lxxix
598b;  cxxx  606a-b  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, xia-xvid; Ib-c;
part  ii,  251a-252b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, llb-12c; 39b'd;
63b-c;  99b-c  31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b 32 MiltOin: Vacation
Exercise  [1-58]  59a-60b 33 Pascal: Pcnsees, 25-35 175b-177a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  327a-c;  573a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 167d-168b; 180c;
307c;  381d-382a;  455b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153b 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  115a-c  53 James: Psychology,
687a-688a 10. The language of things and events: the book of nature; the
symbolism  of  dreams;  prophetic  signs Old Testament: Genesis, 9:8-17;
37:1-11;  4041  /  Exodus, 4:1-9,28-31 / Deuteronomy, 4:32-36; 7:17-19 /
J^dg^^^  6:36-40;  7:13-15 / / Kings, 13:1-6— (D) /// Kings, 13:1-6 / //
Kings, 20:8-11 -(D) IV Kings, 20:8-11 / Esther, 10— (D) Esther, 10:1-3 /
Job,  12:7-9;  35:11-12;  36:24-25;  37:7  /  Psalms,  19:1-6; 65:8— (D)
Psalms,  18:1-7;  64:9  /  Isaiah,  i 38:6-8; 45:5-6-(D) Isaias, 38:6-8;
45:5-6

[1015b]
1  /  Jeremiah,  18:1-6—  (D)  Jeremias,  18:1  6  / Daniel, 2; 4-5; 7-8
Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  10:4-11 :i2— (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-11:12 /
Wisdom   of   Solomon,  13:1-7—  (D)  OT,  Boo}{  of  Wisdom,  13:1-7  /
Ecclesiasticus,  43—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 43 / // Maccabees, 7:28;
15:11-16—  (D) OT, // Machabees, 7:28; 15:11-16 New Testament: Matthetv,
6:26-30;  24:3-34;  26:26-29 / Mar}{^, 13:4-30; 14:22-25 / Lul^, 2:8-15;
12:24-28;  21:7-13;  22:17-20  /  John,  6:32-35,47-58 / Acts, 2:16-22 /
Romans,  1:20  / / Corinthians, 1 :23-29 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [301-368]
13a-d passim; BK XIII [821-832] 96d-97a,c / Odyssey, bk xix
[509-581] 294c-295a,c
5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [176-225]  17a-c  /  Prometheus Bound [442-506]
44c-45a / Agamemnon
[104-159] 53a-d / Choephoroe [523-553]
75b-c  5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King [976-983] 108b / Oedipus at Colonus
[1447-15 17] 127b-128a / Antigone
[988-1094]
139c-140b / Trachiniae
[663-722] 175d-176b
5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among the Tauri [42-60] 411c-d 5 Aristophanes:
Birds [708-722] 551d-552a 6 Herodotus: //zV/ory, BKi,8a-b; 12b-d; 17a-b;
18b;  25b-31a esp 25b-d, 28c-29a; 38a-b; 39c40a; 47a-c; bk ii, 79a-c; bk
hi,  90d-91a;  95d; 103b-104b; 106c-d; 116a-b; bk iv, 124d-125a; 135b-c;
146d-147a; bk v, 170c-d; 183d-184a; bk VI, 190c-d; 199d-200a; 200d-201a;
204b-c;   205d-206a;  208b;  211a;  bk  vii,  216d-220b;  223b-c;  227a;
238d-239a;  bk viii, 267a; 268d-269a; 270c-271a; 278c; 285c-286a; bk IX,
289d-290a; 309d-310a; 313d-314a 6 ThuCYBIDES : Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
389ab;  BK  III,  438d-439a;  bk  vii,  552a-c; 560d561a 7 Plato: Crito,
213b-d  /  Theaetetus,  520b  /  Statesman,  591  b-c 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  27  92a93a,c  /  Dreams 702a-706d / Prophesying
707a709a,c  9 Aristotle: RJietoric, bk i, ch 2 [1357^23-^24] 596d-597c /
Poetics,  ch  16 [i454''i9-3o] 689d690a 10 Hippocrates: Prognostics, par
25 26a,c / Epidemics, bk i, sect hi, par i 49c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[931977] 42a-c
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 17 122d124a; bk hi, ch i, 177a-b 13
Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [385-401] 113b-114a; bk II [162-233] 128b-130b;
[671-704] 143a-144a; BK III
[132-191] 150b-152b;
[356-409] 157a158b;
[530-550]
161b-162a; bk iv
[54-67]
168b-169a; [450-473] 179b-180a; bk vi [185211] 216a-b; bk vii
[59-80]
237b-238a; bk VIII
[31-89]
259b-261b;
[520-540]
273a-b; BK XII [244-265] 360b-361a

[1016a]
(10.  The  language  of  things  and  events:  the  hook  of nature; the
symbolism  of  dreams;  prophetic  signs.)  14 Plutarch: Theseus, 8d-9a;
14d-15a,c  /  Numa  PompiliuSy  52b-c;  56d-57b  / Pericles, 123c-124a /
Alcibiades,   174a-d   /  Timoleon,  198c-d  /  Pelopidas,  239d-240c  /
Marcellus,  259c-260c  /  Pyrrhus,  329c-d  /  Sulla,  371d372c / Cimon,
398d-399b  /  Lucullus,  411a-b  / Nicias, 429d-430b / Eumenes, 473a-b /
Alexander,  548d-549a  / Dion, 789b-790a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 9a-b;
bk ii, 26c-27a; 27b; BK IV, 79b; bk vi, 95d-96a; bk xi, 101b; 103a-b; bk
xii,  112d-113a; 119b; 124b; bk XIII, 141a-b; bk xiv, 147a-b; 149b-c; bk
xv, 159b-c; 168d-169a / Histories, bk i, 189d-190a; 195b-c; 206a; bk ii,
228a-b;  235a-c;  bk hi, 256d-257a; bk iv, 293a-294a 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  iv,  853b-854a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b-1085b passim 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 13 4b-c; bk III, par 19-20 18b-19a; bk
xiii,  par 6-48 112a-124a passim / City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; ch 36
149c-d; bk ii, ch 2-3 150c-151c; bk IV, ch 33-34 206c-207a,c; bk v, ch i
207d-208c;  ch  11-26 216c-230a,c; bk x, ch 5 301b-302a; ch 8 303a-d; ch
12-20  306d311c; BK XI, CH 18 331d-332a; ch 24-28 335c-338d; bk xv, ch i
397b,d-398c;  ch  2122  415b-416c; bk xvi, ch 25 438a-b; bk XVII, ch 1-3
449a-451c;  bk  xviii,  ch  1-2  472b,d-473d;  bk  xxii, ch 30, 618c-d /
Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 2 624d-625a; bk II, CH 1-3 636b,d-637d esp
ch  i, 637a; bk iv, CH 21, 690d-691b 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  57,  A  4,  ANS  298a-299a;  q  104, a 4, ans and rep i 538a-c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 12, a 3, rep 2 778b-779a; qq 60-65
847a-884a,c esp q 60, A 2, ANS and rep i 848a-d, a 4, rep I 849c-850b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxiv
[1-21]
34d; XXXIII
[1-90] 49c-50c; purgatory,
ix
[13-69] 66a-c; xix [1-69] 81c-82a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk v, stanza 52-55 127a-b; stanza
177-185  143b-144b;  STANZA  207-217 147a-148b; stanza 245 152a / Nun' s
Priest'  s  Tale [14,898-15,162] 451a-455b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i,
53c-d;  80b-c;  81d-82b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi,
146a-147d;   148d-150d;   154a-156c;  159d'163c;  166a-169d;  175c-178a;
215C'218a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69b-d;  212a-c;  215a216b; 218a-c 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc ii
[17-40] 36c-d / 3rd Henry VI, act v, sc vi [4479] 103c-104a / Richard III, act
i, sc iv
[i83] 114d-115c / Romeo and Juliet, act
i, sc IV [49-103] 291a-c / Richard II, act ii, sc iv

[1016b]
^ 958 THE GREAT IDEAS 10
[7-24]
334c-d  /  Midsummer-Night's Dreamy ACT II, sc II [145-156] 360b-c / 1st
Henry IV ACT III, sc I
[1-63] 450a-d / 2nd Henry IV,
ACT I, sc I [60-103] 468d-469b / /w/Zwi Caesar, ACT I, sc III
[1-78] 572c-573b; act
ii, sc ii
[71-90] 578d-579a; act v, sc
i
[71-92] 592d593a
/ As You LiJ^ It, act ii, sc i
[3-20]
603c-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i
[64-125]
30b-31a / King Lear, act i, sc ii
[i 12-164]
249a-b / Macbeth, act v, sc i 306b-307a / Cymbeline, act v, sc iv
[30-151] 481c-482c;
sc V [426-465] 488b-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 200a-b 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 331b-332a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
ii,  381a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 54c-55a 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  i,  44a-c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 25, corol
365b;  PART  II,  DEF  I  373a  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [28-128]
176a178a; bk v
[3o8]-bk
viii
[653]
182a-246b esp BK VIII
[283-499]
238b-243a; bk xi
[i93]-BK
XII
[649] 303b-333a / Areopagitica,
389a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  173  203b-204a; 643-646 290b-291b esp 643
290b-291a;   652-657   292a293a;  670  295a-b;  675  296b-297a;  693-736
301b-317b;  803-856  328b-341b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, general
schol,   369a-371a  /  Optics,  bk  hi,  528b-529a  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge,  sect 44 420d-421a; sect 65-66 425d-426a; sect 108109 434a-b;
sect  146-154  442a-444b  passim,  esp SECT 148 442b-ci 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  162b-163a  40 GiBBOJ^: Decline and Fall, 294a-296b; 547a-b; 571a
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 398b-399b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  263d265c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [430-481]  12b-14a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  la-3a;  115b-117a; 120a-b; 135a-136a; 138b-145a;
204a-205a;  231a;  331a-332a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 198b-203a;
BK VI, 248d-250a; 259c-d; bk vii, 298d-299b; 300c-301b; 302c-d; bk viii,
340d-341a,c; bk IX, 377d-379a; bk x, 428a-429a; bk xi, 481b482a; bk xii,
546a-d;   561b-562a;   bk   xiv,  608a-b;  epilogue  i,  673d-674a,c  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 36bc; BK VI, 147c-148a; bk vii,
189a-191a,c  54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, llb-12d
passim  /  Hysteria,  57a-59d  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 137d-138d;
173a174d;   178a-205c   esp   178b-179c,  194b-d,  197b198d;  230b-231c;
252c-340a  esp 252c-253a, 264c-272c, 282a-285b, 332a-333b / Unconscious,
440c-442b / General Introduction, 467a-b; 489c-494d esp 492d-493c; 504d-

[1017a]
11  /o  12  Chapter 45: LANGUAGE 959 519d csp 505b-506c, 513d-518d / New
Introductory Lectures, 808d-810d; 812d-817a esp 813c-814a, 814d-816b 11.
Immediate  communication:  the  speech of angels and the gift of tongues
CUd  Testancent:  Numbers, 11:16-17,24-30 . New Testament: Mar^, 16:17 /
Acts,  2:1-21;  10:44-47;  19:5-6  /  /  Corinthians,  12-14  ^^P  ^4 17
PlotIxVus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch r8 151b-c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  xvi,  ch 6 426c427a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 106-107
545c-552b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, A 4, ANS 15a-d
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[1-21]
llOd; VII
[1-24]
115a-c; xi
[13-27]
122a-b; XV
[1-90] 128b-129b;
xxiii
[70-139]
142a-c;  XXVI [82-108] 146c-147a; xxix [1-12] 150b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 55a-b / Netv Atlantis, 203c 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  XXIII,  SECT 36 213c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 189b 53
James: P5>'<rAo/o^>', 846a-847b esp 846b-847b
[fn3]
54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 820c-829d esp 820d'821a, 822b-823d,
829a-c  12.  The  language  of  God or the gods: the deliverances of the
oracles;  the  inspiration,  revelation,  and  interpretation  of Sacred
Scripture  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1 / Exodus, 4:11-12; 24:12; 31:18;
32:15-16; 34:1 / Numbers, 12:68; 22:20-38 / Deuteronomy, 4:2; 8:3; 9:10;
18:18-22;   29:29;  30:11-14  /  Job,  38-42  /  Psalms,  12:6;  33:6,9;
119:105,130—  (D) Psalms, 11:7; 32:6,9; 118:105,130 / Proverbs, 30:5-6 /
Isaiah,  28:9-13;  34:16;  40:8;  51:15-16;  55:811; ^59:21— (D) Isaias,
28:9-13;  34:16; 40:8; 51:15-16; 55:8-11; 59:21 / Jeremiah, 1:7-9; 5:14;
13:1-11;  15:16;  18:1-6;  23:28-32; 24; 36:1-4— (Z)) Jeremias, 1:7-9; 5
-14'  i3'i-ii; 15:16; 18:1-6; 23:28-32; 24; 36:1-4 / Ezel^iel, 2:7-3:11—
(D)  Ezechiel,  2:7-3:11  /  Daiiiel,  2:20-22,28-29,47;  5:5-28 I Joel,
2:28-29  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 16:26— (D) OT, Bool{ of Wisdom,
16:26   /  EcclesiasticuSy  1:5;  39:16-17;  42:15,19;  43:26—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  1:5; 39:16-17; 42:15,19; 43:28 / I Maccabees, 12:9— (D)
OT,  I  Machabees,  12:9  New  Testament: Matthew, 4:4; 10:19-20; 11:25;
13:1-53;  15:10-20;  16:16-17;  19:3-9; 21:3345; 22:29 / Marl{, 2:23-28;
4:3-34;  10:2-9;  12:24;  14:49  /  Lul^e, 1:70; 2:25-26; 8:4-15; 10:21;
11:28;  20:37-38; 21:33; 24:27,32,4445 /John, 5:38-39,46-47; 10:1-14,35;
12:4750;  14:24;  16:25-29  / Acts, 2:17-18; 17:11 / Romans, 1:20; 10:8;
15:4; 16:25-27 / / Corinthians, 2:7-16; 14:26-39 / II CorinthianSy

[1017b]
3:2-7;  12:1-7  /  Galatians,  1:11-12  / Ephesians, 3:2-5 / // Timothy,
3:14-17  /  Hebrews,  1:1 -^5; 4:12 / / Peter, 1:10-13,23-25; 2:5-8 / //
Peter, 1:19-21; 3:5,15-16 / I John, 2:20,27 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[59-67] 3d; bk
ii
[1-34]
lOa-b / Odyssey, bk xiv
[321-336]
263b-c;  BK  XIX  [291-307]  292b  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes
[742-777] 35b-c / Prometheus Bound
[640-682]
46d47b / Choephoroe [269-305] 72d-73a;
[10211076] 80a-d / Eumenides [1-33] 81a-b
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus
[386-419]
117d-118a  /  Trachiniae  [155-177]  171c;  [821-830]  177b 5 Euripides:
Iphigenia Among the Tauri [12341283] 422b-c / Iphigenia at Aulis
[872-883]
433a 5 Aristophanes: Knights [108-233] 471b-472d;
[941-1099]
481d-483d / Peace
[1017-1126]
537c-539a / Birds
[959-991]
554c-555a / Lysistrata
[762-780]
593a-b / Plutus
[1-78]
629a-630a  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 4d; lOa-c; llb-d; 14a-15c; 20a-b;
21b-22a;  38a-b;  39c-d;  bk  II, 60d-61b; 70d-71a; 77a-b; 80c; 81d-82b;
83b-c;  BK  III,  101d-102b;  103b-d;  bk  iv,  126d-127a; 153b-d; bk v,
160a-b;   175b-c;   178a-180a;   183d-184a;  bk  vi,  189a-b;  191d192b;
194d-195b;  197d-198a; 199d-201a; 201d202c; 211b-d; 212d-213a,c; bk vii,
234d;  239c-240d;  241c-242a;  246b-c;  248b-c;  250b;  255c-d; bk viii,
263b-c;  268b-d;  269c-270a;  273b-c; 276d-277a; 281a; 284d-285b; bk ix,
295d-296c;  302b-c; 308a-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 355bc;
378a-b;  380a-d;  bk ii, 392a-b; 401a-b; 415d-416c; bk hi, 442c-443a; bk
v,  489a-b 7 Plato: Ion 142a-148a,c esp 142d-145c / Apology, 201d-203a /
Timaeus, 467b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii
[108-136] 127a-b; bk
III
[84-191] 149b-152a; bk vi
[42-101] 212a213b; BK VII [81-106] 238a-239a
14  Plutarch:  Aristides,  268a-d / Cimon, 392b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii,  37a-b  / Histories, bk II, 235a-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi,
par  9  15a-b;  bk  VI, par 6-8 36c-37c; bk xi-xiii 89b-125a,c / City of
God, bk xi, ch 3 323d; bk xv, ch 26-27, 419d-421d; bk xvi, ch 2, 423c-d;
ch  6  426c-427a; bk xvii, ch 3 450c-451c; bk xviii, CH 23 483d-485a; ch
42-44  496d-498c; ch 46-47 500a-501b; bk xx 530a-560a,c esp ch 21, 549d,
CH  28-29  556c-557c  / Christian Doctrine 621a-698a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q i, AA 9-10 8d-10c; Q 3, a I, rep 1-5 14b-15b; Q 34
185a-189a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 101-103 265d-304a;
part ii-ii, q i 380a390d; part hi, qq 60-65 847a-884a,c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [22-48]  llOd-llla;  XIX  [40-66]  135c-d;  xxiv
[52-114]

[1018a]
(12.  The  language of God or the gods: the deliverances of the oracles;
the  inspiration,  revelation,  and interpretation of Sacred Scripture.^
143b-d; xxv
[67-102]
145a-b; xxvi
[1-69]
145d-146c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  70c-71a; 81d-82a; PART II,
160b-c;  PART III, 165a-167b; 171a172a; 176d-177b; 181a-186c; 215b-216b;
241a-242a;  246c;  part  iv,  247a-258b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 284d 27
Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv [91122] 482a-b; sc v [426-485]
488b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 97c100b / New Atlantis,
202d-203c  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 123d124a; 227a-228a 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [544-576]  187a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  78b-80b; 163aCKOSS-KEFEKENCES Sign and Symbol 5e; Theology 4b.
I.  Dante.  De  Vulgari  Eloquentia  .  Convivio  {The  Banquet),  first
treatise, CH 5-7, 9-13

[1018b]
960 THE GREAT IDEAS 12 164b / Pensees, 570-588 273b-277b passim; 642-736
290b-317b;  775 323b-324a; 803-856 328b-341b 35 Locke: Toleration, 5a-b;
21c-22d  /  Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch ix, sect 9 286d287b; SECT 23
291b-c;  ch  x,  sect  12  294b-c  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 44
420d-421a;  sect 65-66 425d-426a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, 401c-402a
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 186d-188a passim 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  230c-232c  43  Federalist:  number  37,  120a-b 43 Mill: Liberty,
290a-291d passim / Utilitarianism, 455b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  hi,  308c309d  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1220-1237]  30a-b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dicl^, 30a-36b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c  For:  The  other major discussion of language in terms of the
variety  of  signs  and the modes of signification, see Sign and Symbol.
Other  considerations  of language as an instrument of thought, see Idea
4a;  Judgment 5a; Logic 3a; Mathematics 3d; Rhetoric ib, 2c-2d; Sign and
Symbol  id,  4b, 4e. The distinction of the natural and the conventional
as applied to language, see Custom and Convention i; Sign and Symbol ib,
id, if. The general discussion of the liberal arts of grammar, rhetoric,
and  logic,  see  Art 6b; and for the relation of grammar to these other
arts,   see   Logic  3a;  Rhetoric  ib,  3c.  Another  analysis  of  the
imperfections  of  language, and for the remedies proposed by semantics,
see  Sign  and Symbol 3a, 4c. The language of poetry, see Poetry 8b. The
language  of  symptoms  in medicine, of dreams in psychoanalysis, and of
omens  and  portents in prophecy and divination, see Medicine 3c; Memory
and  Imagination  8d-8e;  Prophecy 3b-3c; Sign and Symbol 4e, 5b, 6a-6c.
The  language  of  God  or  the  gods  in  Sacred  Scripture or oracular
utterances, and for the problem of interpreting the divine word, see God
6c(i);  Prophecy 3a-3d; Religion ib(i); ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below
are  works not included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World, but relevant
to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the
last  chapter  of  The Great Ideas. HoBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural
and   Politic^   part  i,  ch  13  Milton.  Grammar  Spinoza.  Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus {TheologicalPolitical Treatise), ch 7-13

[1019a]
Locke.  Conduct  of  the Understanding Rousseau. Essai stir Voriginc des
langues A. Smith, y^ Dissertation on the Origin of Languages J. S. Mill.
A System of Logic, bk i; bk iv, ch 3-6 II. Epicurus. letter to Herodotus
QuixNTiLiAN.  Institutio  Oratoria {Institutes ofOratory), BK I-III John
of Salisbury. Metalogicon, bk i Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed,
part  i;  PART II, CH 30; PART III, CH I-7 R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part hi
SuAREZ.  Disputationes  Mctaphysicae,  xxx  (13),  XLi (3) John of Saint
Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Thotnisticus, Ars Logica, part i, qq 1-3
Arnauld  and  Lancelot.  A  General  and Rational Grammar Containing the
Principles  of  the  Art  of  Speaf{ing  Arnauld.  Logic  or  the Art of
Thinl^ing,  part  i,  ch  15;  part  II,  CH  1-2  Leibnitz.  New Essays
Concerning   Human  Understanding,  BK  III  J.  Harris.  Hermes,  or  A
Philosophical    Inquiry   Concerning   Universal   Grammar   Burke.   A
Philosophical  Enquiry  into  the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and
Beautiful,  part  v Voltaire. "Languages," in A Philosophical Dictionary
CoNDiLLAC.  La  langue des calculs . Logique, part ii Blair. Lectures on
RJietoric  and  Belles Lettres, xi-xiv Tooke. The Diversions ofPurley D.
Stewart.  Elements  ofthe  Philosophy  oftheHuman Mind, PART II, CH I A.
Johnson.  A  Treatise  on Language J. Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of
the  Human  Mind,  CH  4  Emerson.  Nature  Grimm. Uber den Ursprung der
Sprache  Trench. On the Study of Words CoMTE. System of Positive Polity,
vol  11,  Social  Statics,  CH  4 Boole. An Investigation of the Laws of
Thought  LoTZE.  Microcosmos,  bk  v, ch 3 Renan. De Vorigine du langage
MuLLER.  The  Languages of the Seat of War in the East. With a Survey of
the   Three  Families  of  Language,  Semitic,  Arian,  and  Turanian  .
Comparative Mythology . The Science of Language

[1019b]
Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 96 Schleicher. Darwinism Tested by the Science of
Language  Farrar.  Chapters  on  Language  Weixjwood.  On  the Origin of
Language  E.  Hartmann.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious, Whitney.
Oriental and Linguistic Studies Jevons. On the Mechanical Performance of
Logical  Inference  .  The  Principles  of  Science, ch 6 (17-18) Sayce.
Introduction   to  the  Science  of  Language  Venn.  Symbolic  Logic  .
Principles   of  Etnpirical  or  Inductive  Logic,  CH  6,  22  Bradley.
Appearance and Reality, bk i, ch 2 Breal. Semantics A. Sidgwick. The Use
of Words in Reasoning Croce. Aesthetic as Science of Expression CouTURAT
and  Leau.  Histoire  de la langue universelle DiLTHEY. Das Erlebnis und
die  Dichtung  Whitehead and Russell. Principia Mathematica, INTRO Shaw.
Pygmalion  Pareto.  The  Mind and Society, vol i, ch 1-2 Sapir. Language
Vendryes.  Language  Ogden  and  Richards. The Meaning of Meaning, CH I,
9-10  H.  Delacroix.  L^  langage et la pensee Jespersen. Language . The
Philosophy  of Grammar Cassirer. Philosophic der symbolischenFormen, vol
i,  Die  Sprache  . Language and Myth Dewey. Experience and Nature, ch 5
Head. Aphasia and Kindred Disorders of Speech Whitehead. An Introduction
to  Mathematics,  ch  5  . Process and Reality, part i, ch i (5) BuHLER.
Sprachtheorie  R.  A. Wilson. The Miraculous Birth of Language Richards.
Interpretation  in  Teaching  Joyce. Finnegans Wal^e Urban. Language and
Reality  Ayer.  Thinl^ing  and  Meaning  Carnap.  The  Logical Syntax of
Language . Introduction to Semantics . Meaning and Necessity B. Russell.
An  Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, CH 1-6, 13-15, 25 . Human Knowledge,
Its Scope and Limits,

[1020a]
INTRODUCTION THE notion of law is associated with a diversity of subject
matters,  and  its  meaning  undergoes many variations as the discussion
shifts  from  one  context  to  another.  The  most  radical  difference
separates  the way in which natural scientists use the term law from the
way  in  which  it  is  used  in  the arts and in morals or politics. We
ordinarily  think  of  law  as  a  rule—a command or a prohibition—which
should  be  obeyed  and  can be disobeyed. Both alternatives are usually
present.  Though  the  duty  or obligation which a law creates is one of
obedience, there would be no moral significance to discharging this duty
if  the  law  could  not  be  violated. But the laws of nature which the
scientist  tries  to  discover do not have this characteristic. They are
inviolable.  The  so-called law of gravitation, for example, or Newton's
three laws of motion, cannot be disobeyed. Scientists may disagree about
the truth of any formulation of a natural law, but if the formulation is
valid,  then  the general rule of behavior is supposed to obtain without
exception;  and  if  exceptions  are  found, they are not interpreted as
instances of disobedience, but rather as cases to which the law does not
apply.  The  rules  of  an  art  may  be violated, either unwittingly or
intentionally.  For  example,  grammatical  errors  can be made by those
ignorant  of  the  rules or by those who wish to disregard them. The so-
called  "law  of contradiction" in the art of logic seems to be like the
rules  of  grammar  or  of  any  other  art.  Men  certainly  contradict
themselves  in  spite  of  the rule which places the penalty of error on
those  who  make  contradictory  statements.  But  according  to another
conception  of the law of contradiction, which belongs to the science of
metaphysics rather than to the art of logic, nothing can both be and not
be at the

[1020b]
Chapter  46:  LAW same time in the same respect. This law of being, like
the  laws  of  motion,  is  regarded as inviolable by those who think it
true.  In this it has the aspect of a scientific or natural law. The law
of  contradiction,  conceived as a rule of logic, may also be natural in
the sense of not being man-made. In the opinion of certain philosophers,
man  does  not  invent either the metaphysical rule which all existences
must  observe  or  the  logical  rule which the human mind should always
obey.  He  discovers both. There still remains that other class of rules
to  which  the  word  "law" is most commonly applied. These are rules of
moral action or social conduct which, like rules of art, are essentially
violable.  "Laws,  in  their  most  general  signification," Montesquieu
writes,  "are the necessary relations arising from the nature of things.
In  this  sense  all beings have their laws." But he points out that law
operates differently in the realm of physical nature and in the realm of
intelligent  beings  like man. The latter, he says, "does not conform to
[its laws] so exactly as the physical world. This is because, on the one
hand,  particular  intelligent  beings  are  of  a  finite  nature,  and
consequently  liable  to  error; and on the other, their nature requires
them to be free agents." Hence, even the laws "of their own instituting,
they  frequently  infringe." The profound division between laws ofnature
and  laws  of  human  conduct  thus seems to involve two points: (i) the
former  may  apply to all things, the latter are addressed to man alone;
(2) the former, being inviolable, state the necessities of behavior, the
latter,  precisely  because they are violable, imply freedom in those to
whom  they  are  addressed.  These  two  kinds  of law have this much in
common.  Both  the  laws  of  nature discovered by the scientist and the
rules  of  conduct  instituted by the legislator are general rather than
particu962

[1021a]
lar.  Their generality has been made, in the tradition of jurisprudence,
the  basis for differentiating rules of law from particular decisions or
decrees.  On theological grounds, however, the I two kinds of law can be
said  to  have  a  more  significant  characteristic  in common. Aquinas
conceives  the  laws  of  nature  which  the scientist discovers as laws
implanted  in  the  very  nature of things at their creation by God. The
laws  which  God implants in human nature do not differ in their eternal
origin  in  the  divine intellect and will, or in their manifestation of
the  divine government of the world. They differ only in that it is part
of  man's nature to be free and therefore able to disobey even the rules
of  his  own  nature. Thus both sorts of law are directions of behavior.
Only if the laws which science discovers are not attributed to God, will
they  seem  to  be  merely descriptive rather than prescriptive. In this
chapter we shall be primarily concerned wdth law as a direction of human
conduct  or, as Kant would say, law in the sphere of freedom. But within
the  one  meaning of law I w hich concerns us here, there are still many
important  distinctions  of  type.  The  division of law into divine and
human, natural and positive, private and public, moral and political— to
name  only some of the traditional distinctions —determines the outlines
of  the diverse philosophies of law which the great books contain, and I
underlies  the great issues concerning the origin, j the properties, and
the  authority of law. I Different writers use different criteria to set
,  up  their  classification  of the kinds of law. It is '; nevertheless
possible   to   perceive   certain   paral-   •  lels  in  analysis  and
classification. The opposite ' of natural law is sometimes called "human
law,"  i  "positive  law,"  or  "written  law," sometimes "civil law" or
"municipal  law."  Sometimes, as with Kant, for whom the analysis of law
derives  from  an  analysis  of  rights, the differentiation be- ' tween
natural  and  positive  right  is  also expressed in terms of innate and
acquired right, public and private right. Thus, for Kant, "natural right
rests  upon  pure  rational  principles a priori', positive or statutory
right is what proceeds from the will of a legislator. . . . Innate right
is that right which belongs to everyone by nature, independent of

[1021b]
Chapter  46: LAW 963 all juridical acts of experience. Acquired right is
that  right  which is founded upon such juridical acts." From natural or
innate  right  develops  "the  system  of  those  laws  which require no
external  promulgation"  and  which  therefore  belong  to the sphere of
private  right.  Positive or civil rights are the acquired rights of men
living in a state of civil society under "the system of those laws which
require public promulgation" and which therefore belong to the sphere of
public  right.  The  source  of  differentiation  here  seems threefold:
whether  the  right  is  inherent  in  human nature or acquired from the
state;  whether  men  are  viewed  as  living in a state of nature or as
living  in  a  civil  society;  whether the laws do or do not need to be
publicly proThe distinction between the state of nature and the state of
civil  society  is used by many other writers in differentiating between
natural  and  positive  (or civil) law, e.g., by Hobbes, Spinoza, Locke,
Montesquieu,  Rousseau.  They  also recognize that the law which governs
men  Hving  in  a  state  of  nature  is  natural  in the sense of being
instinctive,  or  a  rule  of  conduct  which  man's  reason is innately
competent  to  prescribe; whereas the civil law originates with specific
acts  of legislation by a political power, vested in a sovereign person,
in  a  representative  assembly,  or  in  the  whole body of the people.
Dividing  all  laws  into  two  kinds—  "laws  of nature and laws of the
land"—Hegel  holds that "the laws of nature are simply what they are and
are  valid  as  they  are."  In  contrast,  positive  law is "valid in a
particular  state, and this legal authority is the guiding principle for
the  knowledge  of right in this positive form, i.e., for the science of
positive law." Our manner of knowing their content further distinguishes
between  these  two  kinds  of  law.  "To know the law of nature," Hegel
explains,  "we  must learn to know nature, since its laws are rigid, and
it  is  only  our ideas about them that can be false. . . . Knowledge of
the  laws  of  the  land  is in one way similar, but in another way not.
These  laws  too  we  learn  to  know  just  as they exist . . . But the
difference  in  the  case  of  laws  of the land is that they arouse the
spirit of reflection, and their diversity at once draws attention to the
fact that they are not abso-

[1022a]
964  THE  GREAT IDEAS This leads us to the heart of the distinction. The
law  of  the  land,  or  civil  law,  is  "something  posited, something
originated  by  men."  It  is  positive law in the sense that it must be
posited  (i.e.,  officially instituted) in order to exist. The civil law
is  not  something discovered by examining man's nature. It is made, and
must  be  externally promulgated so that those who are subject to it can
learn  its provisions. Anyone who will inquire can learn the natural law
for  himself;  or  he  can  be  helped  to  discover it by a teacher who
instructs  him  in this matter as he would instruct him in geometry, not
as a lawyer informs clients concerning the prevailing laws of the state.
Aquinas  both subtracts from and adds to this analysis of the difference
between natural and positive law. On the one hand, he does not appeal to
the  condition  of  man  in  a  state of nature as contrasted with civil
society.  On  the  other hand, he finds the chief difference between the
natural  and  the  positive law in their originating sources. The one is
made  by  God,  the other by man. "The natural law," Aquinas writes, "is
nothing  else  than the rational creature's participation in the eternal
law."  It  is  God's eternal law with respect to man as that is received
and  exists  in human nature. It exists in man as the first principle of
his  practical  reason  and  includes  all  the  precepts  which  can be
discovered  by reasoning therefrom. Hence, for Aquinas as for Locke, the
law of nature is not only the law of reason but the law of nature's God.
But  Aquinas  distinguishes  between the law of nature generally, or the
eternal law, and the natural law in man. The latter is a moral law, both
in the sense that it is a law governing free acts, and also in the sense
that  it  directs  man with regard to good and evil in the sphere of his
private  hfe,  not  merely  with  regard  to  the political common good.
Natural  and  positive  law  are aUke in the very respects in which they
differ. Both share in the nature of law which, according to Aquinas, "is
nothing  else  than  an ordinance of reason for the common good, made by
him  who  has care of the community, and promulgated." Each has a maker,
God  or  man; each proceeds in a certain way from the reason and will of
its maker; each must be promulgated, though not in the same

[1022b]
manner;  and each is concerned with a common good—human happiness or the
welfare  of the state. The further additions which Aquinas makes consist
of  distinctions  with  respect to divine and human law. With respect to
the divine law he distinguishes between God's eternal ordinances and His
positive  commandments.  The  eternal part of the divine law, as we have
seen,  is  that  which,  at the moment of creation, "God imprints on the
whole  of  nature" to instill in each created species "the principles of
its  proper  actions."  "If  man were ordained to no other end than that
which is proportionate to his natural faculties," Aquinas writes, "there
would be no need for man to have any further direction . . . besides the
natural  law  and  the  human law which is derived from it." But "man is
ordained  to  the  end  of  eternal happiness"; and since salvation is a
supernatural  end  which  exceeds ^ man's power to achieve without God's
help, "it was necessary that . . . man should be directed to this end by
a  law  given  by  God."  God  gave  such  a body of lav/ to man, not at
creation,  but  at a certain moment in history. He did not implant it in
his  nature  but  promulgated  it, in the manner appropriate to positive
law,  through  verbal  declaration— through His revealed word in the Old
and  the New Testaments, e.g., the Ten Commandments and the two precepts
of  charity.  The  human law Aquinas divides "into the law ofnations [or
the  ins  gentium]  and  civil  law.''  The  civil  law is that which is
instituted  by  a community for its own members. With regard to the ills
gentium  Aquinas follows the tradition of the Roman jurists. What he has
in  mind in using this term should, therefore, not be confused with what
later  writers,  such  as  Grotius,  treat  as  the  ius inter gentes or
international  law.  Yet  applicable  to  both  the  law  of nations and
international law is the question whether such law belongs more properly
to the sphere of natural or to the sphere of positive law. International
law  concerns  the  relations  between autonomous states which, as Hegel
points out, are "in a state of nature in relation to one another," since
"the  sovereignty  of  a  state  is  the  principle  of its relations to
others."  Laws  cannot  be appfied to sovereign states with the coercive
force of positive law. "It follows," says

[1023a]
I  legel,  "that if states disagree and their particular wills cannot be
harmonized,  the  matter can only be settled by war." His statement that
international  law  "does not go beyond an oughtto-be" separates it from
positive  law. On similar grounds Aquinas separates the ius gentium from
positive  law. He recognizes, as will presently appear, that it does not
result from legislative enactment. Furthermore, he points out that it is
discovered  by  reason  and  derives  its rules by way of deduction from
natural   law.   The  law  of  nations  is,  therefore,  not  positively
instituted.  That  the  law  of  nations lacks some of the properties of
civil law does not make it, for Aquinas, less essentially a body of law;
but  for Hegel it falls short of the essence of law, which consists in a
determinate and universal rule of right posited by a sovereign will. The
great  legal positivists of the 19th century, such as Austin, go further
and  deny that anything is truly law except the positive enactments of a
government  which  has the power to enforce its ordinances. The law^s of
nature  are laws only in a metaphorical sense. The Greeks also appear to
regard  law  as  primarily  a creation of the state. Aristotle conceives
political  justice  as  "part  natural,  part legal— natural, that which
everywhere  has  the  same force and does not exist by people's thinking
this  or  that; legal, that which is originally indifferent, but when it
has been laid down is not indifferent." This tends to identify the legal
aspect  of  justice with the conventional. The threefold division of law
into  civil  law, law of nations, and natural law is not Greek but Roman
in  origin.  Yet  the  Greeks  do  not  hold  that  all  law is of human
institution  or  merely  a  matter  of local convention. The fundamental
opposition  between  the  divine  law  and the man-made law of the state
occurs  frequently  in the Greek tragedies, and with particular force in
the Antigone of Sophocles. In burying her brother, Antigone violates the
king's  edict,  but, in her view% not to have done so would have been to
violate  the  *  'unwritten statutes of heaven" which, she declares, are
"not  of  today  or  yesterday, but from all time, and no man knows when
they  were  first  put forth. Not through dread of any human pride," she
says, "could I answer to the gods for breaking these.''

[1023b]
Chaptkr 46: LAW 965 Aristotle cites this passage from Sophocles when, in
his  Rhetoric,  he  advises  the  forensic  orator (or trial lawyer) "to
appeal  to  the  universal  law,  and  insist  on its greater equity and
justice,"  //""the  written  law  tells  against  our  case." Under such
circumstances,  he  thinks  it  is  wise to "urge that the principles of
equity are permanent and changeless, and that the universal law does not
change  either,  for it is the law of nature, whereas written laws often
do change." Under the opposite circumstances, that is, when "the written
law  supports  our  case," he prescribes an opposite course— to cite the
laws of the state and to urge that they be upheld. Though Aristotle here
speaks  of  "the  law  of  '  he  seems to have in mind the notion of "a
universal  law," or a body of law that is common to all peoples. For the
most part, he speaks of natural justice rather than natural law. Whether
or  not the two notions are equivalent, his principle of natural justice
stands  in  the  same  relation  to  political  enactments as, for later
writers,  the natural law stands to the positive law. Plato's conception
of  law  as  "a  disposition of reason" which orders things according to
their  natures, even more explicitly recognizes that law neither depends
upon  nor  derives its authority from the power of the state. The phrase
"natural  law"  may be infrequent in the Greek books, but its meaning is
not  unrepresented  in  Greek  thought.  Other  distinctions in kinds of
law—written  and  unwritten, statutory and customary, constitutional law
and  the various particular bodies of law, such as the law of contracts,
of  crimes,  or  of torts—are for the most part subdivisions of positive
law.  The  one exception, perhaps, is the unwritten law, which, when not
identified  with customary law, stands for the natural law or the law of
reason.  With  respect to these parts of law, the chief problems concern
constitutions  and customs. The difference between a constitution as law
and  all other laws obtaining in a state is considered in the chapter on
Constitution;  and  the legal force of custom, both in itselfand also in
relation  to  legislative  enactments,  is  discussed  in the chapter on
Custom. Here our major concern is with positive law as a whole, with its
properties  and defects, but above all with its relation to natural law.
Some

[1024a]
966  THE  GREAT  IDEAS of the properties of positive law are agreed upon
even  by  those  who sharply disagree concerning its relation to natural
law.  It  is  generally agreed, for example, that a rule of positive law
cannot be made by any man, but only by him who exercises the legislative
authority and has the power to enforce the rule. Agreement also prevails
concerning  the  mutability  of positive law, though not all would go as
far  as  Montaigne  in  holding  that  "there is nothing more subject to
perpetual  agitation than the laws." Yet it is generally recognized that
the  content  of  positive  law  continually  undergoes  change with the
nullification  or  amendment  of old rules and the addition of new ones,
and  that  positive  regulations  on any particular matter may vary from
state   to   state.   No   less  common  is  the  understanding  of  the
indispensability  of  courts and judges. "Laws are a dead letter without
courts to expound and define their true meaning and operation," Hamilton
writes. Though rules of law, in distinction from decrees, are formulated
to  cover  an  indefinite  number of like cases, the cases to which they
must be applied by the judicial process are far from uniform. Courts and
judges  have  the  task  of deciding whether the facts of the particular
case  bring  that case under the specific provisions of the law. This is
the  field  of judicial discretion and the battleground of litigants and
lawyers. The propensities of men of law, on the bench and at the bar, to
protract  and  complicate  the  procedures  of  a trial, to multiply and
divide the issues, to separate themselves from laymen by a heavy curtain
of  language, have been satirically noted in the great diatribes against
the legal profession, from Aristophanes to Chaucer, Rabelais, Montaigne,
and  Swift. Rabelais, for example, has Pantagruel undertake to arbitrate
in the litigation between "Lord Kissbreech, plaintiff of one side, and .
. . Lord Suckfist, defendant of the other, whose controversy was so high
and  difficult in law that the court of parliament could make nothing of
it."  Pantagruel  conducts the proceedings in an unusual style. When the
counsellors  and  attorneys  "delivered  into his hands the bags wherein
were  the  writs  and  pancarts concerning that suit, which for bulk and
weight were almost enough to load four great couillard

[1024b]
or  stoned  asses, Pantagruel said unto them, Are the two lords, between
whom  this  debate and process is, yet living?" Upon being told they are
alive,  "to  what a devil, then, said he, serve so many paltry heaps and
bundles of papers and copies which you give me? Is it not better to hear
their  controversy  from  their own mouths, whilst they are face to face
before  us,  than  to  read  these vile fopperies, which are nothing but
trumperies,  deceits, diabolical cozenages of Cepola, pernicious slights
and  subversions  of equity." Furthermore, Pantagruel continues, "seeing
the  laws  are  excerpted  out  of  the  middle  of  moral  and  natural
philosophy,  how should these fools have understood it, that have, by G—
, studied less in philosophy than my mule? In respect of human learning,
and  the knowledge of antiquities and history, they are truly laden with
these faculties as a toad is with feathers. And yet of all this the laws
are so full, that without it they cannot be understood. . . . Therefore,
if  you  will that I make any meddling in this process, first, cause all
these  papers  to  be  burned;  secondly,  make  the  two gentlemen come
personally  before  me, and, afterwards, when I shall have heard them, I
will   tell   you   my   opinion  freely,  without  any  feignedness  or
dissimulation  whatsoever." The trial which Pantagruel then conducts, in
which the two lords are forced to plead without benefit of counsel, is a
choice  and  proper piece of litigation. The problems of casuistry, with
which  Pascal  deals at length in his Provincial Lettersy2iiG. sometimes
thought  of as peculiar to the canon law, but casuistry, in the sense of
distinguishing  cases  and  examining them in relation to general rules,
necessarily  occurs  in the judicial application of any body of law. The
most  difficult cases are those which may fall under the letter of a law
but  seem  to be inconsistent with its spirit. The reverse also happens;
cases  fall  outside  the  letter  of the law but the purpose of the law
seems  to  cover  them. All such cases indicate an unavoidable defect in
rules  of  law.  The  defect is unavoidable, Aristotle says. Law aims at
universality  "but  about  some  things  it  is  not  possible to make a
universal statement which shall be correct." To remedy this defect.

[1025a]
the  intention  of the lawmaker should be consulted. The particular case
should  be  treated as he would have treated it if he had had it in mind
when  he  framed the general rule. Such handhng of the difficult case is
what Aristotle means by the equitable— "a correction of the law where it
is  defective  owing to its universalThe law which equity is called upon
to  correct  may  be  a  just  rule, but that does not prevent its being
unjustly  applied.  Equity  prevents  the  injustice of misappUcation by
dispensing  justice  in the particular case according to the spirit, not
the  letter,  of  the law. It is a kind of justice, Aristotle says; "not
legal  justice  but  a correction of legal justice . . . not better than
absolute  justice  but  better  than  the  error  which  arises from the
absoluteness  of the rule." Those who share Aristotle's theory of equity
acknowledge   a  standard  of  justice  by  which  not  only  the  law's
application,  but  also the law itself, is to be measured. In his terms,
natural  justice provides this standard. The justice of laws made by the
state  is  not only relative to the constitution of the state, but since
the constitution itself can be more or less just, there is a standard of
justice  prior  to and independent of the state— in this sense, natural.
Essentially  the  same  point is made by those who, like Montesquieu and
Locke, appeal to the natural law, both as a measure of constitutions and
as  a  criterion for distinguishing good from bad law. "Before laws were
made," Montesquieu writes, "there were relations of possible justice. To
say  that  there  is  nothing  just  or  unjust but what is commanded or
forbidden  by  positive  laws,  is  the  same  as saying that before the
describing of a circle all the radii were not equal." The law of nature,
according  to Locke, does not apply only to the conduct of men living in
a  state  of  nature.  The law of nature which Locke describes as a rule
"ofcommon  reason  and  equity  which is that measure God has set to the
actions  of  men  for  their mutual security," is not abolished when men
enter  into  civil  society. "The obligations of the law of nature cease
not  in  society,  but  only in many cases are drawn closer, and have by
human   laws   known   penalties  annexed  to  them,  to  enforce  their
observation. Thus the law of nature stands as an eternal rule

[1025b]
Chapter  46:  LAW  967  to  all men, legislators as well as others." The
rules  of positive law, writes Locke, must "be conformable to the law of
nature, i.e., to the will of God, of which that is the declaration." The
municipal  laws  of  any particular state "are only so far right as they
are  founded on the law of nature, by which they are to be regulated and
interpreted."  The  position  of Locke and Aquinas makes natural law the
source as well as the standard of positive law. As a source, natural law
gives  rise  to  positive  law  in  a  way  which, for Aquinas at least,
differentiates it from the law of nations or the ius gentium. "Something
may  be derived from the natural law in two ways," he writes. "First, as
a conclusion from premises; secondly, by way of determination of certain
generalities. The first way," he explains, "is like to that by which, in
sciences,  demonstrated conclusions arc drawn from the principles; while
the  second  mode is likened to that whereby, in the arts, general forms
are  particularized as to details: thus the craftsman needs to determine
the  general  form of a house to some particular shape." Now "to the law
of nations belong those things which are derived from the law of nature,
as  conclusions  from premises, e.g., just buyings and sellings, and the
like,  without  which  men cannot live together, which is a point of the
law  of  nature, since man is by nature a social animal. . . . But those
things  which  are  derived  from the law of nature by way of particular
determination,  belong to the civil law, according as each state decides
on  what  is best for itself." Aquinas exemplifies the determinations of
positive  law  by  pointing  out that "the law of nature has it that the
evildoer  should  be  punished;  but  that he be punished in this way or
that,  is  a determination of the law of nature," which the positive law
must  institute. He might also have used as an example the fact that the
universal  prohibition  of killing is a conclusion from the principle of
natural  law  that ''one should do harm to no man,'' whereas the various
kinds  and  degrees  of  murder  are  differently  defined  in different
countries  according to the determination of the natural law made by the
positive law of homicide in each

[1026a]
968  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  The  rules  of positive law cannot be arrived at
deductively.  They  do  not follow necessarily from principles. They are
only determinations which particularize the precepts of natural law in a
manner  which fits the contingent circumstances of a particular society.
Whatever  is  made  determinate  by  positive law is something which the
natural law leaves indeterminate because no point of justice or right is
involved.  Other  determinations  could  have  been  made. An element of
choice  is involved in the making of positive laws. In addition to being
formulated  by  the  reason, they must be posited by the will of whoever
has  the  authority  to make laws. Rules of positive law are the work of
reason  to  the  extent  that  reason  is called upon to propose various
possible  determinations  of  the  natural  law,  e.g.^  one  or another
definition  of  murder in the first degree, one or another definition of
the  penalty  for  it.  Since  a definite rule of positive law cannot be
instituted  until  a  choice is made among the alternative possibiUties,
the  positive law cannot be solely the work of reason. Choice, according
to  Aquinas, is always an act of the will. Though he recognizes the role
of  choice,  and  hence  of  the will, in the enactment of positive law,
Aquinas  does  not  go  to the other extreme of making the will the sole
arbiter  of what is law. The legality of the state's ordinances does not
depend  entirely  on  their  being  posited  by  the will of a sovereign
authority. If a positive regulation is not derived from the natural law,
it  cannot  be a just rule. Quoting Augustine's remark that "a law which
is not just is a law in name only," Aquinas goes on to say: "Every human
law  has just so much of the nature of law as it is derived from the law
of  nature. But if in any point it departs from the law of nature, it is
no  longer  a  law  but  a perversion of law." An ordinance which had no
other foundation than the will of a sovereign prince or government might
have the coercive force of law, but it would lack the moral authority of
law.  It  would bind men, not through conscience, but only through their
fear  of  punishment for disobedience. "That force and tyranny may be an
element in law," writes Hegel, "is accidental to law, and has nothing to
do with its nature."

[1026b]
A  COMPLETELY  Opposite  view  is taken by those who deny natural law or
principles of innate right and natural justice. There is, in addition, a
theory  of  natural law which leads to an opposite view of the legal and
the  just,  though  the  opposition  in  this  case is qualified to some
extent.  According  to  Hobbes, "civil and natural law are not different
kinds, but different parts of law." The law of nature and the civil law,
he  says, "contain each other and are of equal extent." But he also says
that  "the  laws  of nature ... are not properly laws, but quaUties that
dispose  men  to  peace  and  to  obedience."  Before the formation of a
commonwealth,  by  the  contract  or  covenant  whereby men transfer the
rights  and  liberties  which  they  possess  in  a state of nature, the
natural  law  directs men, first, to preserve their lives in the war "of
every  man against every man"; and second, to seek the security of peace
by leaving the natural state of war to join with their fellow men in the
order  of  a  civil  society. The nineteen precepts of natural law which
Hobbes  enumerates  seem  to  set  forth  reason's  recognition  of  the
advantages  of  civil society over the state of nature and also reason's
understanding  of  the  conditions indispensable to a firm foundation of
the  commonwealth.  These  rules  of  reason  "are  the  laws of nature,
dictating  peace,  for a means of the conservation of men in multitudes,
and  which  only  concern  the doctrine of civil society." But until the
commonwealth  exists,  the  laws  of nature bind in conscience only, and
they  are  therefore  not  effective  in  achieving  their end, which is
security.  "When  a commonwealth is settled, then they are actually laws
and  not  before;  as  being  then the commands of the commonwealth, and
therefore  also  civil laws. For it is the sovereign power which obfiges
men  to  obey  them." The distinction between natural and civil law then
becomes  a distinction between unwritten and written rules; but the test
ofwhether  any rule is actually a law is the same, namely, whether it is
adopted and enforced by the sovereign. "All laws, written and unwritten,
have  their  authority  and  force  from  the will of the commonwealth,"
Hobbes  writes.  The difference between the Hobbesian theory and that of
Locke or Aquinas reveals itself in its^

[1027a]
consequences.  Under  what circumstances can a subject or citizen refuse
obedience  to  the laws of the state? On the ground that they are unjust
or  tyrannical?  By  the criterion that they violate precepts of natural
law  or  the  positive  commandments  of God? Is the individual bound in
conscience to obey every command of the civil law, because the civil law
includes  the natural law, interprets it, and gives it the authority and
force  of  law; and because the natural law itself commands obedience to
the  civil  law  once  a  commonwealth  has been instituted ? Or, on the
contrary,  is an individual in conscience free to disobey those positive
enactments  which  lack  the  authority  of  law because they are not in
conformity  to  the  natural law or the divine law? To QUESTIONS OF THIS
sott,  and  to  the  whole  problem of the right of rebellion, different
answers  seem  to  be given in terms of different views of the nature of
law,  the  sources  of  its authority, and its sanctions. At one extreme
there  is  the  doctrine  that  rebellion  is  never justified, that the
security  of  peace, which the maintenance of law and order provides, is
always  better  than  the  anarchy  and war which result from rebellion.
Hobbes,  for  example,  holds that "nothing the sovereign representative
can  do  to  a  subject, on what pretence soever, can properly be called
injustice, or injury." The rebel would, therefore, always be a criminal,
a  man  who takes the law into his own hands, and uses force to gain his
ends.  A  man may be justified in using force, according to Hobbes, only
to  repel  force used against him, and then only in defense of his life.
So much the law of nature permits or requires. But it does not permit or
require  him to decide which laws enacted by his sovereign he shall obey
or  disobey.  At  the  other  extreme  there  is  the  doctrine of civil
disobedience  as  expounded  by  Thoreau  and, of course, Gandhi. Unjust
laws,  or  laws  which violate a man's conscience, may have the force of
the  state behind them. But they exert • no authority over him. The just
man  is  called  upon  to  break  them  and  to  submit  gladly  to  the
consequences  of  breaking  them, by suffering whatever penalties may be
attached to their breach. It is not enough for the individual citi-

[1027b]
Chapter  46:  LAW  969  zen to satisfy his conscience by criticizing the
government  and joining with like-minded fellow citizens in an effort to
get  unjust  laws abolished or reformed. He is obliged in conscience not
to  await help from others or to be patient in the use of gradual means.
He  is  obliged  to act alone and at once— by disobeying the unjust Kant
seems to go this far when he interprets the precept "Do wrong to no one"
as  meaning  "Do  no wrong to anyone, even if thou shouldst be under the
necessity,  in  observing  this  duty, to cease from all connection with
others  and to avoid all society." But he qualifies this somewhat by the
precept:  "Enter, if wrong cannot be avoided, into a society with others
in which everyone may have secured to him what is his own." Another sort
of  qualification  limits  disobedience,  rebellion,  or  secession from
society—even  v/hen the individual conscience recoils from the injustice
or illegality of a civil ordinance. The principle, as stated by Aquinas,
seems  to  be  that the common good may, under certain circumstances, be
better  served by acquiescence than by disobedience. Unless what the law
commands  involves  a transgression of God's commandments, an unjust law
may  be  obeyed "in order to avoid scandal or disturbEven with regard to
reforming  law  by legal means Aquinas recommends that the disadvantages
resulting  from the change of law be weighed against the advantages. The
effectiveness  of  law depends upon the habits of obedience it forms and
upon  the  customary  behavior  it  establishes. "Consequently," Aquinas
says, "when a law is changed, the binding power of law is diminished, in
so  far as custom is abolished." This harm to the common welfare may, of
course,  be  compensated  either  by  "the  benefit conferred by the new
enactment"  or  by the fact that "the existing law is clearly unjust, or
its  observance  extremely harmful." Locke states the principle somewhat
differently. So long as due process of law is available to remedy unjust
ordinances   or  illegal  acts,  the  individual  is  not  justified  in
disobedience,  for such action would "unhinge and overturn all polities,
and,  instead  of  government  and  order, leave nothing but anarchy and
confusion." Nor

[1028a]
970  THE  GREAT  IDEAS I a. The end of law: peace, order, and the common
good ic. The authority and power needed for making law 3. The divine law
of  all  creatures  and the New Testament precepts of the Old Law 4. The
natural  law 4^. The law of men living in a state of nature freedom; the
objectification of the will

[1028b]
is  it  effective  for  the  individual to act alone in As the foregoing
discussion  indicates,  the  using force to resist tyranny or injustice.
But  if  basic  issues in the philosophy of law are inthese illegal acts
have extended to the majority separable from questions about justice and
of  the  people  "and they are persuaded in their liberty, the rights of
the  individual  and  the  consciences,  that  their laws, and with them
authority  of  the  state, the powers of governtheir estates, liberties,
and  lives  are in danger, ment, and the fundamental alternatives of and
perhaps,  their religion too, how they will be crime and punishment, war
and  peace.  These  hindered  from  resisting illegal force used against
matters are considered in the chapters approprithem, I cannot tell. This
is   an  inconvenience,  I  ate  to  the  terms  mentioned  above.  More
parconfess, that attends all governments." There is ticular consequences
of  the  theory  of  law, no alternative then but rebellion— "properly a
especially  natural  law, are found in such chapstate of war wherein the
appeal  lies  only to ters as Revolution, Slavery, and Tyranny, heaven."
Citizen,  Constitution,  and  Wealth,  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE  1. The
definition  of  law 972 lb. Law in relation to reason or will 97^ 2. The
major  kinds  of  law:  comparison  of  human,  natural, and divine law;
comparison  of  natural  and  positive, innate and acquired, private and
public,  abstract and civil rights 974 3^. The eternal law in the divine
government  of  the  universe: the law in the nature (2) The distinction
between the eternal law and the positive commandments of God 975 3^. The
divine  positive law: the difference between the law revealed in the Old
(i)  Law  in  the  Old  Testament:  the  moral,  the  judicial,  and the
ceremonial  (2)  Law  in  the  New Testament: the law of love and grace;
ceremonial  precepts  of  the  New  Law 976 4^. The law of reason or the
moral  law:  the  order  and  habit  of  its principles 4c. The a priori
principles  of  innate  or abstract right: universal law in the order of
4^.  The  natural law as underlying the precepts of virtue: its relation
to the moral precepts of divine law 977

[1029a]
4_/'.  The  relation of natural law to civil or municipal law: the state
of  nature and the 4^. The relation of natural law to the law of nations
and to international law: sov4^. The precepts of the natural law and the
condition of the state of nature with respect to slavery and property 5.
The  human  or  positive  law:  the  sanction  of coercive force 5^. The
difference  between  laws  and  decrees  5^.  The  kinds or divisions of
positive  law  979  5c.  The  justice  of positive law: the standards of
natural law and constitutionality 5^. The origins of positive law in the
legislative  process:  the function of the legislator 5^. The mutability
or  variability  of  positive law: the maintenance or change of laws 980
5/.  The  relation  of  positive  law  to  custom 5^. The application of
positive  law  to  cases: the casuistry of the judicial process; the 5^.
The  defect  of positive law: its need for correction or dispensation by
equity  982 6. Law and the individual 6a. Obedience to the authority and
force  of  law:  the sanctions of conscience and fear; the objective and
subjective  sanctions  of law; law, duty, and right 6b. The exemption of
the sovereign person from the coercive force of law 983 6c. The force of
tyrannical,  unjust, or bad laws: the right of rebellion or disobedience
6d.  The  educative  function of law in relation to virtue and vice: the
efficacy  of  law  as Hmited by virtue in the individual citizen 6e. The
breach  of  law:  crime  and punishment 984 (i) The nature and causes of
crime  (2)  The  prevention  of  crime  7. Law and the state 986 ya. The
distinction between government by men and government by laws: the nature
of  constitutional  or  political  law  yb.  The supremacy of law as the
principle of political freedom yc. The priority of natural to civil law:
the  inviolability  or  inaHenability  of natural rights yd. Tyranny and
treason  or sedition as illegal acts: the use of force without authoritv
987  ye.  The need for administrative discretion in matters undetermined
by  law:  the  royal  prerogative  7/.  The  juridical conception of the
person:  the  legal  personality  of the state and other corporations 8.
Historical  observations  on the development of law and on the diversity
of  legal  systems or institutions 9. The legal profession and the study
of law: praise and dispraise of lawyers and judges 988

[1029b]
Chapter 46: LAW 971 PAGE

[1030a]
972 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The definition
of  law  7  Plato:  Statesman,  599c-601b  /  Laws, bk i, 650a-b; bk iv,
681b-c; bk ix, 743a-b; 754a-b; 757a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^14-19]
377a; bk x, ch 9
[1180*14-24] 434d-435a /
Politics, BK III, CH 16
[1287*28-32]
485d;
[1287^3-5] 486a; bk
vii, ch 4
[1326*29-32]
530b-c  12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk xi, sect i 302a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 90 205a-208b esp a 4, ans 207d-208b 23HoBBEs:
Leviathan,   part  ii,  130b-c;  131a-c;  149c;  157b  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d37b;  CH  IX, sect 124 53d-54a; ch xi
55b-58b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk i, la-2b; 3c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 330b-d / Political Economy, 370b-d / Social Contract, bk ii,
399b-400c esp 399c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 110c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  266c-d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 367b-c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals  383a-394a,c esp 392b / Science of Right,
397a-399c 43 Federalist: number 33, 108d-109a; number 62, 191b

[1030b]
I  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g..
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  j\^^—  {D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 44
BoswEhL:  Joh7Json, 203d-204a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 4a-b;
INTRO,  par  3  10a-12c;  additions, i 115a-d la. The end of law: peace,
order,  and  the  common good 7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 301b-304a; bk ii,
311b-c;  BK  V,  363b-365d;  bk  ix,  425c-427b esp 426c-d / Theaetetus,
531a-b  /  Statesman,  599c-601b  /  Laws,  bk i-iii 640a-677a esp bk I,
643a-644a,  650a-b,  bk  iii, 669b-d, 676b-c; BK IV, 677d; 681b-682c; bk
vi,  706b-c;  bk  ix,  747d;  754a-b;  757a; bk xii, 795c-796b / Seventh
Letter, 804b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^14-19]
377a; ch 6
[1134*29-32] 382a
/ Politics, bk III, ch 16
[1287*18-^35]
485c-486c;  bk  vii, ch 4 [1326*29-32] 530b-c 14 Plutarch: Solon, 72b 18
Augustine:  City  ofGod,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b523a  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 2 206b-207a; a 3, ans and rep 3 207a-c; Q
91, A I, rep 3 208b-d; a 5, ans 211c-212c; A 6, rep 3 212c-213c; q 92, a
i,  ans  and  rep  1,3-4  213c-214c;  q 93, a i, rep i 215b,d-216c; A 4,
CONTRARY  218b-d;  Q 94, A 2, ANS 221d223a; a 3, rep i 223a-c; Q 95, a i
226c-227c; I i

[1031a]
Ibio  \d Chapter 46: LAW 973 A 3 228c-229b; a 4, ans 229b 230c; q 96, aa
23  231c 233a; a 4, ans 233a-d; a 6, ans 235a-d; q 97, a i, ans and ri-p
^  236a-d;  a  2, ANS and REF 2 236d 237b; a 4 238b 239b; q 98, A I, ANS
239b-240c;  g  99, a i, ans and REP 1-2 245c-246b; a 2, ans 246b 247a; a
3,  ans  247a-248a;  q 100, a 2, ans 252b-253a; A 8, ANS 259d-261a; a 9,
contrary  261b262b;  A  II, rep 3 263c-264d; q 105, a 2, ans and REP 1,4
309d-316a;  q 107, a i, ans 325c327b; A 2, ans 327b-329a 21 Dante: DUine
Comedy,  purgatory, xvi [85102I 77d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 11, 103a;
131b-c;  157b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 20c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Toleration, 8c;
lib;  15c;  16a-17b passim / Civil Govertiment, ch i, sect 3 25d; CH VI,
sect 57 36d-37b; ch ix 53c-54d; ch XI 55b-58b; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch
xix,  sect  219  75b-c  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 262a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk i, 2c-3d passim 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353d-355b
esp  354d355a;  359c-d  /  Political  Economy,  370b-d;  375b-c / Social
Contract,  bk ii, 399b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 617a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  114b-115a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 259c-261d esp
259c-d; 272a-b; 274a-277b / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 373d /
Science  of Right, 398c399c; 408c-409c; 412c-414a 44 hoswEi^i.: Johnson,
204b-c;  219d-220a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 299
99c-100b; additions, 135 138c / Philosophy of History, intro, 170c-171c;
part  11,  271d-272a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b-d
lb.  Law  in  relation  to  reason or will 7 Plato: Gorgias, 271c-272b /
Republic,  bk i, 301c-302c / Laws, bk i, 650a-b; bk hi, 669b670c; BK IV,
679c-680d;  681b-682c;  685d;  bk IX, 754a-b; bk xh, 792c-d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1180*14-24]
434d-435a  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  (1253*31-37]  446d; bk hi, ch 16
485b-486c  esp  [1287*1932]  485c-d;  bk vi, ch 3 521c-522a 12 AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk iv, sect 4 264a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
21, a 2, rep I 125c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A I
205b-206b; a 3 207a-c; q 95, a i 226c-227c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
86b-87a;  96b;  PART II, 127b; 131d-132b; 133a; 160b-c; part IV, 272c 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  h,  sect  6-8  26b27a; ch vi, sect 57-63
36d-38c;  ch  xi  55b58b  passim;  ch  xhi, XIX, sect 212 74a-b sect 151
59d-60a; ch

[1031b]
36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 266a b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, hk i,
Ja;  3c  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d 371a / Social Contract, hk
h,  395b d; 399b-400c; v.k hi, 419c-420a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of   Morals,  264b-d;  273d-274a  /  Practical  Reason,  309d  /  Intro.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 390b; 393a / Science of Right, 435a; 448b-d; 450a
b  /  Judgement, 596c-598b 43 Federalisi: number 78, 230d-232a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, intro, par 4 12d13a / Philosophy of History, intro,
170c-171c; part IV, 328a; 364d-365a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
427a-b  \c.  The  authority and power needed for making law 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1180*14-24]
434d-435a  /  Politics, bk hi, ch 16 485b-486c; bk VI, CH 3 521c-522a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp 34b-d, 47a-c / Numa Pompilius, 52b-c /
Solon  64b,  d77a,c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 3
207a-c;  q  92,  a  2,  rep  3  214d-215a,c;  q  95,  A  I  226c-227c 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xii, 18a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, lOOc-
lOla;  123a-b; 130b-132a; 137b-138b; 157b; 160c161a; part hi, 171a-172a;
201a-b; 231d-234d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 147a; part II, 362b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi, 61a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vii,  sect  87-88  44a-c; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi 55b-58b; ch xhi, sect 149
59b-d;  ch  xix, sect 212 74a-b / Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect
5-6  105a-c; sect 12-13 107b-108c; bk ii, ch xxviii, sect 5-12 229c-231c
passim,  esp  sect  6 229d 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369a / Social
Contract,  bk ii, 399d-400a; 4b0c-402a; bk hi, 420a-421c 42 Kant: Intro.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 393c / Science of Right, 398b-c; 399c; 405d-406c;
412c-414c;  435c-436c; 438b-c 43 Declaration of Independence: [43-47] 2a
43  Federalist:  number  33,  107b-108a; 108d109a; number 44, 145c-146d;
number  78, 230d-232a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 94 36b;
PART  HI,  par  212  70d-71a  / Philosophy of History, part i, 207b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, epilogue ii, 680d684a \d. The promulgation of
law:  the  need  and  the  manner  of  its  declaration  Old  Testament:
Deuteronomy, i.']\i~% / Joshua^ 8:3o-35-(^) hsue, 8:30-35 New Testament:
Romans^ 2:14-15

[1032a]
974  THE  GREAT IDEAS (1. The definition of law. Id. The promulgation of
law:  the need and the manner of its declaration.^ 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[450-460]  135a  5  Euripides : Iphigenia Among the Tauri 1499] 424a-d 7
Plato: Laws, bk iv, 684c-686b; bk ix, 746a; bk x, 760c-761b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[1113*3-13]
359a  /  Athenian  Constitution, ch 7, par i 555c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
38c  /  Numa  Pompilius,  60d-61c  /  Solon,  73d-74a  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 90, A 4 207d-208b; q 91, a i, rep 2 208b-d; q
93,  A 2 216c-217b; a 5, rep i 219a-d; q 106, a i 321a-322a 23 Ho-RB-Es:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  132b-133d;  137b138b;  143b-c;  157c-d;  160b  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  47c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95a 35
Locke:  Toleration,  14b  / Civil Government ch II, SECT 9 27a-b; ch vi,
sect  57-60 36d38a; ch ix, sect 124 53d-54a; ch xi, sect 136-137 56c-57b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Latvs,  bk  xxix,  266b-268c  38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  371a / Social Contract, bk ii, 401c-402a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  616d-617a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73a; 73d-74b
passim  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-b  44  B0SWEI.1.:  Johnson,
203d-204c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part iii, par 210211 69d-70c;
par 215 71c-d; par 217 72b-c; par 224 73d; additions, i 115a-d; 141 139c
2. The major kinds of law: comparison of human, natural, and divine law;
comparison  of  natural  and  positive, innate and acquired, private and
public, abstract and civil rights 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[441-525]
134d-135c;
[891-943] 138d-139a / Ajax [1047-1421] 152a155a,c
5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [513-565]  262d-263b  /  Bacchantes [878-911]
347b-c  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-683a  8  Aristotle:  Sophistical
Refutations, ch 12
[173-7-31] 238b-c
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  382c-383a  / Politics, bk I, CH 6
448c-449b / Rhetoric, bk I, CH 10 [1368^7-10] 611d; CH 13
[1373^1-17]
617c-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b; par 17 17d-18a /
City  of God, bk xix, ch 17 522b-523a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  63,  A  2,  ANS  64b-65a;  q  91  208b-213c;  q 97, a 3, REP I
237b-238b;  q  100,  a  i 251b-252a; a 2, ANS 252b-253a; q 107, a i, ans
325c-327b

[1032b]
, 2 to 3a{\) 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxx
[97123] 152d-153a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part I, 86c-d; part ii, 151a-c; part hi, 131a-c;
136d-137b;   138c;  245c-246a;  part  iv,  249a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
281a-283c;  519a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, lOOd 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch ii 25d-28c passim; ch IV, SECT 21 29d; ch vi, sect
56-59  36d-37d; ch ix 53c-54d passim / Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii,
sect  13 107d108c; BK II, CH xxviii, sect 6-13 229d-231c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-3a; BK XXIV, 202b-c; bk xxvi, 214b,d-215a;
218a;  221c-d  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk ii, 399b-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  72a  42  Kant:  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 392b /
Science of Right, 400b,d-403b; 429a-c; 434b436b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
467c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, intro, par 3, 10a516c-517a:
[14351
745c11b;  additions,  i  115a-d 3. The divine law ^a. The eternal law in
the  divine  government  of  the  universe: the law in the nature of all
creatures  Old  Testament:  Psalms, 119 esp 119:91— (Z)) Psalms, 118 esp
118:91  /  Proverbs,  8:15-30  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk v, ch ii
216c-d;  bk  XI, CH 22 333d-334c; bk xix, ch 11-14 516d-520d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 21, A I, REP 2 124b-125b; a 2 125c-d; part
i-ii,  Q  19,  A 4 705b-c; A 6, ans and rep 2 707a708a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, A I 208b-d; a 2, ans and rep 3 208d-209d; Q
93 215b,d-220d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d; xxx
[97-123]  152d-153a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 159d-160b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 71a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55a-b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 30-32 418c-419a passim 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-2b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 243 b-d 3tf(l)
The  natural moral law as the eternal law in human nature Old Testament:
Psalms, 37:30-31— (Z)) Psalms^ 36:30-31 New Testament: Romans, 2:11-16 5
Sophocles: Antigone [450-460] 135a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
9,  lOd;  bk  HI,  par  13-15 16c-17b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 19, A 4 705b-c

[1033a]
3a(2)  to  3^(1)  Chapter 46: LAW 975 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  y 91, A 2 208d-209d; q 93, a 2 216c 217b; a 6 219d220d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part i, 96b; part ii, 134c; 136d-137a; 160b-c; part hi, 171a
c;  216c-217a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of learning, lOOd 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch 11, SECT 5-6 lOSa-c passim; bk ii, ch xxviii,
SECT  7-8  229d-230a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk i, 2b-d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331d / Social Contract, bk iv, 437a ia{2) The
distinction between the eternal law and the positive commandments of God
New  Testament: Romans, 2:11-16 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  91,  A  4,  ANS  and  rep  i 210c-211c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
136d-138b;   160b-c;   PART  III,  171a-c;  199b;  216c-217a  30  Bacon:
Advancement  ofIj;arjiing,  71a-b; lOOd 3^. The divine positive law: the
difference between the law revealed in the Old and the New Testament Old
Testament:  Genesis,  9:8-17;  17:4-14;  26:25  /  Exodus,  19:3-6; 20 /
Deuteronomy,  5;  17:18-19;  27:1-8; 31:26 / Joshua, 8:30-35— (D) Josue,
8:30-35  /  Psalms,  i;  40:8;  78; 119 passim, esp 119:1-16, 119:33-40,
119:129-136  —  (D)  Psalms,  i;  39:9;  77;  118  passim, csp 118:1-16,
118:33-40, 118:129-136 / Proverbs, 3:1-2; 6:20-23 / Jeremiah, 31:33— (D)
Jerew/"^j, 31:33 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 2:16; 17:11; 19:1720; 32:15;
33:2-3;  39:1-11—  (Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:19; 17:9; 19:17-18; 32:19;
33:2-3; 38:39-39:15 New Testament: Matthew, 5:17-44 esp 5:1720; 22:36-40
/  Luke,  16:16-17  /  John,  1:17;  7:19-23  / Acts, 10:1-48; 13:38-39;
15:22-29;  21:19-28  esp  21:20-25  /  Romans  passim  /  / Corinthians,
9:19-21;  10:23-33 / Galatians passim, esp 2:1-5:12 / Ephesians, 2:14-15
/  Colossians,  2:13-23  / / Timothy, 1:5-11 / Hebrews esp 7-10 / James,
1:25;  2:8-12  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk x, ch 17 309c310b; ch 25
313c-314c; bk xviii, ch ii 477c-d; bk xx, ch 4 532b-c 20 Aquinas: Sufnma
Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, AA 4-5 210c-212c; qq 98-108 239b-337d; part
ii-ii,  Q  16  454c-456d;  q  22  480d-482c;  Q  44 592d-598c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  137b-138b: 160bc; part III, 171a-172a; 177c-180a;
199b-207b;  215b-219d: 240c-241a; part iv, 257c-258a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii  [101-314] 321b326a; [401-419] 328a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters, 79b / Pensees, 520 263b-264a; 522 264a; 620 285a-286a; 672 296a
35 Locke: Toleration, 14b-c

[1033b]
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  402a; bk IV, 435c 40 CJibbon:
Decline and Fall, 181 b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 252c 5b(l) Law in
the  Old Testament: the moral, the judicial, and the ceremonial precepts
of  the Old Law Old Testament: Genesis, 9:3-7; 17:9-14; 26:2-5 / Exodus,
12-13;  20-31;  34-35;  40  / Leviticus / Numbers passim, esp 15, 17-19,
27-30, 35-36 / Deuteronomy csp 4-27 / Joshua, 1:7-8; 8:3035; 22:1-6— {D)
Josue,  1:7-8; 8:30-35; 22:1-6 / / Samuel, 13:9-14— (D) / Kings, 13:9-14
/  // Kings, 21 :8— (D) IV Kings, 21 :8 / / Chrofiicles, 22:12-13— (D) I
Paralipomenon,  22:12-1:5  /  //  Chronicles,  34-35 esp 35:1-19— (D) //
Paralipomenon,  34-35  esp  35:1-19  / Ezra, 9-10 — (D) I Esdras, 9-10 /
Nehemiah,  i  :5-9;  9:1638-(D)  77 Esdras, 1:5-9; 9:16-38 / Psalms, 78;
89:30-32; 94:12; 105:43-45; 119 passim— (D) Psalms, 77; 88:31-33; 93:12;
104:43-45;  118  passim  /  Proverbs,  3:1-2;  4:1-2;  6:20-23 / Isaiah,
1:10-17;  5:24-25;  42:21-25;  51:7-8—  (D)  Isaias,  1:10-17;  5-24-25;
42:21-25;  51:7-8  /  Jeremiah,  6:19; 9:13-16; 16:10-13; 26:4-6; 31:33;
44:10-14,23—  (D)  Jeremias,  6:19;  9:1316;  16:10-13;  26:4-6;  31:33;
44:10-14,23 / Ezel{iel, 5:6-9: 11:18-20; 18; 22:26; 36:25-27; 43-48— (D)
Ezechiel, 5:6-9; 11:18-20; 18; 22:26; 36:25-27; 43-48 / Daniel, 9:1-15 /
Hosea, 4:6; 8:1 -(D) Osee, 4:6; 8:1 / Micah, 6:6-8— (D) Micheas, 6:6-8 /
Zephaniah,  3:17—  (D)  Sophonias,  3:1-7  /  Zechariah,  7:12-14  — (D)
Zacharias,  7:12-14  /  Malachi, 2:1-10; y.'j—{D) Malachias, 2:1-10; 3:7
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 2:16; 10:19; 11:15; 17:11; 19:17-20; 24:1-23
esp  24:23;  32:15; 33:2-3; 39:1-11; 45:5— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:19;
10:23;  11:15;  17:9'  19:17-18;  24:133  esp  24:32-33;  32:19; 33:2-3;
38:39-39:15;   45:5-6  /  7  Maccabees,  1:38-63;  2:19-68—  (D)  OT,  7
Machabees,  1:40-66;  2:19-68  /  77  Maccabees, 6-7; 15:1-5— (D) OT, 77
Machabees,  6-7; 15:1-5 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 17 309c310b;
ch  25  313c-314c; bk xx, ch 4 532b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  91,  A  5  211c-212c;  A 6, ans and rep i 212c-213c; qq 98-105
239b-321a;  q  106, a 3, ans 323a324a; a 4, ans and rep 1,3 324a-325c; q
107  325c-330d  passim;  q  108,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3 331a-332b; a 2
332b-333d;  a  3,  rep  1-3  334a336b;  part ii-ii, q 16 454c-456d; q 22
480d482c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 137b-c; 154b155c; 160b-c; part
hi,  177c-188a;  199b-204a;  212d-213a; 216c-218a; 223a-c; 226b-d; 231b;
PART  IV,  268b-c;  269a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 18b-c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii [223-371] 324a327a esp [223-230] 324a,
[287-309] 325b-326a

[1034a]
(3^. The divine positive law: the difference between the law revealed in
the  Old  and  the  New  Testament.  3^(1) Law in the Old Testament: the
moral,  the  judicial,  and  the ceremonial precepts of the Old Law.) 33
Pascal:   Pensees,  619-620  284b-286a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
180b-182c  passim;  208a'C  43  Mill:  Utilitarianis7n,  467c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part i, 246c247a 3^(2) Law in the New Testament:
the  law  of  love  and  grace;  ceremonial  precepts of the New Law New
Testament:  Matthew, 5-7 esp 5:17-20; 16:18-19; 18:18; 22:34-40; 28:19 /
Mar\,  12:28-34  /  Luke,  6:20-49;  10:25-37; 16:1617; 22:15-20 / John,
3:1-8;  6  esp  6:47-58;  13:31-17:26;  20:21-23— (D) John, 3:1-8; 6 esp
6:47-59; i3*3i-i7-26; 20:21-23 / Acts^ 2:37-42; 8:14-17,26-40; 10:34-48;
13:2-4,3839;   15:22-29;   19:1-7;  21:20-25  /  Romans  esp  3-13  /  /
Corinthians, 11:23-34; 13 / Galatians esp 3-6 / Colossians / I Titnothy,
4:14 / Hebrews, 7-10 / James, 5:14-15 / / Peter, 4:8II / I John/ II John
18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk x, ch 25 313c314c; bk XX, ch 4 532b-c /
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22-30 629b-633b; ch 35 634c-d; bk in, ch 10
661c-662a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, A 5 211c-212c;
Q  98,  A  4,  ans  242b-243c;  q  loi,  A  2, ANS 267a-268a; a 4, rep 2
269a270b;  Q 102, A I, rep i 270c-271b; a 4, rep 2-4 276d-283c; a 5, rep
3  283c-292c;  q 103, a 3, ANS 300d-302a; qq 106-108 321a-337d; part ii-
ii,  q  16,  A  I,  rep  2  454c-455c  22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 31
517b-518b;  par  68  533b-534a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 180c-d;
206c207a;  218a-219d;  240d; part iv, 257c-258a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 81a; lOOd 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [285-314] 325b326a;
[576-605]  331b-332a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 672 296a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals^ 259a / Practical Reason, 327c-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
286b-287a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xi, 525c-526b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  121d-137c esp 121d-122b, 126c-127b; bk vi,
150a-c;  166c-170a 4. The natural law 4a. The law of reason or the moral
law:  the  order and habit of its principles 12 AuRELius : Meditatio7is,
bk  hi,  sect  ii 262a-b; bk IV, SECT 4 264a; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c; bk
xi, sect I 302a-b

[1034b]
y  91^ THE GREAT IDEAS 3^(2) to 4c ii% 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par 9, lOd 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 79, A 12 425c-426b 20
Aquinas:  Su?nma  Theologica, part i-ii, q 58, AA 4-5 44a-45c; q 63, a i
63a-64a; q 90, a i 205b-206b; q 91, a 2 208d-209d; a 5, rep 3 211c-212c;
A  6  212c-213c;  q  94 220d-226b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b-87a;
91a-96b  esp  96b;  part  ii,  132c-d; 133b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-c;
184a-b;  520c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 96a-c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d; prop 31-35 432a-434a; prop 37,
SCHOL 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii 25d-28c esp SECT 6-1
1  26b-27d;  ch  vi,  sect 56-63 36d38c; CH IX, SECT 124 53d-54a / Human
Understanding, 90d; BK I, CH II, SECT 5-6 105a-c passim; sect 13, 108b-c
38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 399b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 235a-b;
235d-237a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 253d-254d 259c-261d;
264b-265a; 268d
[fn
2];  271c-d 282b-287b / Practical Reason, 306d-310b 314d-321b; 360d-361d
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-387a,c;  388b-c; 390b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part ii, par 140, 52a-53a; part hi, par 213 71a;
additions, i 115a-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 170d171a 4b. The law
of  men  living in a state of nature 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 311b-312d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-87b;  part  ii,  99a-b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 35 Locke: Civil Goveriiment, ch ii-iii
25d-29d;  CH  IX  53c-54d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 2b-d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331b;  333b-d;  342c-348a  esp  343b-345c /
Social  Contract  BK  I,  389d-390a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 237c 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 222b-c / Science of Right, 402c; 433c-436c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  93 36a-b / Philosophy of History,
intro, 171c172b 4c. The a priori principles of innate or abstract right:
universal  law  in the order of freedom; the objectification of the will
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  110c; 114b-115a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
390b;  392b  /  Science  of  Right,  400b,d-402a;  412c-414c; 416b-417b;
429a-c;  435a-436b  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 446a-d; 458d-459d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, intro, par 4-30 I 12d-19c esp par 4 12d-13a, par 15
16a-b, par 22 17c-d, par 27-30 18d-19c; par 33 20b-d; part I 21a-39d esp
par 36 21b-c, par 94 36b; part II, par 106-114 40a-42b; par 133 47a; par
135

[1035a]
^dto^f  Chapter  46: LAW 977 47b d; part hi, par 142-157 55a-57d csp par
149  56b;  par  209  69d; additions, i 115a d; 46 123d-124a; 84 129b; 86
129c;  94  132b; 131 137d / Philosophy of History, intro, 170c171c; PART
IV,  362b-d;  364c-d  4d.  The natural law as underlying the precepts of
virtue:  its relation to the moral precepts of divine law Old Testament:
Exodus,  20:1-17  / Deuteronomy, 5:6-21 / Jeremiah, 31:33— (D) Jeremias,
New Testament: Romans, 1:18-32; 2:11-16; 3 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
ii,  par  9,  lOd; BK III, par 13-15 16c-17b; par 17 17d-18a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  19,  A  4 705b-c; A 6, ans and rep 2
707a-708a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 51, A I, ANS
12b-13c;  Q  91,  A  4,  ANS  and rep i 210c-211c; Q 94, A 3 223a-c; a 5
224d-225d;  Q  98,  AA  5-6  243c-245b;  q 99, a 2 246b-247a; A 4, rep 2
248a-d;  a  5, ans 249a-250a; q 100 251a-265d; part hi, q 61, a 3, rep 2
856c857c  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i, 91a-96b esp 95d96b; PART II,
131a-b;  136d-137a;  part hi, 216c-217a; 240d-241a 30 Bacon: Advancement
ofLearning,  96a-c;  lOOd  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 18, schol
429a-d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect 4-6 25d26c / Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6 105a-c passim 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk i, Ic-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 343b-345c; 366c-d 42
Kant:   Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  ofMorals,  275b  /  Practical  Reason,
317b-318c;  327c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy ofHistory, part iv, 361c-d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  33c34b  4e.  The relation of
natural  law to natural rights and natural justice 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[441-525]  134d-135c  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch 5 447d-448c /
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 13 [1373^1-17] 617c-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk
iv,  sect  4  264a; bk VII, sect 55 283b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch  21  524a525a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, a I
510b-511b; a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas: Sumfna Theologica, part i-ii, q 91,
A  2  208d-209d;  q  94,  a  2,  ans 221d-223a; q 95, A 2 227c-228c; a 4
229b-230c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86c-d; part ii, 131a-c; 138c 27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Crcssida,  act ii, sc II [163-188] 115b-c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a; appendix, viii 447d

[1035b]
32  Milton:  Samson Agonislcs [888 902] 359a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  ii-ix  25d-54d  passim;  ch  xi,  sf:ct 135-137 55d-57b; ch xv, SECT
171-172  65a-c  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 53b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
330a-331b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 61b; bk ii, 140b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 86d 87a 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 392b /
Science  of Right, 397a-b; 421c-422d; 429a-c; 430a-432c; 434a; 435a-457b
esp 436c, 437c-d, 447b-450b, 451c-d 43 Declaration op Independence:
[1-28]
lab  43 Mill: Liberty, 272d-273b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
171c172b  4/. The relation of natural law to civil or municipal law: the
state  of  nature  and  the  regulations of the civil state 5 Sophocles:
Antigone  [450-460]  135a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch .1134^1! 1135*4]
382c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 13 [1373^118] 617c-d; ch 15
[1375*26-^8]
619d-620a;
[1376*33-^31] 621a-c
18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b; par 17 17d-18a / City of
God, bk i, ch 21 142d-143a; bk xix, ch 12 517b-519a; ch 21 524a-525a; ch
24  528b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, A 3 209d-210c;
q  94, aa 4-6 223d-226b passim; Q 95, a 2 227c-228c; a 4, ans 229b-230c;
q  99,  A  3,  REP  2  247a-248a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 84c-87b;
91a-96b  passim; part ii, 99a-b; 103a; 115b-c; 124d125a; 131a-c; 132c-d;
134b-135b;  138c; 142a-c; 156b-c; part iv, 273c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk ii, 87a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 281a-282a; 516c-517a;
519a-520b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 32
Milton:  Satnson Agonistes [888-902] 359a 35 Locke: Civil Govermnent, ch
ii,  sect  7-13  26c-28b;  ch  vii,  sect  89  44d; ch ix 53c-54d; CH XI
55b-58b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149  59b-d;  ch XIV, SECT 159 62b-c; sect 168
64b-c; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, Ic-d;
bk  viii,  52a; bk xvi, 119d; bk xxvi, 215b-218a; 219d-221c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  333b-c:  353d-355b:  361c-362a / Political Economy, 369a-b;
370d  / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-394d; bk ii, 397a; 399b-c; 405d-406a
39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 52b-c; 61b; BK IV, 228a; bk v, 397a-c
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82b; 86d-89b esp 86d-87d

[1036a]
978 THE GREAT IDEAS (4. The natural law. 4f. The relation of natural law
to  civil  or  municipal law: the state of nature and the regulations of
the  civil  state.  ^  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 222b-c / Science of Right,
397a-b;  402c;  405d-406c;  426b-429a; 430a432c; 433c-434d; 435c-436b 43
Federalist:  number  43,  143b-c  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 470d-471b 44
V>o^yNY.\A.:  Johnson,  120b-c; 275d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  214  71a-c; par 217 72b-c; additions, i 115a-d / Philosophy of
History,  intro, 186a-c; part i, 207b-c; 208b-d; part iv, 361c-d 4g. The
relation  of natural law to the law of nations and to international law:
sovereign  states  and  the state of nature 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
iv,  sect  4  264a  14  Plutarch:  Camillus, 108b-109a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 94, a 4 223d-224d; q 95, a 2, ans 227c-228c; a
4  229b-230c  23HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 86a; part ii, 114b-c; 159c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  13a-b  35  Locke:  Civil
Government, ch ii, sect 9 27a-b; sect 14 28b-c; ch hi, sect 19 29b-c; ch
xii,  sect 145-146 58d-59a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Latvs, bk i, 2d-3b;
BK  X,  61b,d-63d;  bk  xxiv,  201b-c;  bk  xxvi, 223c-224a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  355b-c / Political Economy, 369a-b / Social Contract, bk i,
389d-390d  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 604c [n 107] 42 Kant: Science of
Right, 435a-b; 452a-455c esp 452a-d; 456b-457a 43 Federalist: number 64,
197d-198a; number 75, 223b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
338  llOa-b  / Philosophy ofHistory, part iv, 361c-d 4h. The precepts of
the natural law and the condition of the state of nature with respect to
slavery  and  property  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 5-6 447d-449b 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 13 120b-c 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk
xix, ch 15 521a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, a I, rep 2
488d-489d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  94,  A  5,  REP  3  224d-225d  22  Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 65-67,
531a-532a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 85d; 86b; 91a-b; 94b-c; PART II,
103a;  124d-125c  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch iv-v 29d-36a; CH VII,
SECT  85 43c-d; sect 87 44a-b; ch ix 53c-54d passim; ch xi, sect 138-140
57b-58a; CH XV, SECT 171-173 65a-c; ch xvi, sect 183 67d-68b

[1036b]
4^  to  5a 5iw 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 109b35 110a; llOd-
lllb;  bk xxvi, 216a-217b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333b-d; 348b,d; 353a;
353d-355b;  356c-357a;  357c-358b  /  Political  Economy,  368a / Social
Contract, bk i, 388a-c; 389a-390d; 393c-394d 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations,
bk  i,  52b-c; bk iv, 228a; bk v, 309a-311c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
86d-87b  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  401b-402a; 413d414a; 421c-422d;
445c-446a; 454a-455a 43 Declaration of Lndependence: [7-10] la 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 49 24c-25a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  427b  the sanction of 5. The human or positive law: coercive
force  7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  esp 216d-219a,c / Republic, bk iv,
344a-345d  /  Statesman,  599c604b / Laws, bk iv, 684b-686c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1179^351180^28] 434a-435c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 15
[1286^28-41] 485b / Athenian Constitution, ch
12,  par 4 557d-558a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 17, 522d-523a
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A I 205b-206b; a 3, rep 2
207a-c;  qq  95-97  226b-239b  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xii, 18a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103a;  113c;  130b138d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  362b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95b 35
Locke:  Toleration,  3a; 3c-4a / Civil Government, CH IX 53c-54d passim;
ch  xix,  sect  219  75b-c  /  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch ii, SECT 5
105a-b;  bk  ii,  ch xxviii, sect 6 229d; sect 9-13 230b-231c esp sect 9
230b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
345d  / Political Economy, 371a-c / Social Contract, bk ii, 399b400c; bk
IV,  426b-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71b,d-96d 42 Kant: Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392b  / Science of Right, 439a'b 43 Federalist:
number  15,  65a-d;  number  16  66c-68d passim, esp 67d-68a; number 21,
78b-d;  number  28,  96c;  number  33,  108d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,
467d-468c  passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 211228
70a-75b;  additions,  131 137d / Philosophy of History, part hi, 290a-b;
part iv, 364d-365a 5a. The diflference between laws and decrees 7 Plato:
Laws,  bk  ix,  745c-746a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 4 [1292*4-37]
491b-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, A I, REP I
230C'231c i

[1037a]
)/;  to  5d Chapter 46: LAW 979 35 Locke: Civil Government, cii ix, sect
ly  54d;  CH XI, SECT 136-1^7 56c-57b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, hk
ii,  6b;  hk \T, 33a-34d; bk xxix, 268c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
ii,  395b  d;  397b-c; 399c-400a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73d-74b 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  438a-b  43  Federalist: number 64, 197a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 299 99c -100b / Philosophy of
History,  part  i,  207b-c  5b. The kinds or divisions of positive law 7
Plato:  Laws, bk hi, 674b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 2 1130^301131*9]
378b-c  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [1289*1325]  488a-b  14  Plutarch:
Lyctirgus,  38c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 95, A 4
229b-230c;  q  100,  a  2,  ans 252b-253a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii,
136b-137b;  138b-c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xxvr, 221c-223b
passim  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 406a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  96a  43 Federalist: number 53, 167d'168b; number 81, 241c-d;
number 84, 252a'b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 40 21d-22c;
part hi, par 211 70a-c 5c. The justice of positive law: the standards of
natural law and constitutionality 5 Sophocles: Antigone [450-460] 135a 5
Euripides:  Bacchantes  [878-911] 347b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  ii, 396c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52b / Gorgias, 271b272b; 273d-274c /
Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk IV, 680c-683b; bk ix, 747c; bk x, 760c 8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 12
[173-7-19] 238b-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[1129^12-24]
377a;cH7 382c'383a; ch 9 [ii36''32-35]385a; CHii
[1138^4-13] 386h'C / Politics, bk
1, ch 6
[1255*3-^4] 448c-449a; bk hi, ch
ii  [1282^114]  480b-c;  CH  16  [1287*28-^5]  485d-486a;  bk  IV,  CH I
[1289*13-25] 488a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, CH 10
[1368^7-10]
611d; CH 13
[137:5^1-17]
617c-d; CH 15
[1375^25-^25]
619d-620b;
[1376*33-^31] 621a-c
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4 264a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  hi,  par  15  17a-b;  par  17  17d-18a  /  City of God, bk ii, ch 21
161b-162d;  bk  xix, ch 21 524a-525a; ch 24 528b-c / Christian Doctrine,
bk  iv, ch 18 686d-687d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, a
3  209d-210c;  q  93, a 3 217b-218a; q 95, a 2 227c-228c; q 96, a 4, ans
233a-d

[1037b]
23  HoBHEs: leviathan, part i, 91a-b; part m, 131a-c; 132a b; 134b 135b;
156b-c;   157b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47c-48a;  281a-282a;  384b-c;
519a-520b  30  Bacon: Advancement of learning, 94d-95b 32 Milton: Samson
Agonistes  [888-902] 359a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 291-338 225a-233a; 878-879
345a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 12 27d28a; ch ix 53c-54d;
ch xi 55b-58b; ch xvih 71a-73c passim; ch xix, sect 221-222 75d76c; sect
240-242  81b-d  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, led; 3c-d; BK VI,
39b;  bk  vih, 54b; bk xii, 85c86d; BK XIX, 136a; 138a-c; bk xxvi, 214b,
d225a  passim,  esp  214b,d-215a;  bk  xxix,  262a-b;  265d 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  369c-d;  370d  / Social Contract, bk 11, 399b-400a;
405a-406a;  bk IV, 426b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 61b; bk ii,
140b;  BK  IV,  228a;  284d;  bk  v, 397a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
525d-526c;  617b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 76d-77b; 89d-94b passim;
403b-404d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right, 429a-c; 434a;
435a-436a;   450d-451c   43   Declaration   of  Independence:  la-3b  43
Constitution  of the U.S.: preamble lla,c; article i, sect 8-10 13a-14b;
article vi
[583-590] 16d; amendments, i-x 17a-d
43  Federalist:  number  33, 108b-109b; number 44, 145c-147a; number 78,
230d-232d  passim;  number  81,  237d-238b 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-323a,c
passim   /  Utilitarianism,  465d-466b;  467c-d  44  B0SWEL.L:  Johnson,
203d-204a;  205b-c; 363c364a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
212213  70d-71a  / Philosophy of History, part iv, 364b 5</. The origins
of  positive  law  in  the  legislative  process:  the  function  of the
legislator  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  301c-302b;  bk iv, 344a-346a /
Theaetetus,  531a-b / Statesman, 599c-600d / Laws, bk hi, 666b-c; bk iv,
679c680d;  684b-686c; bk vi, 705d-706c; bk ix, 745c-746a; 754a-d; bk xi,
782a-b  /  Seventh  Letter,  807a-b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk vi, ch 8
[1141^23-33]  390d-391a; bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, bk hi, ch II
[1282*^1-14] 480b-c; bk iv, ch 14 498b-499c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i 3 5 4^131355^3] 593b-594a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[11431160] 76a-b
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d / Solon 64b, d77a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi, 51a-52a

[1038a]
980  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  The  human or positive law: the sanction of
coercive  force.  5d.  The  origins  of  positive law in the legislative
process: the function of the legislator.) 20 Aquinas: Sununa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 90, A 4 2O7d-208b; q 95, a i 226c-227c; a 4, ans 229b-230c
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103a;  123b-d; 130d-131a; 131d-132a;
133d-134a;  151C'152a;  PART  IV, 273d 29 Cervantes : Do;^ Quixote, part
ii, 363d-364a 30 Bacon: Advancefnent of Learning, 94d-95a 31 Descl\rtes:
Discourse,  part  ii,  44d-45a  35 Locke: Toleration, lib; 16a-c / Civil
Government,  CH  VII,  SECT  88-89 44c-d; ch ix, sect 127-CH X, sect 132
54a-55b;  ch xi, sect 134 55b-d; ch xi, sect 141-cH xii, sect 143 58a-d;
ch  xiii, sect 150 59d; ch xix, sect 212-217 74a-75a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  73a-  74b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 6b; BK VI,
33a-35c;  bk  xi,  69d; 71a-72b passim; BK XXIX 262a-269a,c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  324c-d / Political Economy, 368c-369a / Social Contract, bk
ii,  399b-402a;  bk  hi, 419c-423a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 27d-28a;
154a-b;  616d'617a; 624b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 71d-75b esp 72a,
73b-c; 79d-80b; 93b-c; 108a-c 42 Kant: Iniro. Metaphysic of Morals, 393c
/  Science of Right, 397a-b; 436b-c; 438b-c; 451d-452a 43 Declaration of
Independence:  [29-47] 1^' 2a; [62-64] [78-79] 2b 43 Constitution of the
U.S.:  article  i, sect 1-9 lla-14a 43 Federalist: number 33, 107b-108c;
number 38, 121b-124a; number 40, 130c-132a; number 44, 145c-146d; number
53,  168b-169b 43 Mill: Representatwe Government, 356b-362c 44 BoswEhi.:
Johnson,  255d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 298 99c /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  271d273a; part hi, 290a-b; part iv,
364d-365d  5e,  The  mutability  or  variability  of  positive  law: the
maintenance  or  change  of laws Old Testament: Esther, 1:19 / Daniel, 6
esp  6:8,6:15  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c; bk hi, 108c 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  425a-c;  438a-b  7 Plato: Republic, bk iv,
344b-345d;  bk  viii,  403a-404a  /  Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk IV,
679c-680d;  bk vi, 705d-706c; 707a-b; BK VII, 717d-718c; bk viii, 740c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
[1134^181135^4] 382c-d / Politics, bk ii, ch 8 [1268^231269*28] 464d-465b; bk v, ch 9 [1310*12-19]
512b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 15 [1375*25-^25] 619d-620b

[1038b]
5e to 5/ 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 38c; 47a-48a / LycurgusNuma, 63d-64a,c /
Solon,  69c-d  /  Agesilaus, 494a-c / Agesilaus-Pompey, 539a 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  i,  21b-c;  bk  hi,  51a52a;  57d-58b; bk xi, 106d; bk xiv,
151d-152c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 97 235d-239b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 78b-c; part ii, 116a-b; 157c-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  47a-51a;  131b-132a;  281a-c;  318c-319b; 462c-465c; 504c-506a;
516c-517a  35  Locke: Civil Govermnent, ch xiii, sect 157158 61c-62b; ch
xix,  sect 223 76c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 77d; bk XIV,
102b;  104c;  bk  xviii,  126d;  bk  xix,  135d-136a;  bk  xxix, 268d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d / Social Contract, BK II, 405d-406b; bk hi,
419c-420a  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 166a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 78b-81c passim, esp 80d-81b; 96b-c 42 Kant: Sciefice of Right,
441 b-c; 450d-452a 43 Declaration of Independence:
[76-77]
2b 43 Constitution of the U.S. : article v 16c 43 Federalist: number 37,
118d-119b; number 39, 127d'128b; number 40 128b-132a; number 43, 143a-b:
number  49-50  159b-162c;  number  53,  167d-168b; nuxMber 62, 190d191c;
number  64,  197a-c;  number  73,  220a-b; number 81, 239a-b; number 85,
257a-259a  43  Mill: Representative Government, 359a-d; 360c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  203d-205a;  205d;  276a-b; 277b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro, par 3, llc-d; part III, par 216 71d-72a; additions, 176 147c-d 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1972-1979]  46b-47a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  427a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; BK viii,
308d 5/. The relation of positive law to custom 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
[877-911]
347b-c  /  Hecuba  [798-805] 359d 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 97d-98a 7
Plato:  Symposium,  154a-c  /  Republic, bk iv, 344b-d; bk vii, 401c-d /
Statesman,  600a-b  /  Latvs,  bk III, 666b-c; bk iv, 678d-679a; bk vii,
713c-716b;   718b-c;   730d-731b;   bk   viii,  736c-737a  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk ii, ch 3 [995*4-6] 513c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
382c-383a  / Politics, BK II, CH 8 [1268^23-1269*28] 464d465b: BK HI, CH
16 [1287^5-7] 486a; bk v, ch 8
[1307^30-38] 509d-510a; ch 9
[1310*12-19]
512b-c  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 38b-d / Lycurgus-Numa, 63d-64a
/  Themistocles,  99b-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xii,  Ulb-c; bk xiv,
151d-152c

[1039a]
5g  Chapter 46: LAW 981 Augustine: City of God, bk xv, cn i6, 411a-d; bk
xix,  ch 17, 522d-523a Aquinas: Surnma Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A 2,
REP 3 227c-228c; q 96, a 2, ans 231c232b; Q 97, aa 2-3 236d-238b HoBBEs:
Leviathan,   part  i,  78b-c;  part  it,  108c;  130d-131a;  131c;  136d
Montaigne:   Essays,   46b-48b;   131b-132a;   281  a-  283c;  462d-463b
Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure, act ii, so I [1-4] 178d-179a / King
Lear, act i, sc ii
[1-22] 247d-248a
Pascal: Pensees, 294 225b-226b; 312 229a; 325-326 230b-231a Locke: Cifil
Government,  ch xiii, sect 157158 61c-62b Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk
i,  3c-d;  bk  X,  65b:  BK  XIV,  106b:  bk  xix,  135a-146a,c; BK XXI,
168d-169a;  bk  xxiii  197c-198a;  bk  xxviii, 237a-d; 240b; 261a-262a,c
Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d  /  Social Contract^ BK II, 406c-d; BK III,
419d-420a  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 616d-617a Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
71d-73a  passim;  75b-d;  77c-d;  79d-80d  passim;  96b-c Declaration of
Lndependence:
[15-22] lb
Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d;  number  49,  159d-160a  Mill: Liberty,
269c-271b;  307b-d  /  Representative  Government,  329d-330a; 330d-331a
Bosv,ei.l:  Johnson, 204c-205b; 276a-b; 277b Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  211 70a-c; par 274 92a; par 339 110b; par 355 112d-113a;
additions,  132  137d-138b  / Philosophy of History, part ii, 271d-272d;
part   III,  294C'd  Melville:  Moby  DicJ{,  292a-297a  Marx:  Capital,
235a-236c 5g. The application of positive law to cases: the casuistry of
the  judicial  process;  the  conduct  of a trial; the administration of
justice Old Testament: Exodus, 18:20-22; 23:1-3,6-9 / Numbers, 5:11-31 /
Deuteronomy,  1:16-17;  16:18-19;  17:2-13;  19:15-20 / I Kings, 3:1628—
(£>)  ///  Kings,  3:16-28  /  Daniel,  13  New Testament: Acts, 21-26 5
Aeschylus:  Eumefiides 81a-9ld esp [397-822] 85c-89c 5 Euripides: Hecuba
[1129-1251]  362c-363c  5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  507a-525d  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i, 32b-c; bk hi, 95d96b; BK IV, 135c-d; bk v, 164c; bk vi,
211d212a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  381d382d; BK III,
429c-434c;  bk  vi,  523b-c;  524d525d  7  Plato:  Apology 200a-212a,c /
Republic,  bk III, 337b-338a / Theaetetus, 544a-c / Statesman, 599c-603a
/  Laws,  bk  vi, 704c- 705c; bk VIII, 740c-d; bk ix, 744b-c; 754a-d; bk
xi, 782a-b; 7S3c-784b; bk xif, 792a-793a

[1039b]
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 4 379b 380b esp
[1132*19 >i8]379d-380b;BK VI, ch8 [1141^2^-
33) 390d-391a / Politics, bk ii, ch 8 [1268*^523] 464c; BK III, CH II
[i282*'i-61 480b-c; ch
15
[i286'»io-3o] 484b-c; ch
16
[1287^24-28]
485d;   [1287^15-25]   486a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  16  501c502a.c  /  Athenian
Constitution, ch 45 573d574a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i354"M-i355'*3]
593b  594a;  ch  15  619d-622d 14 Plutarch: Solon, 70d-71b / Alcibiadcs,
162d165b  /  Coriolanus,  179c-  184c  /  Aristides, 264b-c / Agesilaus,
494a-c  / Pompey, 526a-d / Agesilaus-Pompev, 539a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi,  46d-49b;  61c-62a;  bk  XIV,  151c / Histories, bk ii, 216d-217a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b515a  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A I, rep 2-3 226c-227c; q 105, a 2, ans and
REP  7-8  309d-316a; part hi suppl, q 87, a i, ans 997b-998c 22 Chaucer:
Tale  of  Melibeus, par 11 403b404a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 78b-c;
part  ii,  123b-d;  134b-136b; part hi, 234d; part iv, 275a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 85c-92c; bk hi, 204c-215c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  47c-48a;  283a;  516c520b  passim  26  Shakespeare: Merchant of
Venice,  act  iv,  sc  I  425c-430b  27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure
174a204d  esp  ACT  11,  sc  i-ii  178d-184a  / King Lear, act hi, sc vi
266c-267d  / Coriolanus, ACT III, sc III 375b-377a / Henry VIII, act ii,
sc  I  [51-136]  558c-559c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 332d333b;
340d-343a;  353b-356d; 361a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  27a-62a: 90a-99a; 102b-117b 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch ix, sect 125 54a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b-75a;  part  iv,  152b-154a  36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  260a-b; 266a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 8c-10c; 28c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk vi, 33a37d; 42c-d; bk xxix, 262a-b 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 433a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  311c-315a,c  40 GiBBOs: Decline and Fall, 244d-245b; 251b-d; 343b-c;
618a-d  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 77b-78b; 93b-c; 94c-95c; 403c-404b:
458c-d; 459b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 60a-c / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics, 372b-d 43 Declaration of Independence: [52-55] 2a;
[70-71] 2b
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  hi 15c16a; amendments, v-viii
17b-d; xi 18a; xiv, sect I 18c

[1040a]
(5.  The  human or positive law: the sanction of coercive force. 5g. The
application  of  positive  law  to  cases: the casuistry of the judicial
process;  the  conduct  of  a  trial; the administration of justice.^ 43
Federalist:  number  15,  65a-b; number 17, 69d-70a; number 22, 83d-84a;
number  65  198a-200c passim; number 73, 221 b-c; number 78-83 229d-251a
passim 44 BoswEi.!.: Johnson, 133b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  85  35a-b;  part hi, par 214 71a-c; par 219 72d73a; par 222-229
73b-75b;  additions,  141 139c / Philosophy ofHistory, part i, 250d-251a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  292a-295a  50  Marx:  Capital,  139b-140b 51
Tolstoy:   War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  547a-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi, 168c-d; BK IX 235b,d-271d; bk xii 348b,d401d 5h. The
defect  of  positive  law:  its  need  for correction or dispensation by
equity 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 699d-700b; bk ix, 754b-d; bk xi, 777d-778b;
bk xii, 785c-786a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 3
[141^15-18]
194b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 10 385c-386b esp
[1137*^10-28] 385d-386a /
Politics, bk hi, ch 15
[1286^10-37] 484b-d; ch
16
[1287^24-28]
485d;
[1287^15-25] 486a-b
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i, CH 13 [i374*i7-'^24] 618c-619a 14 Plutarch: Fabius,
150d-151a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, a 6 235a-d; q
97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  100,  a  8, ANS and REP I 259d-261a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  94d;  part  ii,  132d;  133d'135d; 136b; 156b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  50b-51a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch xiv, sect
159160  62b-d  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 152b-154a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  343c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73d-74b; 77d78a; 91 b-c 42
Kant:  Sciaice  of  Right,  399c-400d  43 Federalist: number 78, 232c-d;
number  80,  237a-b; number 83, 248d-249a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  214  71a-c;  par 223 73c-d 6. Law and the individual 6a.
Obedience to the authority and force of law: the sanctions of conscience
and  fear; the objective and subjective sanctions of law; law, duty, and
right  Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy, 5:28-29; 13:11; 17:12-13; 19:18-20;
21:20-21; 28:58-59 / Ecclesiastes, 12:13 New Testament: Romans, 13:1-5 /
I Peter, 2:1316

[1040b]
982 THE GREAT IDEAS 5h to 6a 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-565]
86b-87a;
[681-710] 88b-c
5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d esp [362-372] 134b,
[640-680] 136d-137a / Ajax
[666-676]
148d;  [1047-1421}  152a-155a,c  5 Euripides: Orestes [491-525] 399a-b 6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370bc; BK II, 396c-d; 400d-401a; bk
hi,  425a-c  7 Plato: Apology, 206b-d / Crito 213a-219a,c / Republic, bk
ii,  311b-312b  / Statesman, 599c604b / Laws, bk hi, 675c-676b / Seventh
Letter,  807a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 12 [1144*12-21] 393d; BK X,
ch 9
[i 179*^35-1 180^28]
434a435c / Politics, bk ii, ch 8
[1269^12-23]
465a-b; bk hi, ch 15 [1286^28-41] 485b; bk IV, ch 8
[1294*1-8] 493d; ch
ii
[1295*^2-20]
495c-d;  bk  v,  ch  8  [1307*^30-38]  509d-510a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[11431160] 76a-b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk iv, ch 7, 234d235a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
38c; 48a / LycurgusNuma, 63d-64a,c / Solon, 66a / Agesilaus, 480b,d-481a
/  Cleomenes, 659d-660a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, a
I,  ANS  and rep 2 213c-214c; a 2, ans and REP 4 214d-215a,c; q 95, a i,
ans  and  rep  i 226c-227c; q 96, aa 4-6 233a-235d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  90b-d;  part  ii,  99a-b; 112b-d; 115a-b; 130b-131c; 132d133d;
149b-c;  153b-c;  part  hi,  224d;  240a241a;  244d-246a,c;  conclusion,
279a-c;  283c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 48b-50a; 319b; 383c-d; 480b-c; 520b
27   Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  hi,  sc  i  [263336]  372c-373b  29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a;  177a-b;  part ii, 362b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 32 Milton: Samson
Agonistes  [1334-1379]  368b369b  33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 114b /
Pensees,  297303  227a-b  35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a;  16c-17c  / Civil
Government,  CH vii, sect 94 46a-c; ch viii, sect 97 47a-b; sect 120-122
52d-53c;   ch  ix  53c-54d  passim;  ch  xi,  sect  134  55b-d  /  Human
Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c passim; sect 13 107d-108c;
bk  ii,  ch xxviii, sect 6 229d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii,
div  76,  485a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 69a-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  366d  /  Political Economy, 371a-372b / Social Contract, bk
ii,  398d; 401c-402a; 406c-d; bk iv, 426b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  308a; 309a311c passim; 397a-c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253d-254b;  259a-c; 273d-287d esp 273d-274a, 275b-d, 277d-279d,
281c-282d, 283b-d /

[1041a]
\h  to 6d Chapter 46: LAW 983 Practical Reason, 325d-326b; 356a c / Pnf.
Metaphysical  Eleryients  of  Ethics, 365b-366d; 375b-d; 379b-d / Intro.
Metaphvsic of Morals, 389a-b; 391a-c / Science of Right, 399c; 400b-d 43
Federalist:  number  15,  65a-b;  number  16  66c-68d passim; number 17,
69d-70a;  number  27  94d-96c  43  Mill: Liberty, 295d-296b; 302d-303a /
Representative   Government,   329c-330a;  339c-340d  /  Utilitarianism,
457c-461c;  465d-466b  44 Boswell: Johnson, 181b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  pref, 2b-3a; 4d5a; PART III, par 144 55b; par 261 83a-d; par 270
84d-89c passim; additions, i 115a-d; 93 132a; 140 139b-c / Philosophy of
History, INTRO, 186b-c; PART I, 207b-c; 211a-c; part II, 271d-272d; part
hi,  290a-b; part iv, 333c-d; 353c-d; 365b-c 49 DARwih! -.Descent ofMan,
304a-305c  esp 305a; 310a-317d esp 310d, 313d-314c, 317a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  670c671a  6b.  The exemption of the sovereign
person  from  the  coercive  force  of  law 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
95d-96b;  107c-d  7  Plato: Laws, bk iv, 682b-c; bk ix, 754a-b / Seventh
Letter,  807a-b  14  Plutarch:  Alexander,  564d-566b 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 96, A 5, rep 3 233d-234d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part h, 102b-c; 125b-c; 130d; 149d-150a; 153b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i, 177a-b 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 208b 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch  xvi, sect 195 70a-b; ch xviii, SECT
205-206  72a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357b-c  / Political Economy,
370d-371a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 399d40ba 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 27b-c; 51c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline arid Fall, 74c 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  438b-c;  439c; 446a-b 43 Articles of Confederation: v [74-81] 6a
43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: article i, sect 6 [132-142] 12c; article
ii, sect 4 15c 43 Federalist: number 69, 207b-c; number 81, 240c-241a 44
B0SWEL.L:  Johnson,  120a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
284  96b  6c. The force of tyrannical, unjust, or bad laws: the right of
rebellion or disobedience 5 Aeschylus: Seve7i Against Thebes [1011-1082]
38b-39a,c 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d esp
[1-99]
131a-132a,
[441-525]
134d-135c,
[640-680]
136d-137a, [891-943] 138d-139a 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[1625-1682]
392b-d

[1041b]
7 PLAtf): Apology 200a-212a,c / Crito 213a219a.c / Laws, bk vi, 706b-c /
Seventh letter, 800c d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 8
[1294*1-8]
493d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 13
[n7V'i-'7l
617c d; ch 15
[i375»26-*'25]
619d-620b;
[1376*33-^31] 621a-c
14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus, 678b d / Marcus Brutus, 805c-81 la 15
Tacitus:  Histories,  bk iv, 269d-270b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi,
par  15-17  17a18a  /  City  of God, bk xix, ch 17 522b 523a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A I, rep 3 205b-2O6b; q 92, a i, rep
4  213c214c; q 93, A 3, REP 2 217b-218a; q 95, a 4, ANs 229b-230c; o 96,
a 4, ans and rep 2-3 233a-d; q 97, a 2 236d-237b; part ii-ii, q 42, A 2,
REP 3 584b-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 102b-c; 113d114b; 115a-116a;
134c-135b;  153c;  157b;  part  HI,  228b;  238b-c;  part  iv, 273a-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  7c; 504c-506a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [888-902]
359a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 326 231a 35 Locke: Toleration, 16c-17c / Civil
Government,  ch  XIII, SECT 155 60d-61a; ch xiv, SECT 168 64b-c; ch xvi-
xix  65d-81d  passim  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk i, 388d-389a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c  42  Kant: Science ofRight,
439a-441d;  450d-451b  43  Declaration  of Independence: la-3b passim 43
Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c; number 28, 97c-d; number 33, 108b-109a;
number  78,  230d-232d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465d-466b; 467c-d 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue i, 668a669d 6d. The educative function
of law in relation to virtue and vice: the efficacy of law as limited by
virtue  in the individual citizen 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d;  bk  vii,  232d-233a;  233c-d  6
ThucYDiBEs  :  Peloponnesian  War,  BKi,370b-c;  BK  II, 396e-d 7 Plato:
Protagoras, 45b-47c / Apology, 203d / Republic, bk iv, 344a-345d; bk ix,
426c-d  / Statesman, 607b-608d / Laws, bk i, 640a644b; BK HI, 669d-670a;
bk  iv, 684b-686c; BK V, 690d-691b; bk vi, 706b-c; bk vih, 735c-738c; bk
xh, 792c-d; 794a-799a,c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102*8-25]
347c; BK II, CH I 348b,d-349b passim, esp
[1103^3-7]
349a; bk v, ch i
[1129^12-24]
377a; ch 2
[1130^20-29] 378b; bk
x, ch 9
[1179*35-1180^28]
434a-435c  /  Politics,  bk  VII,  ch 14 537b-538d esp [1332^33-1333^29]
537c-538c  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d / LycurgusNuma, 63d-64a / Solon
64b,d-77a,c / Lysander, 361b-d / Cleomenes, 659d-660a

[1042a]
984  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (6.  Law  and  the individual. 6d. The educative
function  of  law in relation to virtue and vice: the efficacy of law as
limited by virtue in the individual citizen.^ 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
57b-58d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92 213c-215a,c; q 95,
a  i  226c-227c; q 96, aa 2-3 231c-233a; q 98, a 6, ans 244c-245b; q 100
251a-265d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvt [85105] 77d 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  131a-b; 140b141b; 149b-c; 153a-155c 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 131b-132a 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act i, sc III
[19-39]
177c; ACT II, sc i
[225-270]
181a-c;  ACT  v,  sc i [318-324] 202b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
78d-81c   32  M1L.TON:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [285-306]  325b326a  /
Areopagitica,   383a-395b   35  Locke:  Toleration,  8c;  14a  /  Hu7nan
Understanding,  BK  II,  CH  xxviii, SECT 9-13 230b231c 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 267b-268b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 13b, d17b; bk V,
18b,d-23a;  bk  vii,  44d-45c;  47c-50c;  bk  xii, 86b; 87c-88a; bk xiv,
104a108d passim; bk xvi, 119d; bk xix, 138c142a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
345d;  359d  /  Political Econoi7iy, 372a-377b esp 372a-373a, 375d377a /
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c; bk ii, 400d-401a; bk iv, 434b-435a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, lOOc-lOlb; 291d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
93d-94a 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical Elejnents of Ethics, 367b-c; 373b-c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-b / Science of Right, 448d-449c 43
Constitution   of   the  U.S.:  amendments,  XVIII  19c;  XXI  20b-c  43
Federalist:  number  12,  58b-c  43  Mill: Liberty, 272d-273d; 302d-312a
passim,  esp 306b-307a; 315d-316b / Representative Government, 336c-337b
/  Utilitarianism,  467b468a  44  Boswell:/o^«co;2, 222d-223b; 301c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 150 56c-57a; par 153 57c /
Philosophy  of  History, INTRO, 166b; PART IV, 333c-d 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man,  328c-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 30d32a 54
Freud: War and Death, 758c-d 6e. The breach of law: crime and punishment
6e{\) The nature and causes of crime 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  400d401a;  bk  hi,  436d-438b  7 Plato: Latus, bk ii, 654c-d; bk v,
690d691b; bk IX, 743c; 746a-750a; bk x, 758b-

[1042b]
- 6e to 6e(2)\ 760c; bk XI 771b- 784b passim; bk xii, 784b786b; 791c-d 9
Aristotle rEM/V^, bk v, ch2 [1130*^30-1 131*9] 378b-c; ch ii
[1138^13]
386b-c  / Politics, bk II, CH 7 461d-463c esp [1267^2-16] 462c-d; bk IV,
CH  II  [1295^3-12]  495c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  CH  10-14  611c-619d 18
Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 10, 662a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  ii,  139c-144d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-c; 334b-335a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Civil Govermnent,
ch   ii,   sect  6  26b-28b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  271c-273a,c  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xii, 85c86d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
364d 39 Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v, 309a-c; 397a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  35a;  175c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 92c; 93c 42 Kant:
Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 391 d'- 392a / Science of Right, 446a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 95102 36b-39b; part hi, par 218
72c-d; par 13 319, 106a 50 Marx: Capital, 364a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii,  33c34b  54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  714a-b 6e{2) The
prevention   of   crime  5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b'87a  5
Sophocles:  Electra  [1501-1507]  169a,c  5 Euripides: Orestes [491-525]
399a-b   5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1303-1464]  504b-506c  6  Herodotus:
History,  bk  ii,  87a-b; bk v, 164c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  400d401a;  BK  III, 424d-429a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d / Gorgias,
267c270c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d  /  Laws,  BK  V,  688d-689a;
690d-691b;  bk ix, 743a-c; 757a; bk x, 769d-770c; bk xi, 782a-b; bk xii,
786a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5
[iii3''2i1114*2]
359d-360a; bk x, ch 9
[1179*331180*32]
434a-435a  /  Politics,  bk  ii, ch 7 461d-463c esp [1267*2-16] 462c-d /
Rhetoric, BK I, CH 12
[1372*23-27] 615d-616a; ch
14
[1375*1-7] 619b-c
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk hi, 61c-d; bk xiv, 151 d152c; BK XV, 162c-d 18
Augustine:  City  ofGod,  bk  xix,  ch  16  521d522a  20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  87, a 3, REP 2 187b-188b; q 105, a 2, rep 9
309d316a  22  Chaucer:  Tale  ofMelibeus,  par  40  418b-419a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 94a; part ii, 140a; 141b; 143d; 145a; 145d; 147a-b;
157d158a

[1043a]
>.(3)  Chapter 46: LAW 985 25 Montaigne: Essays, 446a-b 26 Shakespilare:
Romeo and Julie/, act i, sc i
[71-110] 286b-d
27  Shakespeare:  Measure for Measure, act i, sc III 177b-d; act v, sc i
[318-324]  202b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a;
prop  51,  schol  439d;  prop  63, scHOL 444a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a /
Civil  Government, ch 11, SECT 7-12 26c-28a / Human Understanding, BK I,
CH  II,  SECT  13 107d-108c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div
76,  485a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 150b; 267b-268b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk vi, 37d38a; 38d-40b; bk xix, 139c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
351 b-d / Political Economy, 371a-c; 372c / Social Contract, BK II, 399a
39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 309a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
175c-d;  216a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 83c; 85a'C; 92b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  446a-449c  esp  446b447c,  448b-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
271c-272d;   313a-316b   /   Representative   Government,   334d-335a  /
Utilitarianism,  471b-472d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 7d-8a; 204b-c; 301c-d;
335c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 99 37b-d; part hi, par
232  75c-d;  par  319, 106a; additions, 62 126a / Philosophy of History,
PART  I,  214d-216a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  314b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  30d32a;  33c-34b;  bk  vi, 165c 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 787c 6e{i) The punishment of crime 5
Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-562]
86b-87a;
[681-710] 88b-c
5 Sophocles: Antigone [640-680] 136d-137a / Electra
[i 501-1507] 169a,c
5   Euripides:   Orestes  [491-604]  399a-400a  6  Herodotus  :H/V/or)',
BKi,32b-c;  BKiii,116b117a; BK IV, 135c-136a; bk v, 164c; bk vii, 251a'b
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk hi, 427d-428a 7 Plato: Protagoras,
45a-46d  /  Gorgias,  267c270c  /  Statesman,  601c-602d  /  Laws, bk v,
690d-691b;  bk  ix  743a-757d  esp  747d,  757a;  BK X, 769d-770c; bk xi
771b-784b  passim;  bk XII, 784b-786b; 792c-793a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
v, ch 4 379b-380b; ch 5
[1132^21-30] 380b-c; ch
ii [1138^4-13] 386b-c; bk x, ch 9
[1179*33-1180^32] 434a435a / Politics, bk vi, ch 8 [132 1^40-1 322^^28]
525d-526a;  bk  vii, ch 13 [1332*10-16] 536d / Athenian Constitution, ch
52  576b-d;  ch  57-59  579b-580c  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 12 [1372*3-^16]
615c-616b; ch 14 619a-d

[1043b]
14  Plutarch: Solon, 70d; 73a / Thetnistocles, 97b-d / Cicero, 711c-712d
/  Artaxerxes,  851a b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 57a 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  6 514b 515a; bk xxi, ch ii 570b-571a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 92, A 2, ANS and REP 3-4 214d-215a,c; q
96,  a  5  233d-234d; q 105, a 2, ans and rep 9-12 309d-316a 22 Chaucer:
Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  40  418b419a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii,
145a-148b;  157d158a; conclusion, 281a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 519a-c 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc hi
[1-15] 44c-d / Romeo and Juliet, act
i, sc i
[71-110] 286b-d; act hi, sc
i [146-202] 302c303a / Richard II, act i, sc hi [118-153] 324d325b / 2nd
Henry IV, act v, sc ii
[65-145]
498d-499b  /  Henry V, act ii, sc ii 539a541a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i,  68b-73a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 51, schol 439d 33
Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 108b-109a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a / Civil
Government,  ch  I,  sect  3 25d; ch ii, sect 6-13 26b-28b; ch VII, sect
87-88  44a-c; ch ix, sect 128 54b-c; SECT 130 54c; CH XV, sect 171 65a-b
/  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxviii, sect 6 229d; SECT 9 230b 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect viii, div 76, 485a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  i,  28a-b;  29b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 37d43d; BK
XII,  85c-92b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  351  b-d / Political Economy,
371a-c  / Social Contract, bk ii, 398b-399a; 406c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  175d-176a;  388c-d;  617b-d  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 83b-c;
91a-94c  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306b-c / Science of Right, 446a-449c
esp 446b-447c, 448a-d; 450a 43 CONSTITUIION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE I, SECT
9
[271-272]
13d; SECT 10 (300-301] 14a; article II, SECT 4 15c; article hi, sect 3
[507-511]
16a;  AMENDMENTS,  v 17b-c; viii 17d; XIII 18c 43 Federalist: number 15,
65a-b;   number   21,   78b-d;  number  65  198a-200c  passim  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  471d-472d;  474d  44  BoswEL.h: Johnson, 204b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 90103 35d-39b esp par 96-100 36c-38a;
part ii, par 132 46b-47a; part hi, par 218 72c-d; par 220 73a-b; par 233
75d;  par  319,  106a;  additions,  60  125d; 138 139a-b / Philosophy of
History,  part iv, 320b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 364a-367a passim 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 505a-511b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
ii, 30b32a; bk vi, 168c-d; bk xii, 398b-d

[1044a]
986  7.  Law and the state la. The distinction between government by men
and  government by laws: the nature of constitutional or political law 5
Aeschylus: Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[907-931
122d-123a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b 5 Aristophanes:
Wasps  [463-507]  512d-513c 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-d; bk vii,
233a-d  6  Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i, 368c-d; BK II, 396b-c 7
Plato:  Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk hi, 667c-d; bk iv, 681b-682c; bk
ix,  754a-b  /  Seventh  Letter, 805d; 807a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v,
382a-b; bk x, ch 9 [1180* CH 6
[1134*25-^8]
14-24] 434d-435a / Politics, bk I, CH I
[1252*6-16] 445a-b; ch 5
[1254*34-^9] 448a; ch
7
[1255^15-20] 449b;
ch  12  453d-454a;  bk  ii,  ch 10 [1272*35-^11] 468d-469a; bk hi, ch 10
[1281*29-38]  479a;  CH  II  [1282^1-14]  480b-c;  ch 15 [i285^34]-ch 17
[1288*5] 484b-486c; bk iv, ch 4 [1292*4-37] 491b-d; ch 6 492b-493a; ch 8
[1293^22-27]
493c;  CH  10  [1295*9-23] 495a-b 14 Plutarch: Cato the Younger, 635a-b;
638b639a  15  Tacitus:  A?2nals,  bk  ii,  36b; bk hi, 51b-c; 61c 62a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, A 3 207a-c; q 95, a i, rep 2
226c-227c  23 Hobbes: Let'iathan, part ii, 149d-150a; part IV, 273a-c 27
Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII,  act  i,  sc  ii [91loi] 553d 35 Locke: Civil
Government  25a-81d  esp  ch iv, SECT 21 29d, CH VI, sect 57 36d-37b, ch
vii, sect 87-94 44a-46c, ch xi, sect 137 56d-57b, CH XVIII, sect 199-202
71a-72a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk ii, 4a; 7c9a, c; BK III,
12a-13c;  bk  vi,  33a-35a;  bk  xix,  137c-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality,
323d-324a;  358b;  361c-362a  /  Social Contract, bk ii, 400a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 96d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right,
401c;  436c-d; 451 b-c / Judgement, 586c 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b  passim  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: article vi [583599] 16d 43
Federalist: number 33 107b-109b passim; NUMBER 44, 146d-147a; number 53,
167d168b 43 Mill: Representative Government, 340a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
ofRight,  part hi, par 260271 82a-89c; par 349 llld-112a; additions, 171
146b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 198b-199c; part i, 213b; part ii,
271d;  part  hi,  303a-b; part iv, 329b-c; 342b-c 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 780b-d

[1044b]
J THE GREAT IDEAS 7 to7e ?<//( lb. The supremacy of law as the principle
of   political  freedom  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-441]  262a-b  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 396c-d; bk hi, 438a-b 7 Plato:
Laws,  bk hi, 672d-674d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 17 [1288*11-14]
486d; BK IV, ch 4 [1292*4-37] 491 b-d; bk v, CH 9
[1310*25-36] 512c / Athenian
Constitution,  CH  45  573d-574a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14
254b-c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 21 29d; CH VI, SECT 57-60
36d-38a;  ch  ix,  sect  124-131 53d-54d; ch xi, sect 136-139 56c58a; ch
xviii, sect 202 71d-72a; sect 206 72c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
vi,  34c-d;  bk  XI, 69a-b; bk xii, 85a-c; bk xv, 109c; 112c-d; BK XXVI,
223c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353d-355b  esp  354d355a / Political
Economy, 370b-d; 375b-c / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  v,  314d-315a,c  42 Kant: Science of Right, 398c-399c;
436c-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
[1-47] la2a passim; [72-79] 2b
43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: preamble lla,c; amendments, v-vii 17b-d;
xiii,  sect  i-xiv, sect I 18c 43 Federalist: number i, 30a-c; number 9,
47b-c;  NUMBER 53, 167d-168b; number 57, 177d-178a; number 84, 251b-253d
43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  passim, esp 267b,d274a / Representative
Government,  339d-340c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 208
69c;  par  265  84b;  par  286  96c-97a; additions, 129 137c; 135 138c /
Philosophy  of  History,  INTRO, 170c-171c; 180c-d; part i, 230a-c; PART
II, 271d-272d; part iv, 321a; 342b-d; 345a-b; 364b-c Ic. The priority of
natural  to  civil  law:  the inviolability or inalienability of natural
rights  5  Sophocles: Antigofie [450-460] 135a 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 13
[1373^1CH
15
[1375*25-^13] 619d-620a;
17] 617c-d;
[1376*33-^31] 621a-c
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii  162d; bk XIX, ch 21 524a-525a 20
Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, AA 4-6 223d-226b; q 95, a 2
227c-228c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 86c-87d; 90a-b; 94b-95a; part
ii,  115b-116a; 131a-c; 134c; 161b138c; 142b-c; 153c; part iv, 273c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 519a-520b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95b
35  Locke:  Toleration,  20d-21a  /  Civil Government, CH II, SECT 10-12
27b-28a;  ch  hi,  sect  16-19 28d-29c; ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vii, sect
87-94  44a-46c; ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi, SECT 135-140 55d-58a; ch xiv, sect
168 64b-c; CH xvi-xix 65d-81d passim

[1045a]
ldto%  Chapter 46: LAW 987 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i. led; 2b
d;  BK  XV,  109b-110a;  llla-b;  bk  xxvi,  215b-217c  38  Rouss  EAU :
Inequality, 357c-358b / Social Contract, bk I, 393d-394d; bk ii, 397a-b:
399b-c  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 52b-c; 61b; BK II, 140b; BK
IV,  228a  42  Kant:  Science  ofRight, 408d-409c: 426b-429b esp 426b-c;
434a; 436a-b; 456b-457a 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b csp
[1-28] la-b
43  Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, ix 17d-d 43 Federalist: number
28,  97c;  number  43, 143b-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 465d-466b 44 Bosw
ell:  Johnson,  363c-364a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 66
29a-c;  part  ii, par 127 45b-c; part hi, par 323-324 107a-d; additions,
43  123c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 362d-363a; 364d365a 7d.
Tyranny  and  treason  or  sedition  as  illegal  acts: the use of force
without  authority  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk hi, 432b-c 7
Plato:  Laws,  bk  ix,  744c-d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch 10
[1281*19-28] 478d-479a; bk v, ch 10
[1313*8-18] 515c-d;
BK  VII,  ch  2 [1324*^23-41] 528d-529a 14 Plutarch: Poplicola, 77a-80d;
81d  /  Timoleon,  196c-197b  /  Lysander-Sulla, 387b,d-388c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  ii, 36b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, A I,
rep  4 213c-214c; q 93, a 3, rep 2 217b218a; q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c; q
96,  a  4, ans and rep 2 233a-d; part ii-ii, q 42, a 2 584b-d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-102c;  114d115a; 115d-116a; 121b-122b; 144a;
147c;  150c151a;  152b-c; 153c; part iv, 273a-c 26 Shakespeare: Henry V,
act ii, sc ii
[102144] 540b-c
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  298  227a; 325-326 230b231a; 332 232a-b 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch  xi,  sect  136-140  56c-58a;  ch  xiii, sect 155
60d-61a;  ch xviiXIX 70c-81d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 361c-362a / Social
Contraa,  bk  i,  388d-389a; bk iii, 419a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
251d;  525d-526c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92d-93c 42 K.\nt: Science
of Right, 439a-441d 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b esp
[25-30] lb
43   Articles   of  Confederation:  iv  [37-44]  5d;  v  [74-81]  6a  43
Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article ii, sect 4 15c; article hi, sect 3
15d-16a  43  Federalist: number 16, 68b-c; number 43, 140c-d; NU-MBER 65
198a-200c passim; number 74, 222b-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b,d [fn i]

[1045b]
46  Hkgel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 278 92c-93a / Philosophy of
History,  part  iv, 328b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 8d lOd; bk xi,
505a-511b;  epilogue  i,  668a  669d  le.  The  need  for administrative
discretion  in  matters  undetermined  by  law:  the royal prerogative 7
Plato:  Statesman,  600a-b / Laws, bk vi, 705d-706c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch 10 385c-386b passim, esp
[1137^26-31] 386a
/ Politics, bk HI, CH 16
[1287*24-28]
485d;
[1287^15-25]
486a-b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  9  556c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354*^4-7] 593c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, A I, REP
3  226c-227c;  q  96,  a 6, rep 3 235a-d; Q 97, a 4 238b-239b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii, 103c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95a 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xii,  sect  147 59a-b; ch xiv 62b-64c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 73d-75b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 448a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 214 71a-c; additions, 134
138b-c If. The juridical conception of the person: the legal personality
of  the  state  and  other  corporations  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
96c-98a,c;  part  II, 100c-102c; 104a-b; 117b-119a; 119d-120c; 122b-124b
esp  122b-c;  130b-d;  132a-b;  151c152a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
368d-369a  /  Social Contract, bk i, 392a; 393a; bk ii, 396d397a; bk hi,
408b-409a; 412c 42 K.\nt: Science of Right, 429b; 438b; 454a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 46 23d-24a; part hi, par 279, 93c;
additions,  191  150a-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  285b-d;
302d-303c  8.  Historical  observations on the development of law and on
the  diversity  of  legal systems or institutions New Testament: Romans,
3:1-5:21 / Galatians, 3:1-5-14 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c; 14a-c; bk
ii,  77d-78b; 87a-b; bk hi, 96a-b 7 Plato: Critias, 484c-485d / Laws, bk
hi,  664b-670a esp 666b-c, 668a; 674d-676b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii,
ch 7-12 461d-471d passim / Athenian Constitution 553a-584a,c passim, esp
ch  27,  par  3-5  565b-c,  ch 63-69 581d-584a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[11361160] 76a-b
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  26a-b / Lycurgus 32a48d passim / Numa Pompilius
49a-61d  passim  /  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon  64b,  d77a,c /
Poplicola, 81b-82a / Poplicola- Solorit 86d-87b

[1046a]
988  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (8. Historical observations on the development of
law  and on the diversity of legal systems or institutions.^ 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  ii, 44b-c; bk hi, 51b52a; 57b-58d; 61c-62a; bk iv, 67d-68a;
bk  XII,  llla-d;  bk  xiv,  151d-152c;  bk  xv,  162c-d  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13-14  16c17a  /  City  of  God, bk x, ch 25
313c-314c; bk XVIII, CH II 477c-d; bk xx, ch 4 532b-c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 94, A 4, ANS 223d-224d; qq 98-108 239b-337d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vi
[1-30]
113c-d  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  144c  25  Montaigne: Essays,
47c-48a;  281a-283c;  519b-520b  26  Shakespeare:  Henry V, act i, sc ii
[33-95]  534b-535a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 95b 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 374b-376a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws la-315d passim
38   Rousseau:   Inequality,  324c-325a;  330a-d;  353d-355c;  366a-b  /
Political Economy, 369c-d / Social Contract, bk ii, 401d-402a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 51 d; 175b-176a; 616d-618d; 624b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  71b,d-96d;  108a-c;  210b-c;  403b-404d  42 Kant: Science of
Right, 451d-452a 43 Federalist: number 2, 32a-d; number 9, 47b-d; number
38,  121b-122b;  number  53,  167d;  NUMBER 84, 252b-c 43 Mill: Liberty,
295d-296b  /  Representative  Government,  329d-330a  /  Utilitarianism,
467c-d  44  Boswei^l:  Johnson,  204c-205b 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight,
intro, par 3 10a12c; additions, 176 147c-d / Philosophy of History, part
i,  229d-230a; part ii, 271d272a; part hi, 290a; 296b-297a; 312c-d; part
IV,  345a-b  48  Melville:  Mo/^;/  Dicf{,  292a-297a  50 Marx: Capital,
114d-115c; 131a-145c; 194a-b; 195b-196d; 236c-238a; 241a-244b; 357a358b;
364a-368b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk vi, 238c-243d 9. The legal
profession  and  the  study  of law: praise and dispraise of lawyers and
judges Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 1:12-17; 17:8-13 / / Samuel, 8:3— (D)
/  Kings,  8:3 / Isaiah, 1:21-26— (D) Isaias, 1:21-26 /Jeremiah, 5:2629—
(D) Jeremias, 5:26-29 / Micah, 3:9-12— (D) Micheas, 3:9-12

[1046b]
9
[8:i-8
New   Testament:   Lul^e,  11:45-46,52-54;  /  /  Corinthians,  6:1-9  5
Aristophanes: Clouds [428-475] 493d-494b dl / Birds
[27-48] 542c-d;
[1035-1057] 555c-d;
[1410-1469] 559c-560b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  95d-96b  7  Plato:  Apology,  200a-c /
Republic,  bk hi, 337b-338a / Theaetetus, 528c-529a; 544b-c / Statesman,
604c-605c  / Laws, bk xi, 784a-b; bk XII, 792c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
x, ch 9
[ii8o**i21181^24] 435b-436a,c
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1354^13-1355^3] 593b-594a; ch 12 [1372*1721] 615d; [1372*33-35] 616a
15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi, 101c-102a; bk xiv, 151c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b515a  22  Chaucer: Prologue [309-330] 164b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii,  132a-b;  135b; 150b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 85c-92c; bk hi, 204c-215c 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 47c-48a; 238a-b; 283a; 516c-520b 26 Shakespeare: 2nd
Henry VI, act iv, sc ii
[83-91] 58c / Merchant of Venice, act iv, sc
i  425c-430b  30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 5b-6a; 94d95a 32 Milton:
Sonnets,  xviii  67b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x, SECT 12
294b-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  h,  73b-75a;  part iv, 152a-154a 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 260a-b; 374b-376a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 54b-c
38  Rousseau: Inequality, 330a-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 314b
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  244d-245d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
72d-73a;  75d-80b  43 Federalist: number 78, 233a-c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
157c-d;  191c-d;  209d266b;  i  210a;  216c; 251d-252b; 281c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 3 10a12c; PART HI, par 212 70d-71a; par
215  71c-d; par 228 74d-75b; par 297 99b; additions, 135 138c 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part i [1968-1979] 46b-47a 48 Melville: Moby DicJ{, 295b-297a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  243c; bk xii, 547b-d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk ix, 247b-d

[1047a]
CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions bearing on the kinds of law, j^^
Constitution 2b; God 7c; Justice le, loa; tice 6-6b. The relation of law
to  liberty,  justice,  and  peace,  see  Democracy  4a; Justice io-ioc;
Liberty  id, ig; Monarchy 4e(i); Tyranny 5a; War and Peace iia, iic; and
for the distinction between government by law and government by men, see
Constitution  i;  Monarchy  ia(i);  Tyranny 5-5b. The relation of law to
duty,  virtue,  and  sin, see Duty 3, 5; Education 4c; Sin i; Virtue and
Vice  4d(3);  Will  8d.  The  conception of the common good as an end of
government and law, see Good and Evil 5d; Government ic; Happiness 5-5b;
Liberty  le;  State  2f.  Other  discussions  of  the making of law, see
Government  3C-3c(2); Prudence 6b. The factors of authority and power in
lawmaking,  see  Government  id;  Tyranny la; and for law in relation to
sovereignty,  see  Government  la; Liberty ib; Tyranny 5c; War AND Peace
iid.  Other  discussions of the application of laws to particular cases,
see  Government  3d-3d(2); Justice lod; Universal and Particular 6c. The
relation of law to custom and habit, see Custom and Convention 6b; Habit
7.  The  consideration  of punishment for the breach of human and divine
law, see God 5i; Justice loc; Punishment 4-4d, 5a-5e(2); Sin 6-6e. Other
discussions  of  the use of lawless force, and of the right of rebellion
or  civil  disobedience,  see  Justice lob; Revolution 6a-6b. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in Greai Boo\s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into two groups: L Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  L  SECT  XI  Augustine.  On  the  Spirit and the Letter . Of the
Original  Contract  Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Ge-ntiles,  bk  hi,  ch hi-
\.S\iiTii.Lectureson Justice, Police, Revenue andArms 121, 128-130 Kant.
Lectures on Ethics, pp 47-70 . Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, q 16
Hegel. The Philosophy of Mind, sect ii, sub sect — . The Two Precepts of
Charity and the Ten Coma,c (cc,a,/3) mandments Freud. Totem and Taboo F.
Bacon.  The Maxims of the Law HoBBES. Philosophical Rudiments Concerning
Govern-  ^^•  ment  and  Society,  ch  2-4  Cicero.  De  Republica  {The
Republic),  iii  . The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic . De Legibus
(The  Laws) . A Dialogue Between a Philosopher and a Student Quintilian.
Institutio  Oratoria  {Institutes  ofOratory)^  of  the  Common  Laws of
England  bk v; bk vii, ch 5-7, 10 Spinoza. TractatusTheologico-Politicus
{TheologicalGaius. Commentaries Political Treatise), ch ^, 12 Talmud

[1047b]
Chapter 46: LAW 989 Hume. A Treatise ofHuman Nature, bk hi, part ii,

[1048a]
990  THE GREAT IDEAS Justinian. The Digest . The Institutes Saadia Gaon.
The  Bool^  of  Beliefs and Opinions, TREATISE III Ranulph de Glanville.
The  Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of England Maimonides. The Guidefor
the  Perplexed, part hi, CH 25-53 Bracton. De Legibus et Consuetudinibus
Angliae  {On the Laws and Customs of England) Njalssaga Legnano. On War,
Reprisals,  and the Duel Fortes CUE. Governance of England . De Laudibus
Legum Angliae {In Praise of English Law) Saint-German. Dialogues Between
a  Doctor  ofDivinity  and  a Student in the Laws of England ViTORiA. De
Indis  et De Jure Belli Soto. Libri Decem de Justitia et Jure Hooker. Of
the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity SuAREZ. A Treatise on Laws and God the
Lawgiver  Coke. Institutes of the Laws of England Grotius. The Rights of
War and Peace Pufendorf. DeJure Naturae et Gentium {On the Law of Nature
and  Nations)  Vico.  II  diritto  universale  BuRLAMAQUi. Principles of
Natural  and Politic Law Blackstone. Commentaries on the Laws of England
Vattel.  The  Law of Nations Voltaire. "Crimes or Offenses," "Criminal,"
"Law  (Natural),"  "Law  (Salic),"  "Law  (Civil  and  Ecclesiastical),"
"Laws,"  "Laws  (Spirit  of),"  in A Philosophical Dictionary J. Wilson.
Worlds,  part  i,  ch  i-v, xii; part hi Jefferson. The Commonplace Boo\
Bentham.  A  Comment  on  the  Commentaries,  sect  1-12 . A Fragment on
Government,  ch  4-5  .  An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation   Austin.   Lectures   on   Jurisprudence   .  The  Province
ofJurisprudence Determined

[1048b]
Whewell.   The  Elements  of  Morality,  bk  vi,  ch  i  Thoreau.  Civil
Disobedience  Dickens.  PicJ^wic/^  Papers . Bleal{ House Trendelenburg.
Naturrecht  auf dem Grunde der Ethi\ Maine. Ancient Law H. SiDGwicK. The
Methods  of Ethics, bk hi, ch 6 1 Ibsen. Pillars of Society Ihering. The
Strugglefor  Law  . Law as a Means to an End O. W. Holmes Jr. The Common
Law  Brentano. The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong, par 1-13,
37-49  Pollock. Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics, ch 2 . The Expansion
ofthe  Common  Law Dicey. The Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in
England  During  the  Nineteenth Century Vecchio. The Formal Bases ofLaw
Kohler.  Philosophy  ofLaw  DuGUiT.  Law in the Modern State B. Russell.
Proposed  Roads to Freedom, ch 5 T. Veblen. The Vested Interests and the
State  of  the Industrial Arts, ch 2 Pound. The Spirit of the Common Law
Cardozo.  The  Nature  of  the  Judicial Process . The Growth of the Law
Kafka.  The  Trial  ViNOGRADOFF.  Common Sense in Law . Custom and Right
Hocking.  Present  Status  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law  and  of  Rights
Malinowski.  Crime  and Custom in Savage Society C. K. Allen. Law in the
Maying  Dewey.  "Logical Method and Law," "Nature and Reason in Law," in
Philosophy  and  Civilization F. Cohen. Ethical Systems and Legal Ideals
M.  R.  Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk hi, ch 4 . Law and the Social Order
A.  J. Carlyle. Political Liberty Maritain. The Rights ofMan and Natural
Law Kelsen. General Theory ofLaw and State

[1049a]
Chapter  ^y:  LIBERTY  INTRODUCTION C)ERTY and law, liberty and justice,
liberty  and  equality—  the  familiar  connection of these terms breeds
neglect of the meaning they confer upon one another through association.
A  few  simple  questions  may help to restore the significance of these
relationships.  Are  men free when their actions are regulated bv law or
coercion  ?  Does  liberty  consist  in  doing  whatever  one pleases or
whatever  one  has  the  power to do, or is one required by justice to !
abstain  from  injury  to  others? Do considerations of justice draw the
line  between  liberty  and  license?  Can  there  be liberty apart from
equality  and  perhaps  also  fraternity  ?  Other questions immediately
suggest  themselves.  Does  not  the rule of law secure Uberty to !' the
governed?   Is  not  slavery  the  condition  of  those  who  are  ruled
tyrannically or lawlessly ? Does it make a difference to freedom whether
the  law  or  the  constitution  is just? Or is that indifferent because
government itself is the impediment to liberty? Does liberty increase as
the scope of government dwindles and reach fullness only with anarchy or
when  men  live  in  a  state  of  nature  ?  Yet  are not some forms of
government  said  to be fitting and some uncongenial to free men? Do all
men  have  a right to freedom, or only some? Are some men by nature free
and  some  slave?  Does  such  a differentiation imply both equality and
inequality  in  human  nature  with,  as  a  consequence,  equality  and
inequality  in  status or treatment ? What impUcations for law, justice,
and equality has the distinction between free societies and dependent or
subject  communities?  As  Tolstoy  points out, the variety of questions
which  can  be  asked  about  liberty  indicates  the variety of subject
matters  or  sciences  in  which the problems of freedom are differently
raised. "What is sin, the conception of 991

[1049b]
which arises from the consciousness of man's freedom? That is a question
for  theology  .  .  .  What  is  man's  responsibility  to society, the
conception  of  which  results from the conception of freedom? That is a
question  for  jurisprudence . . . What is conscience and the perception
of  right  and  wrong  in  actions that follow from the consciousness of
freedom? That is a question for ethics . . . How should the past fife of
nations and of humanity be regarded as the result of the free, or as the
result  of  the  constrained,  activity  of man ? That is a question for
history."  The  great traditional issues of liberty seem to be stated by
these  questions.  From  the  fact  that  most,  perhaps  all,  of these
questions  elicit  opposite  answers  from  the great books, it night be
supposed  that  there are as many basic issues as there are questions of
this  sort.  But  the answers to certain questions presuppose answers to
others.  Furthermore,  the meaning of liberty or freedom or independence
is  not  the  same  throughout the questions we have considered. Answers
which appear to be inconsistent may not be so when the meanings involved
in  their  formulation  are  distinguished. We must, therefore, find the
roots  of the several distinct doctrines of liberty in order to separate
real  issues  from  verbal  conflicts. The historians report the age-old
struggle  on  the part of men and of states for liberty or independence.
History  as  a  development  of  the spirit does not begin, according to
Hegel, until this struggle first appears. "The History of the world," he
writes,  "is  none  other  than  the  progress  of  the consciousness of
Freedom,"  which  does not reach its climax until freedom is universally
achieved.  But  though freedom is its product, history, in Hegel's view,
is not a work of freedom, but "involves an absolute ne-

[1050a]
992  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  cessity."  Each  stage of its development occurs
inevitably.  Other  historians  see man as free to work out his destiny,
and  look  upon  the  great  crises of civilization as turning points at
which  free  men,  that is, men having free will, exercise a free choice
for  better  or  for  worse.  "Whether  we speak of the migration of the
peoples  and  the  incursions  of  the  barbarians, or of the decrees of
Napoleon  III,  or  of  someone's  action  an  hour  ago in choosing one
direction  out  of  several  for  his  walk,  we  are unconscious of any
contradiction,"  Tolstoy  declares,  between freedom and necessity. "Our
conception  of the degree of freedom.," he goes on to say, "often varies
according  to  differences in the point of view from which we regard the
event,  but every human action appears to us as a certain combination of
freedom  and  inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain
measure  of  freedom  and a certain measure of inevitability. And always
the  more  freedom  we  see  in  any action the less inevitability do we
perceive,  and  the  more  inevitability the less freedom." Accordingly,
neither  necessity which flows from the laws of matter or of spirit, nor
overhanging  and indomitable fate determines the direction of events. If
the  theologians  say  that  nothing happens which God does not foresee,
they   also  say  that  divine  providence  leaves  the  world  full  of
contingencies  and man a free agent to operate among them. "Though there
is for God a certain order of all causes," it does not follow, Augustine
says,  that  nothing depends "on the free exercise of our own wills, for
our  wills  themselves  are  included  in  that order of causes which is
certain  to  God,  and is embraced by His foreknowledge, for human wills
are  also  causes of human actions." These matters are further discussed
in  the  chapters  on  Fate, History, and Necessity AND Contingency. The
mention  of  them here suggests another meaning of liberty— that of free
choice  or free will—and with it issues other than those involved in the
relation  of  the  individual to the state or to his fellow men. Yet the
metaphysical  questions  about  liberty  and  necessity,  or freedom and
causality,  and the theological questions about man's freedom under God,
are not without bearing on the politi-

[1050b]
cal  problems of man's freedom in society, or his rights and powers. The
fundamental   doctrines  of  civil  liberty  certainly  seem  to  differ
according  to  the  conception  of  natural  freedom on i which they are
based. Freedom may be natural i in the sense that free will is a part of
human  nature;  or  in the sense that freedom is a birthright, an innate
and  inalienable  right. It may be natural in the sense in which freedom
in  a state of nature is distinguished from pohtical liberty, or liberty
under  civil law and government. The effort to clarify meanings requires
us  to  look  at  the  three  words  which  we have used as if they were
interchangeable—  "liberty," "freedom," and "independence." For the most
part,  "liberty"  and  "freedom"  are  synonyms.  Both words are used in
English  versions  of  the  great  books.  Though authors or translators
sometimes  prefer  one,  sometimes  the other, their preference does not
seem to reflect a variation in meaning. In Enghsh the word "freedom" has
a little greater range in that it permits the formation of the adjective
"free."  It  is  also  adapted  to  speaking  of  freedom  from  certain
restraints  or  undesirable  conditions, as well as of freedom to act in
accordance   with   desire   or   to  exercise  certain  privileges.  In
consequence,  the  word  "freedom"  is  more  frequently employed in the
discussion  of  free  will.  Though the traditional enumeration of civil
liberties  may  use  the  phrasing "liberty of conscience or worship" as
frequently as "freedom of conscience or worship," "freedom of speech" is
more  usual, and "freedom from fear or want or economic dependence" does
not  seem  to  have an alternative phrasing. The word "independence" has
special  connotations  which  make  it  equivalent  to  only part of the
meaning of "freedom" or "liberty." Negatively, independence is a freedom
from  limitation  or  from  being  subject  to determination by another.
Positively,  independence  imphes  self-sufficiency  and adequate power.
When  we  speak  of a man of independent means, we refer not only to his
freedom  from  want  or  economic  dependence on others, but also to his
having  sufficient  wealth  to  suit  his tastes or purposes. A moment's
reflection  will  show  that  this  is a relative matter. It is doubtful
whether

[1051a]
absolute  economic independence is possible for men or even for nations.
The  real  question  here seems to be a metaphysical one. Can any finite
thing  be  absolutely  independent?  The  traditional  answer  is No. As
appears  in the chapter on Infinity, only a being infinite in perfection
and  power—only  the  Supreme  One  of  Plotinus,  the  uncreated God of
Aquinas,  or  the  self-caused God of Spinoza has complete independence.
God  has  the  freedom of autonomy which cannot belong to finite things.
There is, however, another sense of divine freedom which Aquinas affirms
and both Plotinus and Spinoza deny. That is freedom of choice. "God does
not  act  from freedom of will," Spinoza writes; yet God alone acts as a
free  cause,  for God alone "exists from the necessity of his own nature
and  is  determined  to  action  by  himself  alone." The divine freedom
consists  in  God's  self-determination  which,  for  Spinoza,  does not
exclude  necessity.  The  opposite view is most clearly expressed in the
Christian  doctrine  of  creation.  The  created  world  does not follow
necessarily  from  the  divine  nature.  "Since  the  goodness of God is
perfect,"  Aquinas writes, "and can exist without other things, inasmuch
as no perfection can accrue to Him from them, it follows that for Him to
will  things other than Himself is not absolutely necessary." This issue
of  freedom  or  necessity  with regard to God's will and action is more
fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on Will and World. The metaphysical
identification  of  independence  with infinity does not carry over into
the sphere of political freedom. Yet in one respect there is an analogy.
The autonomous is that which is a law unto itself. It admits no superior
authority.  When in the tradition of political thought states are called
"free  and  independent,"  their  autonomy  or sovereignty means that by
virtue  of which, in the words of the Declaration of Independence, "they
have  full  power  to  levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract  aUiances,
establish   commerce,  and  to  do  all  other  acts  and  things  which
independent  states may of right do." Free and independent states do not
have  infinite  power.  There  is  always the possibility of their being
subjugated   by  another  state  and  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a
dependency. But

[1051b]
Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  993  though  their  power  is  not infinite, they
acknowledge no superior. To be a sovereign is to accept commands from no
one.  Since  autonomy  or  sovereignty is incompatible with living under
human law or government, the independence of sovereign princes or states
must  be  an  anarchic  freedom—a  freedom from law and government. This
seems  to  be  the  view  of Hobbes, Locke, Kant, and Hegel, all of whom
refer  to  the  anarchy  of  independent  states or sovereign princes to
explain  what they mean by the "state of nature." Sovereigns are, in the
words of Kant, "like lawless Applying this conception to individual men,
Hobbes  and Locke define natural as opposed to civil liberty in terms of
man's  independence in a state of nature. In a state of nature man had a
limited  independence,  since  each  man  might be coerced by a superior
force;  but  it  was  an  absolute independence in the sense that he was
subject  to  no human government or man-made The natural freedom of man,
according  to  Hobbes, is not free will. Since "every act of man's will,
and every desire and inclination, proceed from some cause, and that from
another  cause, in a continual chain (whose first link is in the hand of
God, the first of all causes), they proceed from necessity.'' Liberty is
not  of  the will, but of the man, consisting in this: "that he finds no
stop  in  doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination to do." The
proper  application  of  the word "free" is to bodies in motion, and the
liberty  it signifies when so applied is merely "the absence of external
impediments."  The  natural  right of every man is "the liberty each man
has  to  use  his  own power ... for the preservation of his own nature,
that is to say, of his own life . . . and consequently of doing anything
which  in his own judgment and reason he shall conceive to be the aptest
means thereunto." This liberty or natural right belongs to man only in a
state  of  nature.  When  men  leave  the  state of nature and enter the
commonwealth,  they  surrender  this  natural  liberty in exchange for a
civil  liberty which, according to Hobbes, consists in nothing more than
their freedom to do what the law of the

[1052a]
994  THE  GREAT IDEAS state does not prohibit, or to omit doing what the
law does not command. Locke agrees that man's natural liberty is not the
freedom  of  his  will  in choosing, but the freedom to do what he wills
without  constraint  or  impediment. He differs from Hobbes, however, in
his  conception  of natural liberty because he differs in his conception
of  the  state  of  nature. For Hobbes the state of nature is a state of
war;  the notions of right and wrong, justice and injustice, can have no
place  in it. "Where there is no common power, there is no law; where no
law,  no  injustice." The liberty which sovereign states now have is the
same  as  "that which every man should have if there were no civil laws,
nor commonwealth at all. And the effects of it also are the same. For as
amongst  masterless men, there is perpetual war of every man against his
neighbor  ...  so  in  states  and  commonwealths  not  dependent on one
another,  every commonwealth has an absolute liberty to do what it shall
judge  .  .  .  most  conducing  to its benefit." For Locke the state of
nature  is  not  a  state  of  war,  but a natural as opposed to a civil
society,  that  is,  a  society in which men live together under natural
rather  than  under  civil law. Men who live in this condition are "in a
state  of  perfect  freedom  to order their actions and dispose of their
possessions  as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature."
This  is  a limited, not an absolute freedom; or, as Locke says, "though
this  be a state of liberty, yet it is not a state of license." The line
between liberty and license is drawn by the precepts of the natural law.
The  difference,  then,  between natural and civil liberty lies in this.
Natural  liberty  consists  in  being  "free  from any superior power on
earth,"  or  not being "under the will or legislative authority of man."
Only the rules of natural law limit freedom of action. Civil liberty, or
liberty  under  civil law, consists in being "under no other legislative
power  but  that  established  by  consent."  It  is  a  freedom for the
individual  to  follow his own will in all matters not prescribed by the
law  of  the state. In the arguments for and against free will, one view
regards  free  will  as  incompatible  with  the principle of causality,
natural necessity, or

[1052b]
God's omnipotence; the other conceives free choice as falling within the
order  of  nature  or causality and under God's providence. We shall not
consider  these  alternatives  in  this  chapter,  since  this  issue is
reserved for the chapter on Will. Yet one thing is clear for the present
consideration  of  poUtical  liberty. If the statement that men are born
free  means that it is a property of their rational natures to possess a
free  will, then they do not lose their innate freedom when they live in
civil  society.  Government  may  interfere with a man's actions, but it
cannot  coerce  his  will. Government can go no further than to regulate
the expression of man's freedom in external actions. Nor is the range of
free  will  limited  by law. As indicated in the chapter on Law, any law
moral  or  civil, natural or positive—which directs human conduct can be
violated.  It  leaves  man free to disobey it and take the consequences.
But if the rule is good or just, then the act which transgresses it must
have  the  opposite  quality.  The  freedom  of a free will is therefore
morally  indifferent.  It can be exercised to do either good or evil. We
use  our  freedom  properly,  says Augustine, when we act virtuously; we
misuse  it  when  we choose to act viciously. "The will," he writes, "is
then  truly free, when it is not the slave of vices and sins." Those who
conceive  the natural moral law as stating the precepts of virtue or the
commands  of  duty and who, in addition, regard every concrete act which
proceeds  from  a  free  choice  of the will as either good or bad—never
indifferent—  find  that  the  distinction  between  liberty and license
applies  to  every free act. The meaning of this distinction is the same
as  that between freedom properly used and freedom misused. Furthermore,
since there is no good act which is not prescribed by the moral law, the
whole  of  liberty,  as  opposed to license, consists in doing what that
moral law commands. These considerations affect the problem of political
liberty,  especially  on  the  question  whether  the spheres of law and
liberty  are  separate,  or  even opposed. One view, as we have seen, is
that  the area of civil liberty lies outside the realm of acts regulated
by law. To break the law may be criminal license, but to

[1053a]
obey  it  is not to be free. The sphere of Hbcrty increases as the scope
or  stringency  of  hnv  diminishes.  The  opposite view does not regard
freedom as freedom from law. "Freedom," Hegel maintains, "is nothing but
the  recognition  and  adoption of such universal substantial objects as
Right and Law," All that matters in the relation between liberty and law
is  whether the law is just and whether a man is virtuous. If the law is
just,  then it does not compel a just man to do what he would not freely
elect  to do even if the law did not exist. Only the criminal is coerced
or  restrained  by  good  laws.  To  say  that such impediment to action
destroys  freedom  would  be to deny the distinction between liberty and
license. Nevertheless, liberty can be abridged by law. That is precisely
the problem of the good man living under unjust laws. If, as Montesquieu
says,  "liberty  can consist only in the power of doing what we ought to
will,  and  in  not  being constrained to do what we ought not to will,"
then  governments and laws interfere * with liberty when they command or
prohibit  acts contrary to the free choice of a good man. The conception
of  freedom  as  the condition of those who are rightly governed—who are
commanded  to do only what they would do anyway—seems to be analogically
present  in  Spinoza's  theory of human bondage and human freedom. It is
there  accompanied  by  a  denial  of  I  he  will's  freedom of choice.
According  to  Spinoza human action is causally determined by one of two
factors in man's nature— the passions or reason. When man is governed by
his  passions,  he  is in "bondage, for a man under their control is not
his  own  master,  but  is mastered by fortune, in whose power he is, so
that he is often forced to follow the worse, although he sees the better
before him." When man is governed by reason he is free, for he 'does the
will  of  no  one but himself, and does those things only which he knows
are of greatest importance in life, and which he therefore desires above
all  things."  The man who acts under the influence of the passions acts
in  terms  of  inadequate ideas and in the shadow of error or ignorance.
When  reason rules, man acts with adequate knowledge and in the light of
truth. So, too, in the theory of Augustine and

[1053b]
Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  995  Aquinas,  the  virtuous  man  is  morally or
spiritually free because human reason has triumphed in its conflict with
the  passions  to  influence  the free judgment of his will. The rule of
reason does not annul the will's freedom. Nor is the will less free when
it  is  moved  by  the  promptings  of the passions. "A passion," writes
Aquinas, "cannot draw or move the will directly." It does so indirectly,
as,  for  example,  "when  those  who are in some kind of passion do not
easily turn their imagination away from the object of their affections."
But  though  the will is not altered in its freedom by whether reason or
emotion  dominates,  the situation is not the same with the human person
as  a  whole.  The  theologians see him as a moral agent and a spiritual
being  who  gains  or loses freedom according as the will submits to the
guidance  of  reason or follows the passions. On the supernatural level,
the  theologians  teach that God's grace assists reason to conform human
acts to the divine law, but also that grace does not abolish free choice
on the part of the wiU. "The first freedom of the will," Augustine says,
"which man received when he was created upright, consisted in an ability
not  to  sin,  but  also  in an ability to sin." So long as man lives on
earth,  he remains free to sin. But supernatural grace, added to nature,
raises  man  to  a  higher  level  of spiritual freedom than he can ever
achieve  by the discipline of the acquired Still higher is the ultim.ate
freedom  of  beatitude itself. Augustine calls this "the last freedom of
will"  which,  by  the  gift of God, leaves man "not able to sin." It is
worth  noting that this ultimate liberty consists in freedom from choice
or  the  need  to choose, not in freedom from love or law. Man cannot be
more  free than when he succeeds, with God's help, in submitting himself
through  love  to  the  rule of God. The political significance of these
moral and theological doctrines of freedom would seem to be that man can
be  as free in civil society as in a state of nature. Whether in fact he
is depends upon the justice of the laws which govern him, not upon their
number  or  the matters with which they deal. He is, of course, not free
to  do  whatever he pleases regardless of the well-being of other men or
the welfare of the community.

[1054a]
996  THE GREAT IDEAS but that, in the moral conception of Hberty, is not
a  loss  of  freedom.  He  loses  freedom  in  society  only  when he is
mistreated  or misgoverned—when, being the equal of other men, he is not
treated  as their equal; or when, being capable of ruling himself, he is
denied a voice in his own government. The meaning of tyranny and slavery
seems  to  confirm this conception of pohtical liberty. To be a slave is
not  merely  to be ruled by another; it consists in being subject to the
mastery  of  another,  i.e., to be ruled as a means to that other's good
and  without  any  voice  in  one's  own  government.  This  implies, in
contrast,  that  to  be ruled as a free man is to be ruled for one's own
good and with some degree of participation in the government under which
one   lives.   According   to   Aristotle's   doctrine  of  the  natural
slave—examined in the chapter on Slavery—some men do not have the nature
of  free  men, and so should not be governed as free men. Men who are by
nature  slaves  are  not unjustly treated when they are enslaved. "It is
better  for  them as for all inferiors," Aristotle maintains, "that they
should  be  under the rule of a master." Though they do not in fact have
the  liberty  of  free men, they are not deprived thereby of any freedom
which  properly  belongs  to  them,  any  more  than a man who is justly
imprisoned is deprived of a freedom which is no longer his by right. The
root  of  this distinction between free men and slaves by nature lies in
the  supposition  of  a natural inequality. The principle of equality is
also  relevant  to  the  injustice of tyranny and the difference between
absolute  and  constitutional government. In the Republic Plato compares
the  tyrant to an owner of slaves. "The only difference," he writes, "is
that  the  tyrant  has  more  slaves"  and  enforces  "the  harshest and
bitterest  form of slavery." The tyrannical ruler enslaves those who are
his equals by nature and who should be ruled as free men. Throughout the
whole  tradition  of political thought the name of tyranny signifies the
abolition  of  liberty.  But  absolute  or  despotic  government  is not
uniformly  regarded  as  the  enemy of liberty. The issue concerning the
legitimacy or justice of absolute government is examined in the chapters
on Monarchy and Tyranny. But we

[1054b]
can  take  it  as generally agreed that the subjects of a despot, unlike
the citizens of a republic, do not enjoy any measure of self-government.
To  the  extent  that political liberty consists in some degree of self-
government,  the  subjects  of  absolute  rule  lack the sort of freedom
possessed  by  citizens under constitutional government. For this reason
the  supremacy  of law is frei quently said to be the basic principle of
political liberty. "Wherever law ends, tyranny begins," Locke writes. In
going  beyond the law, a ruler goes beyond the grant of authority vested
in  him  by the consent of the people, which alone makes man "subject to
the  laws  of  any  government."  Furthermore, law for Locke is itself a
principle  of  freedom.  "In  its true notion," he writes, it "is not so
much  the limitation as the direction of a free and intelligent agent to
his  proper  interest, and prescribes no farther than is for the general
good of those under that law. Could they be happier without it, the law,
as  a  useless  thing, would of itself vanish, and that ill deserves the
name of confinement which hedges us in only from bogs and precipices. So
that  however  it  may  be mistaken, the end of law is not to abolish or
restrain, but to preserve and enlarge freedom." A constitution gives the
ruled  the status of citizenship and a share in their own government. It
may also give them legal means with which to defend their liberties when
officers   of  government  invade  their  rights  in  violation  of  the
constitution.  According  to  Montesquieu,  for  whom  political liberty
exists  only  under government by law, never under despotism or the rule
of  men,  the freedom of government itself demands "from the very nature
of  things  that power should be a check to power." This is accomplished
by  a  separation  of powers. A system of checks and balances limits the
power  of  each  branch  of  the  government  and permits the law of the
constitution  to  be  applied by one department against another when its
officials  usurp powers not granted by the constitution or otherwise act
unconstitutionally.  Yet,  unlike  tyranny, absolute government has been
defended.  The  ancients raise the question whether, if a truly superior
or  almost godlike man existed, it would not be proper for him to govern
his inferiors in an absolute man-

[1055a]
ner.  "Mankind  will  not  say  that  such  a  one is to be expelled and
exiled,"  Aristotle  writes;  "on  the  other hand, he ought not to be a
subject—  that  would  be  as if mankind should claim to rule over Zeus,
dividing  his  offices  among them. The only alternative," he concludes,
"is  that all should joyfully obey such a ruler, according to what seems
to  be  the  order  of  nature, and that men like him should be kings in
their  state  for  life."  Those subject to his government would be free
only  in  the sense that they would be ruled for their own good, perhaps
better  f  than  they  could  rule  themselves. But they would lose that
portion  of  political  freedom which consists in self-government. Faced
v/ith  this  alternative  to  constitutional government —which Aristotle
describes  as  the  government of free men and equals—what should be the
choice  of  men  who  are  by  nature  free?  The  ancient answer is not
decisively  in  one direction. There are many passages in both Plato and
Aristotle  in  which  the  absolute rule of a wise king (superior to his
subjects  as  a  father  is  to  children,  or a god to men) seems to be
pictured  as  the  political  ideal.  The fact that free men would be no
freer  than  children  in a well administered household does not seem to
Plato  and  Aristotle  to  be a flaw in the picture. They do not seem to
hold that the fullness of liberty is the primary measure of the goodness
of  government. On the contrary, justice is more important. As Aristotle
suggests,  it  would  be unjust for the superior man to be treated as an
equal  and  given the status of one self-governing citizen among others.
But   he  also  points  out  that  "democratic  states  have  instituted
ostracism"  as  a  means of dealing v/ith such superior men. "EquaUty is
above  all  things their aim, and therefore they ostracized and banished
from  the  city  for  a  time those who seemed to predominate too much."
Because  it  saves  the  superior man from injustice and leaves the rest
free to practice selfgovernment, "the argument for ostracism," Aristotle
claims,  "is  based  upon  a  kind  of  political  justice,"  in that it
preserves  the  balance  within  the  state, and perhaps also because it
leaves  men free to practice self-government among themselves. Since the
eighteenth century, a strong tend-

[1055b]
Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  997 ency in the opposite direction appears in the
political  thought  of  Locke, Montesquieu, Rousseau, Kant, the American
constitutionalists,  and  J. S. Mill. Self-government is regarded as the
essence  of  good  government.  It  is  certainly  the  mark of what the
eighteenth  century  writers call "free government." Men who are born to
be free, it is thought, cannot be satisfied with less civil liberty than
this.  "Freedom,"  says Kant, "is independence of the compulsory will of
another;  and  in  so  far  as  it  can co-exist with the freedom of all
according  to a universal law, it is the one sole, original inborn right
belonging  to every man in virtue of his hum^anity. There is, indeed, an
innate equality belonging to every man which consists in his right to be
independent of being bound by others to anything more than that to which
he  may  also  reciprocally  bind them." The fundamental equality of men
thus  appears  to  be founded in their equal right to freedom; and that,
for  Kant  at least, rests on the freedom of will with which all men are
born.  The  criterion of the good society is the realization of freedom.
Kant's  conception of human society as a realm of ends, in which no free
person  should  be  degraded to the ignominy of being a means, expresses
one  aspect of political freedom. The other is found in his principle of
the  harmonization  of  individual wills which results in the freedom of
each  being  consistent with the freedom of all. In institutional terms,
republican  government, founded on popular sovereignty and with a system
of representation, is the political ideal precisely because it gives its
citizens  the  dignity  of  free  men  and enables them to realize their
freedom  in  self-government.  Citizenship, according to Kant, has three
inseparable  attributes:  "i.  constitutional  freedom,  as the right of
every  citizen  to  have  to obey no other law than that to which he has
given  his  consent  or approval; 2. civil equality, as the right of the
citizen  to  recognize no one as a superior among the people in relation
to  himself,  except  in so far as such a one is as subject to his moral
power  to  impose  obligations,  as  that  other  has  power  to  impose
obligations upon him; and 3. political independence, as the right to owe
his  existence  and  continuance in society not to the arbitrary will of
another,

[1056a]
998  THE GREAT IDEAS but to his own rights and powers as a member of the
commonwealth,  and, consequently, the possession of a civil personality,
which  cannot  be  represented  by  any  other than himself." Kant leans
heavily  on  Rousseau's  conclusions  with  regard to political liberty.
Rousseau,   however,   approaches   the   problem  of  freedom  somewhat
differently.  "Man  is  born  free," he begins, "and everywhere he is in
chains."   He  next  considers  two  questions.  What  makes  government
legitimate,  "since  no man has a natural authority over his fellow, and
force  creates  no  right"?  Answering this first question in terms of a
convention   freely   entered  into,  Rousseau  then  poses  the  second
problem—how to form an association "in which each, while uniting himself
with  all,  may still obey himself alone, and remain as free as before."
This,  he says, is "the fundamental problem of which the Social Contract
provides  the  solution."  The  solution  involves  more than republican
government,  popular  sovereignty, and a participation of the individual
through  voting  and representation. It introduces the conception of the
general  will,  through which alone the freedom of each individual is to
be  ultimately  preserved.  Like  Kant's  universal  law of freedom, the
general  will  ordains what each man would freely will for himself if he
adequately  conceived  the  conditions  of  his freedom. "In fact," says
Rousseau,  "each  individual,  as  a  man,  may  have  a particular will
contrary  or  dissimilar  to the general will which he has as a citizen.
His  particular  interest  may  speak  to him quite differently from the
common  interest."  Nevertheless, under conditions of majority rule, the
members  of the minority remain free even though they appear to be ruled
against  their  particular  wills.  When  a  measure is submitted to the
people,  the  question  is "whether it is in conformity with the general
will,  which  is  their  will.  Each man, in giving his vote, states his
opinion  on that point; and the general will is found by counting votes.
When,  therefore,  the opinion that is contrary to my own prevails, this
proves  neither  more nor less than that I was mistaken, and that what I
thought  to be the general will was not so. If my particular opinion had
carried  the  day,  I  should  have achieved the opposite of what was my
will; and it is in that case

[1056b]
that I should not have been free. This presupposes, indeed, that all the
qualities  of  the  general will still reside in the majority; when they
cease  to  do  so,  whatever  side  a man may take, liberty is no longer
possible."  J.  S.  Mill  sees  the same problem from the opposite side.
Constitutional    government   and   representative   institutions   are
indispensable  conditions  of political liberty. Where Aristotle regards
democracy  as the type of constitution most favorable to freedom because
it  gives  the  equahty of citizenship to all free-born men, Mill argues
for  universal  suffrage  to  give equal freedom to all men, for all are
born  equal.  But  neither  representative  government  nor  dem.ocratic
suffrage  is  sufficient  to guarantee the liberty of the individual and
his  freedom of thought or action. Such phrases as "self-government" and
"the  power  of the people over themselves" are deceptive. "The 'people'
who  excercise  the power," Mill writes, "are not always the same people
with  those  over whom it is exercised; and the 'self-government' spoken
of  is  not  the  government  of each by himself, but of each by all the
rest.  The  will  of the people, moreover, practically means the will of
the  most  numerous or the most active part of the people; the majority,
or  those who succeed in making themselves accepted as the majority." To
safeguard  individual  liberty  from  the  tyranny of the majority, Mill
proposes  a  single  criterion  for  social control over the individual,
whether  by  the  physical  force  of  law  or the moral force of public
opinion.  "The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or
collectively,  in  interfering with the liberty of action ofany of their
number,  is  self-protection.  .  .  .  The  only part of the conduct of
anyone,  for  which  he  is  amenable to society, is that which concerns
others.  In the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is,
of  right,  absolute.  Over  himself,  over  his  own body and mind, the
individual  is  sovereign."  Mill's  conception of individual fiberty at
first  appears  to  be  negative—  to be freedom from externally imposed
regulations  or coercions. Liberty increases as the sphere of government
diminishes;  and,  for the sake of liberty, that government governs best
which governs 4

[1057a]
east, or governs no more than is necessary for :he public safety. "There
is a sphere of action," Mill writes, "in which society, as distinguished
from   the   individual,   has,  if  any,  only  an  indirect  interest;
comprehending  all  that  portion  of  I person's life and conduct which
affects  only  himself,  or  if  it also affects others, only with their
free,  voluntary,  and undeceived consent :ind participation. When I say
only  himself,"  Mill  continues,  "I  mean  directly  and  in the first
instance;  for  whatever  affects  himself,  may  affect  others through
himself.  . . . This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty."
But  it is the positive aspect of freedom from governmental interference
or  social pressures on which Mill wishes to place emphasis. Freedomfrom
government  or social coercion is freedom for the maximum development of
individuality—freedom  to  be  as  different  from  all  others as one's
personal inclinations, talents, and tastes dispose one and enable one to
be.  "It  is  desirable,"  Mill  writes,  "that  in  things which do not
primarily  concern  others, individuality should assert itself." Liberty
is  undervalued  as long as the free development of individuality is not
regarded  as  one  of  the  principal ingredients of human happiness and
indispensable  to  the  welfare  of  society.  "The  only  freedom which
deserves the name," Mill thinks, is that of pursuing our own good in our
own  way,  so  long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or
impede  their  efforts  to  obtain  it";  for,  "in  proportion  to  the
development  of his individuality, each person becomes OUTLINE OF TOPICS
I.  Natural freedom and political liberty I a. The birthright of freedom
lb. The independence of men and the autonomy of sovereigns In a state of
nature  or  anarchy  ic.  The  relation  of  liberty  to  free will: the
conceptions  of  liberty  as  freedom  from interference and freedom for
personal  development  id.  The  supremacy  of  law  as  a  condition of
political  liberty  le.  The  restriction  of  freedom  by  justice: the
distinction  between  liberty and license if The freedom of equals under
government:  the equality of citizenship i^. The juridical protection of
liberties:  bills  of rights; the separation of powers ih. Civil liberty
under diverse forms of government

[1057b]
Chaiter  47:  LIBERTY  999  more  valuable  to himself, and is therefore
capable of being more valuable to others. There is a greater fullness of
life  about  his own existence, and when there is more life in the units
there  is more in the mass which is composed of Mill's praise of liberty
as  an ultimate good, both for the individual and for the state, finds a
clearly  antiphonal voice in the tradition of the great books. Plato, in
the  Republic,  advocates  political regulation of the arts, where Mill,
even  more  than  Milton  before  him,  argues against censorship or any
control  of  the  avenues  of  human  expression.  But the most striking
opposition to Mill occurs in those passages in which Socrates deprecates
the  spirit  of  democracy because of its insatiable desire for freedom.
That  spirit,  Socrates  says,  creates  a  city  "full  of  freedom and
frankness,  in which a man may do and say what he likes . . . Where such
freedom  exists, the individual is clearly able to order for himself his
own Ufe as he pleases." The democratic state is described by Socrates as
approaching  anarchy  through  relaxation  of  the laws or through utter
lawlessness. Under such circumstances there will be the greatest variety
of  individual  differences.  It will seem "the fairest of states, being
hke  an  embroidered  robe which is spangled with every sort of flower."
But  it  is  a  state  in which liberty has been allowed to grow without
limit  at  the  expense of justice and order. It is "full of variety and
disorder,  and  dispensing  a  sort  of  equality to equals and uncquals
alike." PAGE lOOI 1002 1003

[1058a]
1000  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  jection 3. Moral or spiritual freedom 3«. Human
bondage,  or the dominance of the passions by the moral law of practical
reason  4.  The metaphysics of freedom 4^. The relation of human liberty
to  chance  and  contingency 5^. Man's freedom in relation to fate or to
the  will  of  God  choice  beginning  and end of the historical process
despots, and oppressors

[1058b]
PAGE  2.  The issues of civil liberty 1003 2b. Liberty of conscience and
religious freedom 1004 2c. Freedom in the sphere of economic enterprise:
free  trade;  freedom  from  governmental  restrictions 005 2d. Economic
dependence  as a limitation of civil liberty: economic slavery or sub3^.
Human  freedom  or  the rule of reason: freedom through knowledge of the
truth  1006 3^:. Virtue as the discipline of free choice: freedom as the
determination  of  the  will  3^.  Freedom from conflict and freedom for
individuality as conditions of happiness 1007 5. The theology of freedom
1008 5^. Man's freedom and God's knowledge 1009 5<i. The divine freedom:
the  independence  or  autonomy  of infinite being; divine 6. Liberty in
history  loio  6a. The historical significance of freedom: stages in the
realization  of  freedom;  the  6b.  The  struggle for civil liberty and
economic  freedom:  the  overthrow  of  tyrants,  6c.  The  struggle for
sovereign  independence  against  the  yoke  of  imperialism or colonial
subjugation loii

[1059a]
Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the
numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are the vokime and page numbers of the
passages  referred  to.  For example, in 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [265-28^)
12d, the number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the number 12d
indicates  that  the  passage is in section d of page 12. Page Sections:
When the text is printed in one column, the letters a and b refer to the
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:
Piyc/!o/o^^,116a-119b,  the passage begins in the upper half of page 116
and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is printed in two
columns,  the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower halves of the
lefthand  side  of  the page, the letters c and d to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of the page. For example, in 7 Plato:
Symposium,  163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half of the left-
hand  side of page 163 and ends in the upper half of the right-hand side
of  page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main divisions of a
work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch,  sect)  are  sometimes  included in the
reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are given in certain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d.  Bible References: The references are to
book,  chapter, and verse. When the King James and Douay versions differ
in  title  of  books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King
James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows;
e.g.,  Old  Testament: Nehemiah, 7:45— (D) // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the  topic  is  discussed intermittently rather than continuously in the
work  or  passage cited. For additional information concerning the style
of  the  references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general
guidance  in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. Natural
freedom   and  political  liberty  la.  The  birthright  of  freedom  18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  15  521a-c  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  r,  q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act
i,  sc ii [9099] 570b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [63-110] 320b321b
35  Locke: Civil Government, ch vi 36a-42a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 53b-d
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 109b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
357c-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk I, 387c-390d passim 42 Kant: Science of
Right, 401b-402a; 420d421a; 421c-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
[1-15]
lab  44  Boswell: Johnson, 363c-364a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  57  26b-27a; par 66 29a-c; additions, 36 122b-c / Philosophy of
History, intro, 171c172b

[1059b]
1001  lb.  The  independence  of men and the autonomy of sovereigns in a
state  of  nature  or  anarchy  15  Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 271a-b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 84c-87b; part ii, 99b-c; 113d-115a; 159c 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 20c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
37,  schol  2  435b-436a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch ii-vi 25d-42a
passim, esp ch ii, sect 14 28b-c; ch vii, sect 87 44a-b; ch ix, sect 123
53c-d;  sect  128  54b-c;  ch xi, sect 136-137 56c-57b; ch xii, sect 145
58d-59a;  ch  xix, sect 211 73d-74a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk i,
2b-d;  bk VIII, 52a; bk xxvi, 221c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 342c-345c;
352a;  353c355b  passim; 356c-357a / Political Economy^ 369a-b; 374a-b /
Social  Contract,  bk i, 393b-c; BK II, 398a-b; bk hi, 419a-b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  237c-d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 222b-c / Science of
Right,  402c;  408c-d; 433c-434d; 435c-436a; 452a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par 194 66c-d; par 333-334 109b-c / Philosophy of
History^  intro, 171c-172b; part iv, 317d318a 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its Discontents, 780d

[1060a]
1002  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (1. Naturalfreedom andpolitical liberty^ \c. The
relation  of liberty to free will: the conceptions of liberty as freedom
from  interference  and  freedom  for  personal  development 23 HoBBES :
Leviaihan, part i, 59b; 86c-d; part II, 112d-113d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [246-257]
116b  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b; 408a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
iv, sect 21 29d; CH VI, sect 57-63 36d-38c / Human Understanding, BK II,
CH XXI, sect 7-27 180a-184c passim; sect 57 193b-c; sect 73 198c-199c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect viii, div 73 483c-484a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  haws,  bk xi, 69a-b; BK XII, 85a; bk xxvi, 223c 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy  ,  370b-d  /  Social  Contract, bk i, 393a-c; bk iv,
426c-d  42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386d387a,c  43 Mill:
Liberty, 272d-273b; 293b-323a,c passim, esp 312b-c 44 BoswEhi^: Johnson,
161a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 121 43d; par 260
82a-83a; par 299 99c-100b; additions, 117 135d-136a; 155-156 142a-b; 158
142d;  177  147d  50  Marx:  Capital, 237a Id^ The supremacy of law as a
condition  of political liberty 5 Euripides: Suppliants [429-441] 262a-b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk vii, 233c-d 6 Thucydihes iPeloponnesian War,
BKii,396c-d;  BK III, 436d-438b esp 438a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch
6 [1134*24-^17] 382a-c passim / Politics, bk hi, ch 6 [1279*822] 476b-c;
bk  iv,  ch  4  [1292*4-37]  491b-d;  bk  v,  ch  9 [1310*25-36] 512c 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop 73, demonst 446c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch
VI,  sect 56-63 36d-38c; ch ix, sect 124131 53d-54d; ch xi, sect 135-139
55d-58a; CH XVIII, SECT 202 71d-72a; sect 206 72c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk  vi,  34d;  bk XI, 69a-b; bk xii, 85a-c; bk xv, 109a-b; BK
XXVI,   223c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d-324a;  355a-b;  356b-c  /
Political  Economy, 370b-371c; 375b-c / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 39
Smith: Wealth ofNations, bk v, 308b-c; 314d315a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  96c-d; 161c-162a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right,
398c-399c; 401c-402a; 436c-d / Judgement, 586c

[1060b]
\c to 1/ 43 Declaration of independence:
[1-47] la2a passim; [72-79] 2b
43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: preamble lla,c; amendments, v-vii 17b-d;
xiv,  sect  r  18c 43 Federalist: number i, 30a-c; number 37, 118d-119b;
number 53, 167d-168b; number 57, 177d-178a 43 Mill: Liberty, 267b,d-274a
/  Representative  Government,  339d-340c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par 93 36a-b; part hi, par i9466c-d; par 208 69c; par 265 84b;
par  286  96c-97a;  additions, 129137c; 135 138c / Philosophy ofHistory,
intro, 170c172b; 173a-175c; 180c-181a; part ii, 271d272d; PART IV, 321a;
342b-d;  345a-b;  364b-c  le. The restriction of freedom by justice: the
distinction between liberty and license 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  ii, 396cd; BK III, 436d-438b 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 314d-315d; bk
iv,  349a-d  /  Laws, bk hi, 674c-676c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 9
[1310*25-36] 512c; bk VI, CH 4
[1318^38-1319*5]
522c;
[1319^27-32] 523b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 12, 119a-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
44d-45b   15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57b-58d  19  Aquinas  :  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 96, a 4 512d-513c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
86c-87b;  part  ii, 113b-116b; 138c 27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure,
act  i, sc II [120-134] 176b-c; sc iii [7-54] 177b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2, 435b-d; prop 73, demonst 446c 32 Milton:
Son?jets,  xii  65a-b  /  Areopagitica,  384a-386a 35 Locke: Toleration,
12c-13b;  17c-18c  /  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d-26c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws,  bk  hi,  10a;  bk  VIII,  51a-52c; bk xi,
68b,d-69c;  bk  xii,  92b-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b / Social
Contract, BK I, 393b-c; bk ii, 396d-398b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
ii,  140b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 622d-623c; 653a 42 Kant: Science
of Right, 398c-399c 43 Mill: Liberty, 271c-d; 297a-b; 302d-323a,c passim
44  Bosweee:  Johnson, 422c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 29
19a-b;  partiii,  par  319  105b-106c;  additions,  127 137b; 145 140b /
Philosophy   of   History,   part  IV,  321a;  328b;  342b-d  54  Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780c781a If. The freedom of equals
under  government:  the  equality of citizenship 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[399-462]  261d-262b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 107c-108d; be VII,
232d-233d; 238c

[1061a]
1^  to  2a CuAPTi-R 47: LIBERTY 1003 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii, 396cd; BK VI, 519c-520d 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 674c-676c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34*24-*'i7]
382a-c  /  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch i 471b,d-472c; ch 6 [1278^30-1 279*22]
476a-c;  ch  16-17 485b487a passim; bk iv, ch 4 [i29i''3o-381 491a-b; CH
10  [1295*17-23]  495a-b;  bk  v,  ch  9 [1310* 25-36] 512c; bk VI, CH 2
[1317*40-^16]  520d  12  AuRELius:  Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi, 97b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
81,  A  :?,  REP 2 430c-431d 23 HoBBEs: l^et'iathan, part it, 114c-115a;
150c151a;156b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a;
prop  73,  demonst 446c 35 Locke: Cit'il Government, ch iv, sect 21 29d;
ch  VII,  sect  94  46a-c;  ch  xi, sect 136-139 56c-58a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-d;  BK  VI,  34d;  BK VIII, 52a-b; bk xi,
68b,d-69c;  71d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  326b-327a;  359a-b / Social
Contract,  bk ii, 396d-398b; 405a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 90d-92a
esp  91b  42 Kant: Science of Right, 398c-399c; 400b,d402a,c; 408c-409c;
436c-d; 438b; 450d-452a 43 Articles of Confederation: iv [17-36] 5b-c 43
Constitution of the U.S.: preamble 11a, c; ARTICLE IV, SECT 2
[519-521]
16a;  AMENDMENTS,  xiii-xv  18c-19b;  xix  19d 43 Federalist: number 8o,
236a-b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  354b-355b;  365b-366a  /
Utilitarianism, 460a-c; 467a; 474d-476a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  i,  213b;  PART  II,  271d-272d; 276a-d; part iv, 362d363a l^. The
juridical  protection  of  liberties: bills of rights; the separation of
powers 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 671b-672c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xii,  sect 143 58c-d; CH xviii, sect 202
71d-72a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 69a75b; bk xii, 84b,d-86d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 24b; 27a-b; 522c523a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 81c-d; 403b-404c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 451a-d 43 Articles
OF  Confederation:  iv [17-36] 5b-c; V [741-vi [93] 6a-b 43 Constitution
of  the  U.S.:  preamble  lla,c; ARTICLE I, SECT 3 [81-95] 12a-b; sect 6
[145151] 12c-d; SECT 9 [267-275] 13d;
[283-295]
13d-14a;  sect  10  [300-303]  14a;  article  ii,  SECT I [331-334] 14b;
article  hi,  sect  3  15d16a;  ARTICLE IV, SECT 2 [519-521] 16a; sect 4
16b-c;  amendments,  i-x  i7a-d; xni, slct iXIV, sect I 18c; XV 19b; xix
19d

[1061b]
b  43  I'kdkralist:  number  9,  47a-d;  number 21, 78d 79b; number 4:5,
140c-d;  number  44,  144d  145a; 146c-d; number 47-51 153c 165a passim;
number  53,  167d;  number  57,  177d178a;  number  58, 180d; number 63,
192c193c;   number   78-79   229d-234d   passim;   number   80,  236a-b;
NUMBER8i,241a-242a  passim;  NUMBER 8:5, 245d-247a; number 84, 251a-253d
43   Mill:   Liberty,   267d-268b  /  Representative  Government,  361b;
365b-366a;  369b-370a;  401d-402b  44  BoswELL:/oA«ion,  164c; 195c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  ofHistory,  part  iv,  345aIh.  Civil  liberty under
diverse  forms  of government 5 Euripides: Suppliants [429-441] 262a-b 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-108c 6 THvcYDiDEs:Pelopo?mesian War,
BKii,396c-d;  BK  VI,  519c-520d  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk viii, 409b-d;
412a-413a  /  Laws,  BK III, 672c-676c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 9
[1310*25-36] 512c; BK VI, CH 2
[1317*40-^16] 520d; ch 4
522a-523b  passim  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  i, sect 14 254b-c 14
Plutarch: Lycurgus, 44d-45b 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 189a 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  114b-115a;  150c151a;  part IV, 273a-b 32 Milton:
Areopagitica,  382a;  384b-388a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect
90-94  44d-46c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaws, bk vi, 33a-35a; BK XI,
68b,d-75b; bk xii, 84b,d-85a; bk xv, 109a-b; bk xix, 135a-b; 142a-146a,c
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b  /  Social  Contract, bk III, 415b-d;
417b-c; 422a-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32c-34a,c; 617a-b; 632d-633a
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  161c-  162a; 222d224a; 288a,c 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  445  b-c;  451b-c  43  Federalist: number 8 44c-47a
passim;  number  47-48  153c-159a;  number  51,  164a-165a;  number  53,
167d-168b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b  /  Representative Government,
338d-341d;  351d-352b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 299,
lOOa-b;  additions,  155-156  142a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
173a-175c  2.  The  issues  of  civil liberty 2a. Freedom of thought and
expression:  the problem of censorship Old Testament: Jeremiah, 38:4-28—
(D)  Jeremias,  38  :4-28  New  Testament:  Matthew,  23:29-38  / LuJ^e,
11:47-51  / Acts, 4:1-31; 5:17-42; 16:19-24; 18:12-16; 19:19; 21:27-32 /
/ ThessalonianSy 2:14-16

[1062a]
(2.  The issues of civil liberty. 2a. Freedom of thought and expression:
the  problem  of  censorship^  5  Sophocles:  Antigone [499-511] 135b-c;
[683700] 137a 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [366-384] 459c-d;
[497-508] 460d-461a
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  172d-173b;  bk vi, 189c; BK VII, 217a 6
Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397bc; BK III, 427a-c; bk viii,
580b-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-c / Apology 200a212a,c / Gorgias, 259d /
Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-334b;  bk  iv,  344b-d; bk x, 427c-434c esp
432d-434c / Statesman, 601c-602c / Laws, bk II, 653a-658b esp 654d-656b;
bk  hi,  675c676b;  bk  vii, 719d-721a; 727c-728b; bk viii, 732c; BK XI,
782d-783b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 6 253b; SECT 14 254b-c 14
Plutarch: Solon, 76a / Timoleon, 212b-c / Cato the Younger, 632d; 636b-d
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk i, 21b-22d; bk hi, 56d57b; BK IV, 67c; 72b-73a;
bk  vi, 87c-88d; bk XIV, 152d-153c; bk xvi, 180d-183a / Histories, bk I,
189a-b  18  Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 9 154a-c; CH 12 155c-d; CH
14  156c-157c;  bk  viii,  ch  13  273b-d 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii,
102d-103a; 150c151a; part iv, 273c-d; 274c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 260b;
270c-d; 408b-410c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 13b-16c; 117d-119d;
185b-188c   30   Bacon:   Advancement  ofLearning,  7b-c  31  Descartes:
Discourse,  part  vi,  60d-61a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b esp
384b389a,  398a-b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, SECT 20
319b-c;  ch xvi, sect 4 367c-368b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi,
div  102-104  497b-498c; div 114 503a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 75b
38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 32c33a,c; bk xii, 89b-90c; bk xix,
146a,c  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 425d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  148a;  355b-d;668d671b  passim,  esp  669b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 300a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 220b-221b; 223a-c / Science of Right,
425c-426a  43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, i 17a 43 Federalist:
number   84,   253a-b   43   Mill:   Liberty,   272d-293b;  297b-298b  /
Representative Government, 341 a-c; 361b-362c; 418c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
29a-b;  86a-b; 161a-b; 221d-224a; 300c-301a esp 301a-d [fn i]; 313d316d;
512c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270,

[1062b]
1004  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  la to lb 88c-89b; par 319 105b-106c; additions,
184185  149a  /  Philosophy ofHistory, part i, 210d; 213d-214a; part ii,
272c-d;  279d-280b 54 Freud: Psycho -Analytic Therapy, 125d-127a,c / War
and  Death,  757b-c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 879b-880b; 883d 2b.
Liberty  of  conscience  and  religious freedom Old Testament: II Kings,
10:18-28;  11:18;  23— {D) IV Kings, 10:18-28; 11:18; 23 / Ezra, i; 6-7—
(D)  /  Esdras, i; 6-7 / Nehemiah, 2:1-9— {D) II Esdras, 2:1-9 / Daniel,
3; 6— (D) Daniel, 3:1-23,91-97; 6 Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 16— (D) OT,
Esther,  16 / I Maccabees, 1-2— (D) OT. / Machabees, 1-2 / II Maccabees,
6-8  -(D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  6-8  New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:11-12;
10:16-23;  23:34-38;  24:9;  26:59-66 / Marl^, 13:9-13; 14:42-65 / Luke,
11:47-51;  21:12-18;  22:66-71  / ]ohn, 5:16-18; 7:1; 15:18-16:3 / Acts,
4:1-22;  5:17-18,25-42;  6:9-14;  7:54-8:3;  9:1-5,23-24;  12:1-6,18-20;
13:27-29,50;  14:5;  16:19-40;  17:5-14; 18:12-16; 2?) -.ly-2.^ /Romans,
8:35-36 / / Corinthians, 4:9-13; 15:9 / II Corinthians, 1:5-8; 11:24-26;
12:9-10   /   Galatians,   1:8-9,1324;  2:1-5;  4:29;  5:10-12;  6:12  /
PhilippianSy  1  :28-3o  /  / Thessalonians, 2:14-16 / // Thessalonians,
1:3-5 / ^^ Timothy, 2:8-10; 3:10-12 / Titus, 3:10-11 / Hebrews, 11:35-38
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 137a-c;
138a-c  7  Plato: Apology, 204d-205c / Laws, bk x, 769d-771b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  i, 21c-d; bk ii, 44b-c; bk XV, 168a-c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk xix, ch 17 522b523a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q
10,  aa  7-12  431b-437d; q ii, aa 3-4 440b-442b; Q 12, A 2 443b-444b 22
Chaucer:   Second   Nun's  Tale  [15,826-16,021]  467b-471b  23  HoBBEs:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  149b-c;  part  iv,  273c-d  25 Montaigne: Essays,
116d-117c;  208b-c;  324c326b 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 209a-b 32 Milton :
New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a-b  / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-h / Samson
Agonistes
[1334-1379] 368b-369b
/ Areopagitica 381a412b esp 386a-b, 388a-b, 397a-b, 402a-b, 404b, 411a-b
35 Locke: Toleration la-22d esp 2d-3a, 18c-20c / Human Understanding, bk
iv,  ch  xvi, sect 4 367c-368b 36 Sterne: Tristrajn Shandy, 257a-258a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xix, 144c145a; bk xxv, 211d-213d; bk
xxvi, 218d-219a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 438d'439c 39 Smith:
Wealth ofNations, bk v, 344a-b; 345b346c; 347d-348a

[1063a]
2c  to 3a Chapter 47: LIBERTY 1005 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 12a-14a;
206b,d232b  passim,  esp  211a-b;  290d 291c; 324b; 349a-c; 464b-d; 601d
603b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 227b d; 285d; 333b-335a,c csp 335a,c;
480d  481a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 433b-c; 444a-c 43 Articlf.s of
Confedkration:  hi  5b  43 Constitution of the U.S.: article vi [591599I
16d; amendments, i 17a 43 Federalist: number i, 30a; number 51, 164bc 43
Mill:  Liberty,  2100  21 la; 272d-274a; 276d287b; 290a-292a; 307d 309a;
311a-312a  /  Representative  Government,  341a-c; 437d-438b 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 221d-224a; 421d; 436d438b;512c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  66  29a-c; part hi, par 270 84d-89c; additions, 67 126d /
Philosophy  ofHistory,  iNTRO,193a-b;  PART  IV,  350d-351a;  "353c-d 48
Melville: Moby Dic{, 60b-65a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428b-c
52 Dostohvsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim 2c, Freedom in
the sphere of economic enterprise: free trade; freedom from governmental
restrictions  35  Locke  :  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a passim 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Latins, bk xx, 148d149a: 149c-d 39 Smith: Wealth
ofNations,  bk  i,  42a,c;  51a-62a passim; bk ii, 142d; bk iv 182a-300d
passim,  esp 194a-c, 287c-288c, 291d-294a, 300a-c; bk V, 397a-c 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 441d-443b 43 Mill: Liberty, 312c-315c / Representative
Government,  348c-349a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 179
62b-c;  par  235-236 76a-c; additions, 145 140b / Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  277b-c;  part  IV,  345a-b;  364d  50 Marx: Capital, 79c-81a;
83d-84a,c;  127c-146c passim, esp 130c-131a, 135d-138c, 141a-c,144a146c;
194a-b;   236c-248d   passim,   esp  241a242a.  243d-244a;  277d-278a,c;
316d-317c;   367c-368b   50   Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420d;
421d-422a;  426c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xih, 573a-b 2d. Economic
dependence  as  a  limitation  of  civil  liberty:  economic  slavery or
subjection 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 5
[1277^341278^39] 475a-c; bk vh, ch 9 [1328^^4-1329*1]
533  b  14 Plutarch: Poplicola-Solon, 87a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vh, sect 85 43c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws, bk v, 20d-21d; BK XIII,
99b-100c

[1063b]
38  R  1  s s K A u : Political Economy, 38lab / Social Contract, rk ii,
405a  -c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 144b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
73b  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c 43 Federalist: number 10,
50b-51d;  number 79, 233c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 339d-340c;
382c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  24:5  77b-c;
additions,  145  140b  /  Philosophy  of History, part iv, 352a 50 Marx:
Capital   138b;   366c-368b  esp  367c368b  50  Marx-Engels:  Cojmnunist
Manifesto,  '\20h-6.\  424c;  426b-d;  428c-429c;  434c-d  3.  Moral  or
spiritual  freedom  3<«. Human bondage, or the dominance of the passions
Old  Testament: Genesis, 4:1-16; 6:5,12; 8:2022 / Numbers, 11 :4-35— (D)
Numbers, 1 1 :4-34 / // Samuel, 11; 13— (D) // Kings, 11; 13 / Proverbs,
5:22-23  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 18:30-31; 23:5-6; 31:1-7,29-30— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-  ^  31;  23:6;  31:1-7,39-40 New Testament:
Matthew,  26:41 / Marl^, 14:38 I John, 8:31-36 / Acts, 8:18-23 / Romans,
i   :i832;   5:12-6:23;   7:8-8:21  /  Galatians,  4:1-10;  5:1,13-26  /
Philippians,  3:18-19  /  / Timothy 6:9-10 / Fitus, 3:3 /James, 1:12-16;
4:1-7  /  /  Peter,  2:11  / // Peter, 2 esp 2:19-20 / / Johny 2:15-17 7
Plato:  Phaedrus, 120b-c; 128a-129c / Phaedo, 224d; 232a-234c / Gorgias,
275d-280d  /  Republic,  bk  I,  296b-c;  bk  iv, 347d-348d; bk viii-ix,
411d-427b  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  669b-d  /  Seventh Letter, 801 b-c; 814b 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk hi, ch 12 [1119*35-^18] 366a,c / Politics, bk hi,
ch 16
[1287*28-32]
485d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[59-93]
30d-31b;  BK  V  [1113-1135]  75c-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i
105a-106c;  CH 4, 109c-d; bk ii, ch 18 161a-162b; bk hi, CH 15, 190d; ch
22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch i 213a-223d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii,
sect  10  257d258a  17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr i, ch 10 82b / Sixth
Ennead, tr iv, ch 15, 304c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 18-26
40d-43a; bk vh, par 27 51d-52c; bk vih, par lo-ii 55c-56b / City of God,
bk iv, ch 3 190a-c; bk xiv, ch ii, 385d-386b; ch 15 388d390a; bk xix, ch
15  521a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk I, ch 24 630c-631a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  89,  a  2,  REP  I 475a-d; part i-ii, q 9, a 2
658<i659c; q 10, A3 664d-665c

[1064a]
(3.  Moral  or  spiritualfreedom, ^a. Human bondage, or the dominance of
the passions^ 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 72, A 2, REP 4
112b-113a;  q 73, a 5 123a-d; q 77 144d-152a esp a 2 145d-147c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  [25-45]  7b-c  22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale
[17,130-144] 490b 25 Montaigne: E^i^^j/^, 165c-166a; 232b-c; 488b489b 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [61-79] 49c-d / Othello, act iv, sc i
229d-233a / Antony and Cleopatra, act hi, sc xiii
[iii116] 335d-336a;
[195-201] 336d-337a / Winter's Tale, ACT II, sc hi [1-192] 498c-500d
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 66c-d; 78a'd 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi, prop 2, schol, 397c-d; part iv, pref-prop 18 422b,d-429d 32 Milton :
Paradise  Lost,  bk  vih  [561-594]  244b245a;  bk xh [79-110] 321a-b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, SECT 12 180d-181a; sect 54
192b-c;  sect 69 196d-197a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 239b 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393c  46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory, part i,
233b-c;  part  IV,  348d-349b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
164b-d  54 Freud: War and Death, 760d-761a 3b. Human freedom or the rule
of  reason: freedom through knowledge of the truth New Testament: /oA;2,
8:31-59  /  //  Corinthians,  3:17  /James,  i  esp 1:25 7 Plato: Lysis,
16c-18b / Phaedrus, 120b-c; 128a-129c / Phaedo, 230d-234c / Republic, bk
IV,  347d-348d;  bk  ix, 425c-427b / Theaetetus, 528C'531a / Laws, bk i,
650a-b; bk hi, 669b-d; bk ix, 754a-b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[129*10-16]
179a  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13 [1102^13-1103* 3] 348a-c; bk hi,
ch 12 [1119*35-^18] 366a,c / Politics, BK I, CH 5
[1254*33-^26] 448a-b;
CH 13 [1260*4-15] 454c; BK III, CH 16
[1287*
28-32] 485d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  bk  v  [1117-1120]  75d  12 'EvicT'ETUs: Discourses, bk i, ch 12
118d-120b;  bk  ii,  ch  1-2,  139c-141c;  ch  18 161a-162b; bk hi, ch 7
182b-184a;  ch  15,  190d;  ch  22 195a201a; BK IV, ch i 213a-223d; ch 7
232c-235a  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect 5 257b-c; sect 16-17
259a-d:  bk  hi,  sect  6  261a-c;  bk  IV, sect 24 265c-d; bk v, sect 9
270b-c;  SECT  26 272c; bk vh, sect 55 283b-c; sect 68-69 284c-d; bk xi,
sect  18,  305b  14  Plutarch:  Cato the Younger, 646b-648a 17 Plotinus:
Third Ennead, tr i, ch 10 82b / Sixth Ennead, tr vhi, ch 3 344a-b

[1064b]
^  1006 THE GREAT IDEAS 3b to 3c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  24 630c-631a; ch 34 634b-c; bk hi, ch 5-9 659d661c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 81, A 3 430c-431d; q 83, a i, rep i 436d-438a; Q
95,  A  2  507c-508a;  part  i-ii,  q  24,  a  727b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 50, A 3 8b-9a; q 56, a 4 32b-33c; q 57, a 3,
rep 3 37b-38a; q 59, aa 2-3 46c-48c; part ii-ii, q 183, A 4, ANS and rep
i 627d-628d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-75] 80a-c
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  58c-d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk i, 65c-66b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 70a-c; 184b-d; 204d205b
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [61-79] 49c-d / Othello, act i, sc
hi [322-337] 212b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71d-72b; 78a-d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 67-73 444d447a; part v 451a-463d esp prop
3-4  453a-d,  prop  20,  schol  457b-458a,  prop  42  463b-d 32 Milton :
Sonnets, xii 65a-b / Paradise Lost, bk XII
[79-110] 321a-b
/  Areopagitica,  404a-b;  409b-410a  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi,
sect  56-63  36d-38c  passim  / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch XXI, sect
46-54  189d-192c;  sect  69 196d197a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i,
393c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 300b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
ofMorals,  2^2h'  283d  /  Practical  Reason, 296a-d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  378c  44  B0SWEI.1.:  Johnson,  92b-c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  160c161c; PART II, 279d-280b; part iv,
315a;  348d-349b;  350a-b;  361  b-c  54 Freud: Psycho-Analytic Therapy,
126a-127a,c  /  General  Introduction,  625a-d  /  Ego  and  Id, 702c-d;
715c-716a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures  838c-839b  3c.  Virtue as the
discipline  of  free choice: freedom as the determination of the will by
the  moral  law  of  practical  reason  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 6
[1106*^36-1107* 6] 352c; bk hi, ch 1-2 355b,d-358a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk iv, ch 3, 190c; bk XIV, CH II, 386b; bk xix, ch 20 523d524a; bk
xxii, ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q 83, A 2,
ANS and REP 3 438a-d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, Q 183, A
4, ANS 627d-628d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-75]
80a-c; xxvii 94c-96a esp
[139-142]
96a;  paradise,  xxxi  [73-90]  154a 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 391a-392a;
394b-395b

[1065a]
3>d  to  ^b  Chapter 47: LIBERTY 1007 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  275b  /  Practical  Reason, 202aid\ 301dZ\^d\ZZ\sih\ 332a-334b;
342a-c  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Hiements  of Ethics, 367d-368a; 378a-b /
Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 386b 387a,c; 390b,d391a / Science ofRight,
420d-421a  /  judgement, 571c-572a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  29  19a-b;  part  ii,  par  105-114  40a-42b; part hi, par 149 56b;
additions, 95 132b / Philosophy ofHistory, intro, 171a-c; part iv, 328a;
362d363a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  164a-165b 3</.
Freedom  from  conflict  and  freedom for individuality as conditions of
happiness  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,398a-c 7 Plato: Lysis,
16c-18a  /  Gorgias,  275d-276b / Republic, bk i, 295d-296c 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch 9 [1280^32-34] 477d-478a 12 Lucretius -.Nature of
Thifjgs,  BKv[i-54]61a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i 105a-106c;
cH  4  108d-110a;  ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  18  124a125a;  bk  ii, ch 1-2
138b,d-141c;  bk  hi,  ch  22  195a-201a; ch 24 203c-210a; bk iv, ch 1-2
213a-224b; ch 4 225a-228a; ch 6-7 230b-235a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
x,  sect 12 298c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 10-30 55c-61c
/  City  of  God,  bk  xix, ch 20 523d524a; bk xxii, ch 30, 617c-618a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  n-ii, q 182, A I, REP 2 620b-621d 22
Chaucer:  Manciple'sTale[iy,  10^-12^] 490a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  109a;  318a-319b;
469a470a;486b-489b  29  Cervantes:  Z)o/2 Quixote, part ii, 379d-380a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk 11, ch xxi, sect 52-53 191d-192b 42 Kant:
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378c-379a  43  Mill: Liberty,
269b-c;  272d-274a;  293b-302c  /  Utilitarianism,  451d-452a  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  118  136a-b;  158  142d / Philosophy
ofHistory, part II, 276a-d; part iv, 320c-321a; 364d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 221b-d; bk xiii, 577a-578b; bk xiv, 605b-d; bk xv, 630c631a
53  James:  Psychology,  199b-202a  54  Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  9a-b;  20a-d  / General Introduction^ 593c'; 623d-625d;
633d-634d;  635c  4.  The  metaphysics  of  freedom  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 19, A 3 llOb-lllc; A 8 116a-d; a 10 117d-118b; q
22,  A  2,  rep  4  128d-130d;  a 4 131c-132b; q 59, A 3 308b-309a; q 83
436c-440b; part i-ii, q 6,

[1065b]
A  I, REP 3 644d-646a; q 10 662d 666a,c; q 13, A 6 676c-677b; q 17 686b,
d  693d csp a 6 690b d; q 21, a 4, rep 2 719d-720a,c 31 Simnoza: Ethics,
part  i,  def  7 355b; prop 17 362b 363c; prop 32-33 367a 369a; appendix
369b  372d;  part  11,  prop  48-49 391a-394d; part III, 395a-d; def 1-3
395d-396a;  prop 1-3 396a-398c; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a; def 8 424b c;
prop  23  430c-d;  prop  66-73  444c447a;  part  v  451a-463d  esp  pref
451a-452c, PROP 40-42 462c-463d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 133a; 140b,d-143a;
164a172c  esp  169c-170a,  170c-171a;  190c-d;  234c235a  /  Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  ofMorals, 264d265a; 279b,d-287d / Practical Reason, 291a293c
esp  292a-293b;  296a-d;  307d-314d  esp  309d,  310b-311d; 331c-337a,c;
340a-342d;  351b-352c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b,d-391a /
judgement,  463a-467a;  571c572a;  587d-588a;  606d-607c;  609b-610a  46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part ii, par 139 48d-49b / Philosophy of
History   153a-369a,c   esp  INTRO,  156d-190b,  203a-206a,c,  part  iv,
368d-369a,c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 688a696d 4a. The
relation ofhuman liberty to chance and contingency 7 Plato: Republic, bk
x,  439b-441a,c  /  Laws, bk IV, 679a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[1112*18-^12]  358a-c  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293]
18b-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 49c; bk iv, 69a-b; BK VI, 91b-d 17
Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr i, ch 8-10 81d82b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  v,  ch  9  213b215c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 82, A 2
432d-433c;  Q  83,  a i 436d-438a; q 116, a i 592d-593d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, xvh
[1342] 132b-c
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxv,  35a-b  42  Kant:  Intro. Metaphysic
ofMorals,  392d-393c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 15 16a-b;
part  hi, par 206 68d-69b; additions, 12 118a-c / Philosophy of History,
part iv, 368d-369a,c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 158b-159a 4^. The opposites
of  freedom:  causality  or  necessity,  nature,  and  law  8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  ix, ch 5 [i047''351048*24] 573b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk  hi, ch 3 [1112*18-^^12] 358a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[251-260] 18b

[1066a]
(4.  The  metaphysics  of  freedom.  4b,  The  oppO'  sites  of freedom:
causality  or  necessity,  nature,  and law.) 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv,
69a-b;  bk  vi,  91b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 4 79d-80a; CH
8-10  81d-82b  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk v, ch 9-10 213b216c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, AA 3-9 110b-117d passim; q 41,
a  2  218c-219d; Q 47, a I, REP I 256a-257b; q 59, a 3 308b309a; q 62, a
8,  rep 2 323c-324a; q 83, a i 436d-438a; q 103, a i, rep 1,3 528b-529a;
q  115,  A  6,  ans  591d-592d;  part  i-ii,  q 10 662d666a,c; q 13, a 6
676c-677b  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, A 3 8b'9a; q
71, a 4, ans and rep 3 108b109a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; purgatory, xvi [52-114] 77b-78a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida,
bk iv, stanza 138-154 106b-108b / Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,236-256] 456b-457a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  113b-c;  part hi, 165c 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 216c-219a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 7 355b; prop 17, scHOL
362c-363c;  appendix  369b-372d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134]
137a138a  35  Locke:  Human  Ufiderstanding,  bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 7-27
180a-184c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii 478b487a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 133a; 140b,d-143a; 164a171a;
234c-235a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d-265a; 279b,d-287d esp
283d285a / Practical Reason, 292a-293b; 296a-d; 301d-302d; 307d-314d esp
310b-311d;  331c337a,c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b387a,c; 390b /
Judgement,  463a-467a;  571c572a; 587a-588a; 607c; 609b-610a 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 392d-393a; 549c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 139
48d-49b; part hi, par 186-187 64d-65c; additions, 90 130b-d / Philosophy
of  History, INTRO, 160c-161c; 171b; 186b-c; part i, 236a-c 48 Melville:
Moby Dic{, 158b-159a; 209b; 237a 50 Marx: Capital, 7b-c; 42a 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk viii, 303d-304b; bk IX, 342a-344b; bk x, 389a-391c; bk
xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-564c;  bk  xiv,  588a590c;  epilogue i,
645a-650c; epilogue ii, 688a-696d 53 James : Psychology, 84a-94b passim,
esp  87b90b;  291a-295b  esp  291a-b;  823a-826a esp 825b-826b [in 2] 54
Freud:   Origin   and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  13c  /  General
Introduction, 454b-c; 462d; 486d

[1066b]
1008 THE GREAT IDEAS Uio5ah 5. The theology of freedom 5a. Man's freedom
in  relation  to  fate or to the will of God Old Testament: Gcjiesis, 3;
4:5-7 / Exodus^ 4:21; 7-14 esp 7:3, 10:1, 14:17 / Deuteronomy, 11:26-28;
30  esp  30:15,  30:19-20  /  Joshua,  11:19-20;  24:14-24—  (Z)) Josue,
11:19-20; 24:14-24 / I Kings, 8:57-58-(D) /// Kings, 8:5^-58 /Job, y.2y,
12:14-25;  34:29 / Psalms, 119:36; 139:15-16; 141:4— (D) Psalms, 118:36;
138:15-16;  140:4  /  Proverbs,  21:1  / Ecclesiastes, 3:14-15 / Isaiah,
14:24-27; 63:17; 64:8— (D) Isaias, 14:24-27; 63:17; 64:8 / Malachi, 4:6—
(D)  Malachias,  4:6 Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 13:8-18— (D) OT, Esther,
13:8-18  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:16—  (D)  OT,  ^oo\of Wisdom, 7:16 /
Ecclesiasticus,   15:11-20—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-21  New
Testament:  Matthew,  20:1-16;  23:37;  26:39  / John, 6:44,64-65,70-71;
10:26-29;   12:37-40;  iy.i^-2'j—{D)  John,  6:44,65-66,7172;  10:26-29;
12:37-40;  13:18-27 / Acts, 4:2728; 7:51-53; 13:48; 17:24-27 esp 17:26 /
Romans,  8:28-9:24;  11:1-10  /  /  Corinthians,  7:21-23; 9:16-23; 12 /
Ephesians,   1:3-12;   2:8-10;   4:7-14   /   Philippians,   2:13  /  II
Thessalonians, 2:11-14— (D) ^^ Thessalonians, 2:1013 / // Timothy, i :<)
/ James, 4:13-15 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi [342-358] 43c-d; bk xix
[74-94] 137d-138a; bk xxiv
[507-551]
176c177a  /  Odyssey, bk xviii [117-150] 285b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King 99a-113a,c esp
[1297-1415] lllb-112b
/ Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[258-291]
116c-d,
[960-999]
123b-c / Philoctetes
[169-200]
183d-184a;
[1316-1347] 193d-194a
5 Euripides: Helen
[711-721]
304d-305a / Electra
[i 168-1359]
337d-339a,c  /  Heracles Mad [1255-1357] 376a-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i, 7b-8c; 20a-22a; BK II, 77a-b; bk hi, 98b-99a; bk vh, 218b220b; BK IX,
291b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 439b-441a,c / Laws, BK I, 650a-b; bk iv,
679a-b;  bk x, 765d-769c esp 767c-768b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii,
ch  10  [1075^  12-24]  605d-606a  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 12
118d-120b; BK II, ch 8, 147b; bk hi, ch 22, 197c-198b; CH 24, 209c-210a;
bk  iv,  ch  i,  218d-219c;  ch  3,  224d;  CH  7,  233d  12  AuREi^ius:
Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; BK VI, sect 42-46 278a-d; bk x, sect
5 296d 13 Virgil: Ae?ieid, bk hi
[492-505] 160b-161a;
BK  IV  [333-361]  176a-177a 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 188d-189c / Sulla,
370c-371b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv, 69a; bk vi, 91b-d 17 Plotinus:
Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b passim 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par 14 12a-b / City of God, bk v, ch 9-10 213b-216c I

[1067a]
5b  to  5d Chapter 47: LIBERTY 1009 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, part i, q
19,  a  19 8 116a-d; q 22, a 2, rep 4-5 128d-130d; qq 23-24 132b-143c; q
83,  a  i,  rep  2-4  436d438a;  q  103, a 5 esp rep 3 531b-532b; aa 7-8
533b-534b;  q  105, aa 3-5 540c-543b; q 116 592d-595c; part i-ii, q 6, a
i,  rep  3  644d646a;  a  4, rep i 647b-648a; q 9, a 6 662a-d; Q 10, A 4
665d-666a,c; o 21, a 4, rep 2 719d720a,c Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
lOb-c; PURGATORY, XVI
[52-114]
77b-78a; 21 xviii
[1-75I
79d-80c; paradise, i
[94-142]
107b-d;  III  [64-90]  llOa-b;  xvii [13-45] 132b-c Chaucer: Troilus and
Cressida,  bk  iv, stanza 138-154 106b-108b Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxv,
35a-b  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 113b c; part iv, 272b-c Montaigne:
Essays, 515a; 520b-d Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, so ii
[220223] 51b / King Lear, act
i, sc ii
[128-164]
249a-b  Cervaktes: Don Quixote, part ii, 408c Descartes: Objections a?7d
Replies,  141b  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk hi
[80-134] 137a138a; bk v [224-245] 180a-b; [506-543] 186a187a; bk vi [169-188] 200a; bk vii
[139-173]
220a-221a; bk ix
[342-375] 254b-255b; bk x
[615-^40] 287b-288b / Samson Agonistes [667709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-395b
Locke:  Civil  Government, ch ii, sect 6 26b-c Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
230b  Kant:  Practical  Reason, 334a-335c BoswEiA.: Johnson, 549c Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, intro, 161d162a Melville: Moby Dic{, 159a; 396b;
409b410b  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 481d; bk xii, 553b; epilogue i,
650b-c;  epilogue  ii, 675a677b; 680b-c; 684b-d Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  246c-247d  /  General Introduction, 582a-b 54 5b. Mao's freedom
and  God's  knowledge  Old  Testament:  P^fl/w5,  139:15-16— (D) Psalms,
138:15-16  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  42:19—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus,
42:19 / Susanna, 13:42-43— (D) OT, Daniel, 13:42-43 New Testament: Acts,
2:23  /  Romans,  8:28-30  /  Ephesians,  1:4-12 / / Peter, 1:2,19-20 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk vi, sect 44 278b-c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b216c;  bk  XXII,  ch  i,  587a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 14, a 13 86d-88c; q 22, a 2, rep 4 128d-130d; qq
23-24  132b-143c;  q 86, a 4, ans 463d-464d; part i-ii, q 40, A 3, REP I
794c-795a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xvii
[1342] 132b-c
22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza

[1067b]
138-154 106b-108b / Nuns Priest's Tale
[15,236-256] 456b-457a
23 Hobbes: I^iathan, part iv, 271b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 342a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk hi
[80
134] 137a138a; bk v
[224-245]
180a-b; bk x
[1-62]
274b  275b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 230b 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 173c;
392d-393a 5c. Man's freedom and God's grace: the freedom of the children
of  God Old Testament: Proverbs, 1:20-33 New Testament: John, 1:1-18 esp
1:12-13;  6:44,65-66; 8:31-36 / Acts, 13:14-52; 15:1-11 / Romans passim,
esp  3:1-8:21,  11:1-10  /  /  Corinthians,  6:11-12;  7:21-23;  8:9-13;
9:15,19-21;  10:23-29  /  //  Corinthians,  3:17; 6:12 / Galatians, 2:4;
4:1-5:4;  5:13,18,22-24  /  Ephesians,  1:3-12;  2:4-22  /  Philippians,
2:12-13  /  Colossians,  1:12-13  / Titus, 2:11-14; 3:3-7 / James, 1:25;
2:10-12  /  /  Peter, 2:15-16 / Revelation, 3:20 {D) Apocalypse, 3:20 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix, par i 61c-d / City of God, bk x, ch 32
319d-322a,c;  BK  XXII, ch I, 587a-b; ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 23, a 3, REP 3 134b-135a; aa 5-6 135d-138c; a 8
140a-14ia;  q  62,  a 3, rep 2 319c-320b; a 4, ANS 320b-321b; q 83, a 2,
contrary  438a-d; Q 95, A I, REP 3,5 506b-507c; part i-ii, q 5, a 5, REP
I 640b-641a; q 9, a 6, rep 3 662a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti-
ii, q 108, A I, ANS and rep 2 331a-332b; q 109, a 2 339c340b; Q III, A 2
352d-353d;  q  113, a 3 362c363c; A 5 364b-365a; part ii-ii, q 183, a 4,
rep I 627d-628d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, i
[1-84]
53a-54a; xxvii 94c-96a esp
[139-142]
96a;  paradise,  III  [64-90]  llOa-b; vii [64-84] 115d116a; XXI [52-75]
138d-139a  31  Descartes:  Meditations, iv, 91a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, bk
iv, prop 68, schol, 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[1024-103 3]
133b; bk III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134] 138a,
[227-238] 140b; bk
xi
[1-2 i]
299a-b;
[251-262] 304b-305a
33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 154b- 159a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140,  50a  /  Philosophy
ofHistory,  part  hi, 310d-311a 5^. The divine freedom: the independence
or  autonomy  of  infinite  being;  divine choice Old Testament: Exodus,
33:19  /  Psalms,  135:6 — (D) Psalms, 134:6 / Isaiah, 14:24-25; 46:913—
(D)  Isaias,  14:24-25;  46:9-12 / Jere7niah^ 4:28— (D) Jeremias, 4:28 /
Daniel,  4:4-37—  (D)  Daniel, 4 New Testament: Matthew, 20:1-16 I John,
5:21  /  Romans,  8:28-9:26  esp  9:15-18  /  /  Corinthians,  12:7-18 /
Ephesians,  1:9-11  /  Philippians^ 2:12-13 / // Timothy, 1:8-10 /James,
1:18

[1068a]
(5.  The  theology offreedom. 5d. The divinefreedom: the independence or
autonomy  of  infinite  being;  divine  choice^ 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xiv
[441-445]  264c  5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [1017-1034]  63a 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5 [1015^916] 536a; bk xii, ch 6-7 601b-603b; gh 10
[1075*12-16] 605d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk hi, ch 13, 188c-d; bk IV, ch 6, 230c-d 17
Plotinus:  Sixth Ennead, tr viii 342d-353d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
vii,  par  6-7 44d-45d; bk xii, par 18, 103a-b; bk xiii, par 5 llld; par
12  113b-d;  par 19 115c-d / City of God, bk v, ch 10 215c-216c; bk xii,
CH  17  353a-354a;  bk xxi, ch 7-8 565d568d; BK XXII, ch 2 587b-588a; ch
30,  617d618a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, aa 1-2 31a-32c;
q 9, a i 38c-39c; q 19, aa 3-5 110b-113c; A 10 117d-118b; q 22, a 3, rep
3 130d-131c; Q 23, A 5, rep 3 135d-137d; a 6, rep 3 137d-138c; q 25, a 2
144c-145b;  aa  5-6 147d-150a; q 46, a i, rep 9-10 250a-252d; q 47, A I,
rep I 256a-257b; q 61, a 2, rep i 315c-316a; q 104, a 3 537b-d; q 105, a
i,  rep 2 538d-539c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, A 4,
REP I 218b-d; PART III, Q 21, A I, ANS 823d824d; PART III suppL, q 91, a
i,  rep  2  1016b1017c  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part ii, 113b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  38a  31  Descartes:  Objections and Replies,
228a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 6-7 355b; prop 17 362b'363c; prop
32-35  367a-369a;  appendix  369b-372d  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[139-173]  220a221a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [300-329]  346a-b  33 Pascal:
Pensees,  654  292b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, SECT
50-51  191b-c 35 Berkeley: //z/wa« Knowledge, sect 57 423d424a; sect 106
433c-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 265b-c esp 265b,d
[fn
i]  /  Practical  Reason,  321b-c;  324d-325a; 325d; 328b; 342c / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  393c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro,
160c161a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue ii, 684c-d 6. Liberty in
history  6a,  The  historical  significance  of  freedom:  stages in the
realization  of freedom; the beginning and end of the historical process
6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23a-b; 38b-c; bk V, 175b; bk vi, 20"7b-208c;
bk vii, 233a-b; 238b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponncsian War, bk i, 353c-d

[1068b]
b  1010  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6  to  6b  7 Plato: Laws, bk hi 663d-677a 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
108,  A  I  331a-332b  40  Gibbon: Decline a?id Fall, 24c; 32c-34a,c esp
33c-d;  51c;  90d-91a;  475a;  521c-523a,c  esp  522d-523a; 523d-524a 41
Gibbon:  Decline  ajid  Fall,  161c-162a; 202a-d; 300a-b; 452d-453a,c 43
Mill:   Liberty,   267d-268b;  271d-272a  /  Representative  Government,
339a-341d;  346a-c / Utilitarianisin, 475d 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight,
intro,  par  4,  12d;  part  i,  par  57  26b-27a;  part hi, par 340-360
110b-114a,c;  additiOxVs,  36 122b-c / Philosophy of History 153a-369a,c
esp  intro,  156d19bb, 203a-2b6a,c, part i, 207a-209a, 219d221a, 230a-c,
235d-236c,  245d-246c,  251c,  257a-258a, part ii, 259a-260c, 263d-267a,
268b-274a,  part  hi,  286c-287a,  303c-307b,  310d-311d, PART IV, 315a,
319b-321c,  331d333d,  348a-c,  350a-c,  360c-365c, 368d-369a,c 50 Marx:
Capital,  35b-c 6b. The struggle for civil liberty and economic freedom:
the  overthrow  of  tyrants,  despots,  and  oppressors Old Testament: I
Kings,  12  :i-25—  (D)  III Kings, i2,:i-:i^ I II Kings, 9:1-10:11; 11;
21:1826—  (D) IV Kings, 9:1-10:11; 11; 21:18-26 / // Chronicles, 10— (D)
// Paralipomenon, 10 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 120b-c; bk iv, 124a-d;
bk v, 167a-b; 171c-175b; 177d-180a; BK VI, 193b-c; 201a-b; 208d-209b; bk
vii,  243b-c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponncsian  War,  bk  i,  353c;  BK VI,
523c-524d;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  esp  582a-583c, 585d-586b, 587a-589a,
590a-c  7  Plato: Seventh Letter, 813d-814d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v,
ch  10  512d-515d  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  5 554d-555a; ch 13-20
558b-562b;  ch  33-41  568b-572a passim 14 Plutarch: Solon 64b,d-77a,c /
Poplicola   77a-86a,c   /   Poplicola-   Solon   86a-87d   /  Coriolanus
174b,d-193a,c  /  Timoleon  195a-213d esp 206d / Pelopidas 232a-246a,c /
Caesar,  600a604d  /  Cato  the  Younger 620a-648a,c esp 643a644b / Agis
648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  esp  678b-d  /  Caius
Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  /  Demetrius,  728b-729d  / Antony, 752a-755c /
Marcus  Brutus  802b,d824a,c / Aratus 826a-846a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xi,  104a-c;  bk  xii,  112a113b;  115d-116b;  117a;  bk xv, 169a-176b /
Histories,  bk i, 195a-201c esp 197a-c 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act
iv,  sc  ii-x  57d-64d  /  Richard  III, act v, sc hi [237-270] 146b-c /
Julius Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act i, sc III
[72-130] 573b-d, act hi, sc
i  580b583c  27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus 351a-392a,c 32 Milton: Lord Gen.
Fairfax 68b-69a / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-

[1069a]
d  6c  Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  1011 38 MoNTESQUiEr: Spirit ofLaws, bk hi,
9d-10a;  BK  V,  29a;  bk  viii, 54b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324a-b /
Social  Contract,  BK  H,  402c39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 170c
173b;  BK  V,  345b-d:  347d-353a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 29c-d;
39c-40a;  60b-61a;  71b-76a  csp  72c-73c;  144a-d;  449d450a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 92d: 166a-167d; 192c-193c: 333d 335a.c; 562b-566c esp
562bd;  574b-582b;  586c-588a 43 Fkderalist: number 9, 47a-c; number 26,
92a-94b  passim;  number  45,  147d-148a;  number  46, 151a-153b passim;
number   84,   252b-c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b  /  Representative
Government,  331a; 346a-c; 352a-b; 367b-c 44 Bosw ELI.: Johnson, 383b 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part h, 275b276a: part hi, 295d-296c; part
iv,  342a346c;  359a;  364a-c  50  Marx:  Capital,  7b  50  Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto, 415a416c; 419b,d; 423b-425b; 429c-433d 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  667b669d  6c. The struggle for sovereign
independence against the yoke of imperialism or colonial subjugation Old
Testament:  Exodus,  1-15  / Deuteronomy, 26:5-8 /Judges, 3-7 esp 6:8-9;
i3-i~5'  i4~i6  / Jeremiah, 41 — (D) Jeremias, 41 Apocrypha: Judith— (D)
OT,  Judith / I Maccabees, 1-9— (D) OT, / Machabees, 1-9 / // Maccabees,
i-io—  (D)  OT, II Machabees, i-io 6 Herodotus: History la-314a,c esp bk
i,  2bCROSS-REFERENCES  For: The problem of the freedom of the will, see
Will  5-60, 8a; and for the relation of political states, see Government
la; Nature 2b; State 3c, 9d; War and Peace i. Will 4b, 7c-7e(2).

[1069b]
6c.  10a  12b.  16c 20b. 23a b. 33a b, 35a 40b, 42c 43b. 45b 48a. bk hi,
118b-123d.  bk  iv,  145a 149a. bk v, 162b 163d, 170c 180c, 181b185a. BK
VI.  186a 191d. 193b 194d, 202c 205a, 207b 208c, BK vii-ix 214a 314a,c 6
Tm-cvDiDEs:  Peloponnesian  IF^/r  349a-593a,c esp BK I, 353b d, 355a b,
378c 380a. bk h, 389a-b, BK HI 417a 446a,c, bk iv, 461b 463a, 468a 469b.
469d-470b.  478d  479b,  bk v, 482d 483a, 504c 508a,c, bk vi, 519c-520d,
528d-534d  14  Plutarch:  Timoleon 195a-213d / Aristides 262b,d-276a,c /
Flamininus, 303a-310d / Demosthenes, 695d-703b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
16b-21b;  bk  h,  44d45a; bk hi, 54b-56b; bk iv, 76a-77c; 82d83c; BK XH,
112a-114c;  117c-d;  bk  xiv, 148d151b / Histories, bk i, 191a-b; bk iv,
269b277d; 283b-292b; bk v 294c-302a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch v 8a-c 26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d / 3rd Henry VI
69a-104d  / Henry V 532a-567a,c 27 Shakespeare: Cyjnbeline, act hi, sc i
463c464c 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[241-276] 344b345b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch xvi, sect 192 69c-d; sect 196 70b-c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 71b-d; 489d-491a; 521a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  51a-67c passim, esp 51a-54a; 217a-b; 443c-446b; 465a-466a 43
Declaration  of  Lndependence: la-3b 43 Federalist: number 45, 147d-148a
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 241d242b; part h, 274a-275a

[1070a]
1012  THE  GREAT IDEAS I. Dante. On World- GoI'erfjtnent or De Monarchm,
BK I, CH 12 Machiavelli. The Discourses Milton. The Readie and Easie Way
to   Establish   a  Free  Commonwealth  Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-
Politiciis {TheologicalPolitical Treatise), ch 20 Locke. Four Letters on
Toleration  in  Religion,  ii-iv Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind, iv(b)
Dostoevsky.  The  House  ofthe  Dead II. Luther. A Treatise on Christian
Liberty  Calvin.  Institutes  ofthe  Christian  Religion,  bk iv Suarez.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xi (3), xix, XXX (16), XXXV (5) Defoe. The
Shortest  Way  with the Dissenters Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human
Understanding,  BK  II,  CH  21  Franklin.  Dissertation  on Liberty and
Necessity,  Pleasure and Pain Voltaire. Essay on Toleration . "Liberty,"
"Liberty  of  Opinion,"  "Liberty  of  the  Press,"  "Toleration,"  in A
Philosophical  Dictionary  T.  Reid.  Essays on the Active Powers of the
Human Mind, IV Paine. Rights of Man Burke. Reflections on the Revolution
in France Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice^ BK II, CH 4-6
Schiller.  William  Tell  ScHELLiNG.  OfHuman  Freedom Schopenhauer. The
World  as Will and Idea, vol i, BK IV Shelley. Prometheus Unbound Byron.
Sonnet  on  Chillon  . The Isles of Greece Bentham. On the Liberty ofthe
Press  Emerson.  "Self-Reliance,"  in  Essays,  1 J. H. Newman. "Private
Judgment,"  in  vol  ii. Essays and Sketches Thoreau. Civil Disobedience
Whitman. Leaves of Grass

[1070b]
For:  The  issue  of freedom and necessity in the philosophy of history,
see  Fate 6; History 43(1), 43(3); Will 7b; and for the history of man's
struggle  for  civil  liberty and economic freedom, see Citizen 9; Labor
7c-7c(3); Revolution 5a-5c, 6a, 7; Tyranny 8. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into  two groups: L Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
pubHcation  of  the  works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas, LoTZE.
Microcosmos, bk i, ch i (4) Burckhardt. Force and Freedom J. F. Stephen.
Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity  AcTON. Essays on Frcedofn and Power, ch
2-4,  9  Bradley.  Ethical Studies, i Arnold. "Democracy," "Equahty," in
Mixed Essays T. H. Green. The Principles of Political Obligation^ (h, i)
. Prolegomena to Ethics, bk i, ch 3 Spencer. The Man Versus the State R.
Browning. Why I Am a Liberal Lecky. Democracy and Liberty BosANQUET. The
Philosophical Theory of the State GiDE. The Immoralist Santayana. Reason
in  Society,  ch  6  Peguy.  Basic Verities (Freedom) Bury. A History of
Freedom  of  Thought  Burgess. Reconciliation of Government with Liberty
Garrigou-Lagrange.  God, His Existence and Nature, PART II, CH 4 DuGuiT.
Souverainete  et  liberte  B.  Russell. Sceptical Essays, xii-xiv Laski.
Liberty  in  the  Modern  State  Whitehead.  Adventures of Ideas, ch 4-5
Gorky. Forty Years—the Life ofClim Samghin Dewey. "The Idea of Freedom,"
in Outlines of a Critical Theory of Ethics . The Study of Ethics, ch 8 .
Characters and Events, vol ii, bk hi (14) . Experience and Education, ch
5-6  . Freedom and Culture Croce. History as the Story of Liberty . "The
Roots  of  Liberty,"  in Freedom, Its Meaning Koestler. Darkness at Noon
Maritain.  "A  Philosophy  of Freedom," in Freedom in the Modern World .
Scholasticism  and  Politics,  ch  v  Becker. New Libertiesfor Old A. J.
Carlyle.  Political  Liberty  Barker.  Reflections on Government, ch 1-2
Malinowski. Freedom and Civilization Berdyayev. Freedom and the Spirit .
Slavery and Freedom Hocking. Freedom of the Press Simon. Community ofthe
Free, ch i

[1071a]
Chapter  48: LIFE AND DEATH INTRODUCTION MEN have divided the totaUty of
things  in  \arious  ways. The three most fundaiicntal divisions rest on
the  distinction  between  :he natural and the supernatural, between the
material  and the spiritual, and between the iicless and the living. The
same  kind  of basic question is raised by .'ich of these divisions, and
given opposite answers in the tradition of the great books. The question
is not always formulated in the same way. It may be a question about the
existence  of the supernatural order or of incorporeal beings. It may be
a  problem of whether the terms of the division represent a real duality
or  merely  different  aspects  of  one  and the same whole. Are God and
nature one or are .^^ Is spirituality merely they radically distinct one
expression  of  bodily  existence,  or are there tw^o worlds, a world of
bodies  and  a  world  of  spirits  ? These issues are considered in the
chapters on God, Nature, Angel, and Matter, as well as in the chapter on
Being.  The  issue  raised  by  the  third  great division is one of the
central  topics  in  this  chapter.  That  issue concerns the difference
between  the  living and the non-living. There is no question here about
wliether,  in the order of nature, living things exist. The fact of life
is  not  denied, at least not as a matter of observation. On the surface
there  certainly  appears to be a striking difference between the living
tree  and  the stone, or between the animal which a moment ago was alive
and  is  now  dead.  But  how this difference is to be understood is the
question.  Does  it  signify an absolute break, a discontinuity, between
the  world  of  living bodies and the domain of inanimate things ? Or is
the  continuity  of  nature  preserved  across  the  line  which divides
inorganic and or- .f^ Is the difference between the ganic matter 1013

[1071b]
non-living and the living (or the living and the dead) one of kind or of
degree  ?  Those  who  answer  that  it  is a difference in kind usually
formulate  a definition of life which draws a sharp line, on one side of
which  are  the  things  that have the indispensable properties of life,
while  on the other side are things totally lacking in these properties.
The  critical  point  here  turns on whether vitality is present in some
degree  or  totally absent. The definition of life may not always be the
same.  It  may  not  always,  for  example,  postulate  the  soul as the
principle  in  all living things, or involve the same conception of soul
in  relation  to  living  organisms.  But  when  life  is  defined as an
essential  characteristic  of  some  natures, the definition implies the
existence  of  natures  which  are  totally  lacking  in  the properties
essential  to  life.  It  also implies the impossibility of intermediate
links  between  the  lowest  form  of  life  and the most complex of the
inorganic   substances.  The  opposite  answer  that  there  is  only  a
difference  in degree between the inanimate and the animate, affirms the
continuity  of nature across the gap between things which appear hfeless
and  those  which seem to be alive. All bodies have the same fundamental
properties,  though  not  in  the  same  magnitude.  But here there is a
further  question.  It  can  be  asked  whether those properties are the
powers  or  functions  commonly  associated with the appearance of being
alive,  such as gro\\'th, reproduction, sensitivity, desire, locomotion;
or   whether   they   are   the   mechanical  properties  of  matter  in
motion—properties  which vary only with the degrees of complexity in the
organization  of  matter.  According  to the doctrine which is sometimes
called "animism" and sometimes "panpsychism," everything is alive, every
body is besouled, though at the lower end of the scale the

[1072a]
1014  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  signs  of  vitality remain hidden from ordinary
observation.  Although  this theory is usually attributed to a primitive
view  of  nature,  it  appears in a subtle form in certain philosophical
developments which make soul or mind a principle as universal as matter.
"There  is  one  common  substance," says Marcus Aurelius, "though it is
distributed  among  countless bodies which have their several qualities.
There  is  one soul, though it is distributed among infinite natures and
individual  circumscriptions."  The  doctrine  which  in modern times is
called  "mechanism"  conceives  the continuity of nature in terms of the
universality  of  purely mechanical principles. It reduces all phenomena
to  the  interaction  of  moving parts or particles. No new principle is
needed  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  life.  The  laws of physics and
chemistry  suffice.  Biophysics  and  biochemistry  simply deal with the
mechanics  of more complex material systems. The apparent differences in
function  between  "living"  and  "non-living" things represent the same
functions.  They  are  altered  only  in  appearance by the more complex
organization  of  the  matter  which is called "living." The controversy
over  mechanistic  principles  in  the analysis of life arose with great
explicitness  in the latter part of the nineteenth century and continues
to  our  own day. The chief opponents of the mechanists are those who at
one  time  called themselves "vitaUsts" to signify their insistence upon
an essential difference between vital and mechanical phenomena. The work
of  Jacques  Loeb can be taken to represent the mechanistic side of this
controversy;  the  writings of Bergson, Haldane, Whitehead, the vitalist
position.  Those  who  regard  the  realm of living things as a distinct
domain  in nature also think that the study of fiving things has special
concepts, principles, and methods as different from those of physics and
chemistry  as  the objects studied are distinct. Biology is a science of
ancient  origin.  The  Hippocratic  collection  of writmgs on health and
disease,  the  extensive biological researches of Aristotle, the work of
Galen,  represent more than a bare beginning of the science. The ancient
classification of vital functions estabfishes

[1072b]
the  terms of biological analysis. Ideas which have come to seem obvious
because  of  traditional  acceptance  were once great discoveries; • for
example,  that  all  Uving  bodies  nourish  them-1  selves,  grow,  and
reproduce;  that  these  are  the minimal, not the maximal, functions of
organic matter; that there is a regular cycle of growth and decay in the
normal  life  span  which  is  itself  different  for different types of
organisms;  that  in the dynamic equilibrium between the living organism
and  its  physical  environment,  the organism actively maintains itself
through  a  certain  balance  of exchanges in the biological economy, of
which  breathing  is  a  prime  example.  The  great books of biological
science  from  Aristotle  to  Harvey seem to be of one mind on the point
that  living  matter possesses distinctive powers and performs functions
which  are  not  present  in  any  degree  in  the realm of the inert or
inorganic.  For  the  most  part they reflect the theory that the living
body  possesses  a  soul  which is the principle of its vitality and the
source  of the vital powers embodied in its various organs. , In ancient
and  mediaeval theory, the soul is not conceived as belonging peculiarly
to  man;  it  is  not  identified  with  mind  or  with the intellectual
faculties.  The  word "animal" derives from the Latin name for soul— the
principle of animation. It is true that Galen distinguishes between what
he  calls  the "natural" and the "psychic" faculties. The latter for him
are  the powers of sensitivity, desire, and locomotion. Yet his analysis
of  the  vegetative  powers of nutrition, growth, and reproduction which
are  common to plants and animals squares with Aristotle's conception of
the  vegetative  soul. "What has soul in it," Aristotle writes, "differs
from  what  has not, in that the former displays life. Now this word has
more  than  one  sense.  .  .  .  Living,  that is, may mean thinking or
perception  or  local  movement  and  rest,  or movement in the sense of
nutrition,  decay,  and growth. Hence we think of plants also as living,
for  they  are  observed  to  possess in themselves an originative power
through which they increase and decrease in all spatial directions. This
power  of self-nutrition ... is the originative power, the possession of
which leads us to speak of things as living^

[1073a]
In  the  great books the opposite position witli i respect to the living
and  non-living  seems to apJjpear lor the first time with Descartes. It
miglit  be  supposed  that  Lucretius,  since  he  denies the soul as an
immaterial  principle,  would  also  tend  to  reject  anything except a
diilerence  in  degree between animate and inanimate bodies. But this is
not  the  case. According to Lucretius living things are not merely more
complex  combinations  of  atoms and void. Their constitution includes a
special  type  of  soul-atom,  whose  round,  smooth  shape and speed of
movement  through  all  parts of the living body accounts for the powers
and  activities which are peculiar to that body. Lucretius is recognized
as  a  materiahst  and a mechanist, yet he sharply separates living from
non-living  bodies and appeals to a special principle— the soul-atom— to
explain  this difference in kind. As appears in the chapters on Mind and
Soul,  Descartes  is  at  variance not only with Lucretius but also with
Aristotle,  Galen,  and  Plotinus  in  his conception of the soul and of
life.  The  soul  is  not  a body or composed of bodies. Neither, in his
opinion,  is it an immaterial principle conjoined with organic matter to
constitute  the living body. It is itself an immaterial substance, quite
separate  from  the human body to which it is allied. Descartes tells us
how  he passed from "a description of inanimate bodies and plants ... to
that  of  animals,  and  particularly  to  that  of  men." He asks us to
consider  the  supposition  that  "God formed the body of man altogether
like  one of ours . . . without making use of any matter other than that
which  I  have  described  and without at first placing in it a rational
soul  or  any other thing which might serve as a vegetative or sensitive
soul."  He then goes on to say that "examining the functions which might
in  accordance  with  this  supposition  exist  in  this  body,  I found
precisely all those which might exist in us without our having the power
of  thought, and consequently without our soul that is to say, this part
of us, distinct from the body, of which it has been said that its nature
is  to  think."  The  mechanistic  implications  of  his supposition are
explicitly  developed  by  Descartes  in  his  consideration of Harvey's
discovery of the motions of the heart and blood. These move-

[1073b]
Chapti:k  48:  LIFE  AND  DEA  Til  1015  ments,  lie  says,  follow "as
necessarily  from the very disposition of the organs ... as does that of
a clock from the power, the situation, and the form, of its counterpoise
and  of  its wheels." In these motions, as well as in the actions of the
nerves,  brain,  and  muscles,  it is not necessary to suppose any other
cause than those operating according "to the laws of Mechanics which are
identical  with  those of nature." This will not seem strange, Descartes
adds,  to those who know "how many different automata or moving machines
can  be  made by the industry of man, without employing in so doing more
than  a  very few parts in comparison with the great multitude of bones,
muscles,  nerves,  arteries,  veins or other parts that are found in the
body  of  each  animal.  From  this  aspect,  the  body is regarded as a
machine,  which,  having  been made by the hands of God, is incomparably
better  arranged,  and possesses in itself movements which are much more
admirable,  than  any  of  those which can be invented by man." Only the
functions   of   reason,   only   the  acts  of  thinking—not  those  of
living—operate under other than the mechanical laws of corporeal nature.
Whether  living or not, all bodies without reason or a rational soul are
automata  or  machines.  Whatever  they do can be explained as a kind of
clockwork—by  the  disposition  and  interaction of their parts. Another
source  and another version of the view that the continuity of nature is
uninterrupted,  comes  from  the theory of evolution. Darwin himself, in
his  brief  consideration  of  the  origin of Ufe, deals mainly with the
alternative  hypotheses of the divine creation of a single original form
or  oi  several  primitive  forms  from which the whole of the plant and
animal  kingdoms  has  developed  by  the natural steps of evolution. He
rejects  the  division of the animate world into more than the two great
kingdoms of plant and animal life, and holds that man differs from other
animals  only  in  degree,  not in kind. As indicated in the chapters on
Animal and Evolution, Dar\vin questions the discontinuity between plants
and animals. He refers to the intermediate forms which seem to belong to
both  kingdoms.  He  suggests  the  possibility that the lowest forms of
animal life may have

[1074a]
1016  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  developed  by natural evolutionary descent from
plant organisms. But he does not seriously consider the hypothesis of an
evolutionary transition from inorganic matter to living organisms. Here,
on  the  contrary, he seems to recognize a difference in kind. "The most
humble  organism,"  he  writes,  "is  something  much  higher  than  the
inorganic  dust  under  our  feet;  and no one with an unbiased mind can
study  any  Hving  creature,  however  humble, without being struck with
enthusiasm at its marvellous structure and properties." He questions the
notion  that hving organisms might have originated from inorganic matter
by  spontaneous  generation. "Science has not as yet proved the truth of
this  belief,"  he says, "whatever the future may reveal." Nevertheless,
with  the  extension  of Darwin's theory of the origin of species into a
doctrine  of  cosmic  evolution,  what  James  calls  "the  evolutionary
afflatus"  leads  writers  like  Tyndall and Spencer to "talk as if mind
grew  out  of  body  in  a  continuous way. ... So strong a postulate is
continuity,"  James writes, that the evolutionists try to "leap over the
breach" between inorganic matter and consciousness. "In a general theory
of  evolution," he explains, "the inorganic comes first, then the lowest
forms  ofanimal  and  vegetable  life,  then  forms  of Hfe that possess
mentality,  and  finally  those like ourselves that possess it in a high
degree.  .  .  .  We  are  dealing  all  the  time  with  matter and its
aggregations  and  separations; and although our treatment must perforce
be  hypothetical,  this  does  not prevent it from being continuous. The
point  which  as evolutionists we are bound to hold fast is that all the
new  forms  of  being  that  make their appearance are nothing more than
results  of the redistribution of the original and unchanging materials.
The  self-same atoms which, chaotically dispersed, made the nebula, now,
jammed and temporarily caught in peculiar position, form our brains; and
the  'evolution'  of  the  brains,  if  understood,  would be simply the
account  of how the atoms came to be so caught and jammed. In this story
no  new natures, no factors not present at the beginning, are introduced
at  any later stage." James is here presenting a theory which he himself
rejects.  He recognizes the strength of the "postulate of continuity" in
the theories of

[1074b]
Spencer,  Tyndall,  and  other  evolutionists, but he thinks the evident
"contrasts between living and inanimate performances" favor the division
of  nature  into  two realms. Yet he also seems to regard some degree of
intelHgence  or mentahty as an accompaniment of Hfe. Hence his criterion
of  the  difference  in  kind  "between  an intelligent and a mechanical
performance"— namely, purposiveness or "the pursuance of future ends and
the  choice of means"—also serves as the mark of distinction between the
animate  and the inanimate. It is worth remarking that this criterion is
one of the tests Descartes proposes for differentiating man from all the
rest  of  nature,  man  alone having reason or thought. It is also worth
noting   that   in   associating   different  degrees  of  mentality  or
consciousness  with  Hfe  at  all  levels  of development, James himself
affirms  a  continuity  in  the realm of all living things. He therefore
does  not go as far in the direction of discontinuity as do those in the
tradition  of  the  great books who find an essential difference between
the  inanimate  and  the  living,  between plant and animal, and between
brute  and  human  hfe. The issues raised by these last two distinctions
are further considered in the chapters on Animal, Man, and Mind. Here we
are concerned only with the fact that those who find genuine differences
in  kind in the world of animate things also tend to distinguish between
the  living  and  the  non-living  by  reference  to  the  most  generic
properties of corporeal life, that is, the powers or functions shared by
plants,  animals,  and  men. The question of origins does not seem to be
relevant  to  the problem of differences. Aquinas, for example, does not
seem  to  regard  the hypothesis of the spontaneous generation of living
organisms  from  putrefying  organic  matter  as  inconsistent  with his
assertion  that  the  vegetative functions of plants and animals are not
performed  in  any  degree—by  inanimate  bodies. When Aristotle says of
natural  bodies that "some have life in them, others not; and by life we
mean  self-nutrition  and  growth,"  he  is aware that the word "growth"
occurs  in  the  description  of  a  certain type of change in inanimate
bodies. Other than living things increase in

[1075a]
;Ize.  To  avoid an equivocal use of the word 'growth," he assigns three
distinguishing  charK  teristics  to the quantitative change or increase
;ii  living  things: "(i) Any and every part of the growing magnitude is
made  bigger,  (2)  by the icccssion of something, and (3) in such a way
that  the  growing  thing  is preserved and persists." To cxempliiy this
ditierence, Galen compares I he growth of an organism with the expansion
c)l  a  dried  bladder  when  children  blow  air into 11. The expanding
bladder  seems to grow, but not as it did when it was a part of a living
animal  and  when  the  growth of the whole involved I he growth of each
part.  "In  these  doings  of the children," Galen writes, "the more the
interior   cavity  of  the  bladder  increases  in  size,  the  thinner,
necessarily,  does  its substance become. But, if the children were able
to bring nourishment to this thin part, then they would make the bladder
big  in  the  same  way  that  Nature does. . . . To be distended in all
directions  belongs  only  to bodies whose growth is directed by Nature;
for  those  which  are  distended  by  us undergo this distension in one
direction  but .grow less in the others; it is impossible to find a body
which will remain entire and not be torn through whilst we stretch it in
the  three  dimensions. Thus Nature alone has the power to expand a body
in all directions so that it remains unruptured and preserves completely
its  previous  form."  Modern  biologists  sometimes  compare the growth
ofcr\stals  in  solution with living growth and reproduction. Or, making
the point that "other systems in dynamic equilibrium show in essence all
the properties of living things," they say that "it is almost impossible
to  distinguish  a  candle  flame  from  a  living  organism." Aristotle
considers  the  latter  comparison and rejects it. He observes that "the
growth  of  fire  goes  on without limit so long as there is a supply of
fuel"; but no amount of nutriment can increase the size of living things
without  limit.  "There  is a limit or ratio which determines their size
and  increase, and the limit and ratio are marks of the soul, but not of
fire." The flame is a lively thing, but to say that it is alive, that it
grows  or  dies,  is  in  Aristotle's  view  a  poetic  metaphor,  not a
scientific  statement.  "When I have plucked the rose," Othello says, "I
cannot give it vital growth again, it

[1075b]
Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND DEATH 1017 needs must wither." But to the candle
burning beside Desdemona's bed, he says: "If 1 quench thee, thou flaming
minister,  I  can  again  thy former light restore." The flame is lit or
extinguished  by  motions  from  without;  but  the birth and death, the
nourishing and growth of the living thing is self-movement. According to
Aristotle and Aquinas selfmovement is the essential mark of being alive.
"All  things  are  said  to  be alive, "Aquinas writes, "which determine
themselves  to  movement  or operation of any kind; whereas those things
which  cannot  by their own nature do so, cannot be called living except
by  a  similitude."  He  further defines the meaning of self-movement by
distinguishing  between  the  transitive  action  of one inert body upon
another  and  the immanent activity of a living thing, whereby the agent
itself  is  perfected.  Growing, sensing, and understanding are immanent
actions  because  they are activities which affect the growing, sensing,
or understanding thing. The result of such actions remains in the agent.
In  contrast,  heating is a transitive action. Inheating, one thing acts
upon  another,  and  the  hot  thing  loses  its  own  heat  in As vital
operations differ thus from the actions of inanimate bodies, so do vital
powers  differ from the capacities of inert matter, through which bodies
can  act  upon  or react to other bodies. The power of self-movement (or
immanent  activity)  enables  living  things alone to change from a less
perfect  to  a  more  perfect state of being, as measured by the thing's
nature,  rather  than  simply  to change from contrary to contrary, as a
body  changes  when  it moves locally from this place to that, or alters
from  hot  to  cold,  or  cold  to  hot. For the theologian, there is an
additional  aspect  to  the  problem  of  defining life. If the realm of
corporeal substances is divided into inert and living bodies, what is to
be  said about incorporeal substances {i.e., the angels) and about God.?
It  is  easier to think of the angels as not being than to conceive them
as  not  being alive. More than "infinite" or "omnipotent" or "eternal,"
"the  ever-hving  God" is the phrase which, in the language of religious
worship,  expresses  positively  the  divine nature. But the fundamental
activities which distinguish living from

[1076a]
1018  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  non-living  bodies  (such as nutrition, growth,
reproduction)  are essentially corporeal in nature. So, too, are sensing
and locomotion. What common meaning of life, then, can apply to material
and  spiritual beings ? Aquinas answers by saying that "since a thing is
said  to  live  in  so  far as it operates of itself and not as moved by
another,  the  more  perfectly this power is found in anything, the more
perfect  is  the life of that thing." By this criterion, plants are less
perfectly alive than animals, in whom self-movement is found to a higher
degree  because  of  their sensitive faculties; and among animals, there
are grades of life according to degrees of sensitivity, and according to
the  possession of mobility, a power which certain animals seem to lack.
In  both the higher animals and in man, there is purposive behavior, but
man  alone, through his intellect and will, can freely determine his own
ends  and  choose  the  means to them ; hence these faculties give human
life  an  even  greater  degree  of self-movement. But the action of the
human intellect is not perfectly self-determined, for it depends in part
upon  external  causes.  Wherefore  Aquinas  concludes  that life in the
highest  degree  belongs  properly  to  God—  "that  being  whose act of
understanding  is  its  very  nature  and  which,  in  what it naturally
possesses,  is  not determined by another." He quotes Aristotle's remark
that  the  perfection of God's Ufe is proportionate to the perfection of
the  divine  intellect, which is purely actual and eternally in act. And
he  goes  on  to  remark  that,  in  the sense in which understanding is
movement,  and  that  which  understands itselfmoves itself, "Plato also
taught  that  God  moves Himself." Nourishment, growth, and reproduction
are indispensable features of corporeal life precisely because corporeal
things   are  perishable.  They  need  "reproduction,  to  preserve  the
species,"  Aquinas writes, "and nourishment to preserve the individual."
Hence  the higher powers of life, such as sensing and understanding, are
never  found  in corporeal things apart from the vegetative powers. This
does  not  hold,  however,  for  spiritual  beings  which  are by nature
imperishable.  Spiritual  life  is essentially immortal life. Subject to
the  ravages  of  time,  corporeal  life  at  every  moment  betrays its
mortality—in its need for sleep, in the enfeeblement of its pow-

[1076b]
ers,  in  disease,  decay,  or degeneration. Death is the correlative of
life  for those who sharply divide the living from the non-living. Rocks
may  crumble  into  dust, bodies may disintegrate, and atoms explode—but
they  do  not die. Death is a change which only living matter undergoes.
The  transition  from  Ufe to death accentuates the mystery of life. The
notion  of  spontaneous generation aside, life always seems to come from
life.  Whether  by cell division or by germination, the hving thing that
is  generated comes from the living substance of another thing. But when
a  living thing dies, it crosses the gap between the living and the non-
living.  As the organic matter of the corpse decomposes, nothing is left
but  the  familiar  inorganic elements and compounds. This seems to be a
change  more  radical  than  generation  or  birth. All the metaphysical
problems  of  form  and substance, of matter and the soul, of continuity
and discontinuity in nature, which appear in the analysis of Ufe, become
more intense in the understanding of death. As APPEARS in the chapter on
Immortality,  the  living  are preoccupied with death, not predominantly
with analyzing it, but with facing and fearing it, struggling against or
embracing  it.  Death,  as  the  great  poems  reveal,  is the object of
soliloquy in moments of greatest introspection or self-appraisal. To die
well,  Montaigne points out, requires greater moral stamina than to live
well. For him the essence of the philosophical temper, as for others the
meaning  of  heroism  or  martyrdom,  consists  in  facing death with an
equanimity which reflects the highest qualities of a well-resolved life.
Montaigne  devotes  a long essay to the subject that "to philosophise is
to  learn  to die," and begins it by quoting Cicero's statement that "to
study  philosophy is nothing but to prepare one's self to die." Socrates
then  is  the prototype of the philosopher, for in conversation with his
friends  in  prison  while  awaiting death, he tells them that "the true
votary  of philosophy ... is always pursuing death, and dying." He tries
to prove to them, by his actions as well as by his words, that "the real
philosopher has reason to be of good cheer when he is about to die." Not
only  death but the dead exercise a profound effect upon the living. The
historians describe the various forms which the ceremonials

[1077a]
Chapter  48:  LIFE  ANI^) DRATH of death take in every society. Wiiethcr
the  the  erotic instincts rituals arc secular or sacred, they are among
the  most  significant  customs ofany culture, for they reveal the value
placed  upon lite and the conception of hfe's meaning and man's destiny.
No  deeper  differences exist among the great religions than those which
appear  in  the  practices or sacraments in preparation for death and in
the  services  for the dead. The moral, social, and religious aspects of
death  appear  to be peculiarly human. Yet on I he biological level, the
same  fundamental  instincts and emotions seem to prevail in animals and
men.  The  struggle  to remain alive may be presumed to occur in plants.
But  it  is not there as plainly discernible as in the specific patterns
of  behavior  manifested  by  the  animal instinct of self-preservation.
Almost  in  proportion  to the degree of vitality, the instinct of self-
preservation operates with a strength and pertinacitv as vigorous as the
love for life and arouses as an emotional corollary an equally devouring
fear  of  death. The instinct of self-preservation is the life instinct.
Directed  toward the related ends of maintaining and increasing life are
the  reproductive  impulses  and the erotic instincts. But, according to
Freud,  there  is  in  all  living matter a more primitive instinct than
these,  and  one  I  which  aims  in the opposite direction. That is the
plishing  a  result  which  no  one  intends. Furtherdeath instinct— the
impulse  of  the living to return to lifelessness. "It would be contrary
to  the  conservative nature of instinct," Freud writes, "if the goal of
life  were  a state never hitherto reached. It must rather be an ancient
starting  point,  which  the living being left long ago, and to which it
harks  back again. ... If we may assume as an experience admitting of no
exception that everything dies from causes within itself, and returns to
the  inorganic,  we  can only say 'The goal of all life is death.' " The
death  instinct, according to Freud, originates with hfe itself. "At one
time  or  another,  by  some operation of force which completely baffles
conjecture, the properties of life were awakened in lifeless matter. . .
.  The tension then aroused in the previously inanimate matter strove to
attain an equilibrium; the first instinct was present, that to return to
Ufelessness." The death instinct acts against the tendency of

[1077b]
1019  which  are always trying to collect livingsubstances together into
ever  larger  unities. . . . The cooperation and opposition of these two
forces  prcxluce  the  phenomena  of  life  to which death puts an end."
Freud's hypothesis of the death instinct has a bearing on the impulse to
commit suicide and on the question whether it is natural or perverse for
men  to  choose  this escape from the tensions and difficulties of life.
The   psychological   problem   here,  especially  with  regard  to  the
unconscious  forms of the suicidal impulse, is not the same as the moral
problem.  The  question  whether  animals  other  than  men  ever commit
suicide,  like the question whether the killing of one animal by another
can  be  called "murder," indicates the difference between psychological
description  and  moral  judgment.  For the moralist the condemnation of
suicide seems to rest on the same grounds as the condemnation of murder.
With  Kant, for example, it represents the same type of violation of the
universal  moral  law.  The  categorical  imperative  requires us to act
always as if the maxim of our individual action could be universahzed as
a rule for all men to follow. But, in the case of suicide as in the case
of  murder,  the  maxim  of  the  action cannot be universalized without
accommore,  suicide  is not consistent with the idea of the human person
as  an end in itself. The man, says Kant, who destroys himself "in order
to  escape from painful circumstances uses a person merely as a means to
maintain  a  tolerable  condition up to the end of Hfe." Suicide is also
condemned by the theologians as a contravention of the divine as well as
of  the  natural  law.  Men are God's handiwork and, therefore, as Locke
puts  it,  "they are His property . . . made to last during His, not one
another's,  pleasure." Under the natural law, a man is not at liberty to
destroy  himself, nor consequently is he at liberty to sell himself into
slavery. Everyone "is bound to preserve himself and not quit his station
willfully."  If,  furthermore,  there  is  an  after-life of rewards and
punishments,  suicide  is no escape. "Death so snatched," Adam tells Eve
in  Paradise  Lost,  "will not exempt us from the pain we are by doom to
pay."

[1078a]
1020  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  powers  or functions plants and animals 5^. The
nature and causes of health 5^. The nature and causes of disease 6b. The
human life span 6c. The biological characteristics of the stages of life
Sb. The desire for death: the death instinct; the problem of suicide

[1078b]
There  is  similar reasoning in pagan antiquity. But the pagan tradition
also  speaks  with  an Suicide is an act of violence and, says Plotinus,
opposite  voice. For the Stoics, suicide does not *'if there be a period
allotted  to  all  by fate, to seem to be as reprehensible as murder. To
those  anticipate  the  hour  could  not be a happy act. who complain of
life's  pains  and  the  fetters  of . . . If everyone is to hold in the
other  world  a  the  body, Epictetus says, "The door is open." standing
determined  by  the  state in which he In a doctrine in which all things
that  affect  quitted this, there must be no withdrawal as only the body
are  indifferent  to  the  soul's  welllong  as  there  is  any  hope of
progress."  A  Chrisbeing,  death too is indifferent. "Death is the tian
would  add  that  to  rehnquish hope as long harbor for all; this is the
place  of  refuge; as soon as hfe persists is the sin of despair. as you
choose,  you  may  be  out  of the house." OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. The
nature  and  cause of life: the soul as the principle of life in organic
bodies 1021 2. Continuity or discontinuity between living and non-living
things: comparison of vital powers and activities with the potentiahties
and  motions  of  inert  bodies 1022 3. The modes or grades of corporeal
life:  the  classification and order of the various vital 3^. Continuity
or  discontinuity  between  plants  and animals: comparison of plant and
animal  nutrition,  respiration,  growth,  and reproduction 1023 3^. The
grades  of  animal  life: types and degrees of mobility and sensitivity;
analogies  of structure and function 1024 4. The biological economy: the
environment  of  the organism; the interdependence of 5. Normal vitality
and its impairment by disease, degeneration, and enfeeblement with age I
025  5^.  The restorative function of rest or sleep 1026 6. The Hfe span
and the life cycle 1 027 6a. The life span of plants and animals, and of
different  species of plants and animals 7. The causes and occurrence of
death:  the  transition  from  life  to death 1028 8. The concern of the
living with life and death 1029 Sc. The contemplation and fear of death:
the  attitude  of  the  hero,  the  philosopher, the martyr 103^ Sd. The
ceremonials of death: the rites of burial in war and peace 1032

[1079a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy tvpe,
which  arc  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homkr: Iliad, bk ii [265-28:5] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  vokime  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a- 119b.
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras  7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas, consult the Preface. 1, The nature and cause of life:
the  soul  as  the  principle  of  life in organic bodies Old Testament:
Genesis,  1:20-27; 2:7 / ]ob, 12:9-10 7 Plato: Cratylus, 93c / Phaedrus,
124b-d  /  Phaedo, 223c-d; 225b; 244b-246c / Gorgias, 275d-277b passim /
Laws,  bk  x,  763a-764a  8  Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 10 [148*23-37]
202b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk v, ch 4 [1014^22-26] 535a; ch 8 [1017^10-17]
538b; bk vii, ch 10
[i035''i4-28] 559a-b; bk ix, ch 6 [1048^18-34]
574a-c; bk xii, ch 7 [1072*^14-29] 602d-603a; bk xiil ch 2 [io77''20-23]
608c  / Soul, bk i 631a-641d passim; bk ii, ch 1-4 642a-647b; bk III, ch
12-13  667a-668d  /  Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 1-4 714a-716b; ch 14
720d-721a  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch i [640^ 30-641^33]
163c-164b  / Generation ofAnimals, bk I, CH 19 [726^15-29] 266d-267a; bk
ii, ch i
[731^29-33]
272a-b;
[734^20-735*9]
275b-d; CH 3
[737^18-34]
278a-b; ch 5
[74i"6-3i]
282a-b; bk hi, ch ii [762*18-^22] 303b-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i,  ch  i 167a-b; bk ii, ch 3, 185a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
ii
[8651022] 26a-28a; bk hi [94-416] 31b-35c; bk v
[783-825] 71b-d

[1079b]
Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND DEATH 1021 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la-6b
passim  /  Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 12-13 46c-47b / Third Ennead, tr vi,
ch  3, 108b; tr viii, ch 8, 133a-b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 8, 146c-d;
CH  9,  147b-c; ch 19 151d-152b; ch 23, 153d; tr IV, ch 29 173b-174b; tr
v,  ch 7, 188b-c; TR VII, CH 2-5 192a-194a; ch 14 200b-c / Fifth Ennead,
tr  i,  ch  2,  208c-  209a  /  Sixth Eimead, tr iv, ch i 297b-d; ch 4-6
299a-300b; ch 16, 305a; tr v, ch 12 310b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xii,  ch 25 358b359a; bk xiii, ch 2 360b-361a; bk xxii, ch 24, 609c-610a
/ Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 8 626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 3, a i, ANs 14b-15b; q 4, a 2, rep 3 21b-22b; q 10, A I, rep 2
40d-41d;  q  18  104b-108c;  q  27, a 2, ANs 154c-155b; q 51, a i, rep 3
275b-276b;  A  3  277a-278c; q 69, a 2 361c-362c; q 70, A 3, ANS and rep
2-5 365b-367a; qq 71-72 367a-369d; qq 75-76 378a-399b passim; Q 97, A 3,
ANS  515a-d;  qq  118-119 600a-608d passim 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  56,  A  I,  REP  I  30a-c;  part ii-ii, q 23, a 2, rep 2
483d-484d; part hi, q 2, a 5 715a-716b; g 5, A 3 737d-739a

[1080a]
1.  The  nature and car^se of life: the soul as the principle of life in
organic bodies.^ 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-54] 80b-c; XXV
[19-108]
91c-92c;  paradise, II [127-148] 109a-b; vii [121-148] 116b-c 23 HoBBEs:
Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part i, 65a; part hi, 173d; 176d; part iv, 251a
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 138a-b 28 Harvey: Motion
of  the  Heart, 285d-286a; 296a-d / Circulation of the Blood, 316a-318b;
325d-326d / On Animal Generation, 384d390b passim; 431b-434a esp 433c-d;
488d496d  31  Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 156a-d; 207a; 226b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvii, sect 3-5 219d-220c passim;
bk  hi,  CH  X,  SECT  22, 297d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 191b-192b 42
Y^a^t:  Judgement,  555a-558b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par
47 24a-b; additions, 28 121b; 161 143a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[6819-7004]
167a171b; [7851-7864] 191b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 27b-28a; 344b-345a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  145b-c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xh,
561b-d;  bk  XIV, 608a-b 53 James: Psychology, 140a 54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  652d; 654c-656d esp 655c-656a; 659d-660b / Ego and
Id,  708d-709a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  851c  2.  Continuity or
discontinuity  between living and non-living things: comparison of vital
powers  and  activities  with  the  potentialities  and motions of inert
bodies 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 5
[213^4-9]
292c;  BK  V,  CH  3  [227*10-17] 307d-308a; bk VII, CH 2 [244^1-245*12]
328b-d; bk vhi, ch i
[250^11-14]
334a; ch 4 338d-340d; ch 6
[259*20-^31] 345a-d
/ Heavens, bk ii, ch 2
[284''30-285*i] 376c / Meteorology, bk iv, ch
1-3 482b,d-486a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4
[1014^17-26] 534d-535a; bk vii, ch 16 [1040*^516] 564c / Soul, bk
I,  CH 5 [411*7-23] 641a-b; bk II, CH I 642a-643a; ch 4 645b-647b; ch 12
656a-d  / Longevity, ch 2-3 710b-711b 9 Aristotle: History ofAnimals, bk
viii, ch i
[588V10]
114d-115a  /  Parts of Animals, BK IV, CH 5 [681*12-15] 211d / Motion of
Animals,  CH I [698*15-21] 233b; ch 4 [700*5-27] 235b-c; ch 6 235d-236b;
ch 7 [7oi^i]-ch 8
[702^^12] 236d-238a / Generation of Animals,
BK I, CH 23
[731^30-^8] 271C-d; BK
II, CH 4
[740*13-18] 281a; bk hi, ch i i [761^25-763^15]
302d-304d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 7 170c171a; bk ii, ch 3,
186c-d

[1080b]
1022  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2/0  3  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk i
[215-264]  3d-4b; bk ii [865-930] 26a-d 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ix,
sect  9  292b-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 3, a I, ans
14b'15b;  Q.18,  a  i  104c-105c; a 4 107d108c; Q 27, A 2, ANS and rep i
154c-155b;  q  51,  A 3 277a-278c; q 69, a 2, rep i 361c-362c; Q 70, A 3
365b-367a;  q  78,  a  i, ans and rep 3 407b-409a; a 3, ans 410a-411d; q
118,  a  i,  ANS  600a-601c;  part  i-ii,  q 17, a 9, rep 2 692d-693d 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act v, sc ii
[7-15]
239a   28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  hi,  67b-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  384a-b;  457a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 27,
157b158a; aph 40, 171a-d; aph 48 179d-188b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
v,  59a-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 75 185b-186a / Great Experiment, 382b-383a
/  Weight  of  Air,  425a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvi,
sect 2, 217c; ch xxvii, sect 3-5 219d-220c passim; bk hi, ch vi, sect 12
271d-272b;  bk IV, ch III, SECT 25 321a-b; ch xvi, sect 12, 370c-371a 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Judgement, 555a-558b; 578d-582c
esp  579d-580a,  582b-c; 602b,d [fn i] 43 Federalist: number 37, 119c 45
Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity, 836d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
341c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk x, 449b-c 53 James: Psychology,
4a-6b;  68a-71b passim, esp 68a-b; 85a-b; 95b-96a 54 Freud: Unconscious,
429c-d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  651d-652d;  661b-c  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  849d;  851c 3. The modes or grades of corporeal
life:  the  classification  and  order  of  the  various vital powers or
functions  Old  Testament: Genesis, 1:11-12,20-31 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:4-8—
(D)  Psalms,  8  esp  8:5-9  /  Ecclesiastes, 3:18-22 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
124c-128d  passim  / Symposium, 165c-166b / Republic, bk iv, 350c-353d /
Timaeus,   466a-c;   469d-470a   8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8
[199*20-^13]  276c-d  / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 383b-384c / Generation and
Corruption,  bk  i, ch 5 417b420b / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 2 [379^10-25]
483d-484a  /  Metaphysics,  bk i, ch i [980*22- ^27] 499a-b; bk ix, ch 2
571c-572a;  ch  5 573a-c / Soul 631a-668d esp bk i, ch 5 [410^ 16-411*2]
640d-641a,  bk  ii,  ch 2-3 643a645b, BK III, CH 12-13 667a-668d / Sense
and the Sensible 673a-689a,c / Memory and Reminiscence 690a-695d / Sleep
696a-7bld / Youth, Life, and Breathing 714a-726d 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk viii, ch i 114b,d-115b / Parts of Animals, hk t, ch i

[1081a]
3 to ?>a Chapter 48: LIFE AND DFlVni 1023
[641^5-10] 164b-c; BK
II,  CH  10 (655^28-656" 14] 181d-182b; bk iv, ch 5 [68i"i2 15) 2Ild; CH
10  [686*'23-687''i]  218b-c / Motion of Animals, CH 6-1 1 235d-239d csp
ch  10  238c-239a  /  Gait  of  Animals,  ch 4 244a-245a / Generation of
Animals, bk i, ch 2^ (7^i'*24-^8] 271c-d; BK II, ch 3
[736»25-^29l 276d-277c;
CH  4  (74o^25]-CH 5 [74i*3i] 281d-282b; bk hi, CH 7 [757^14-30] 298c-d;
ch ii (76i^i2-''23l 302b-d / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[ 1 097'^
i^ ^-1098*7] 343b; ch 13 (ii02*33-iio3''3l 347d-348c / Politics, bk VII,
ch  13 [i332*39-*'8] 537a-b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties 167a-215d esp bk
I,  ch  I 167a-b, CH 5-8 169b-171a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[258-322]  33b-34b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6, llla-c; bk II,
CH 8, 146a-b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a, c; bk v,
sect  16  271c-d;  bk viii, sect 7 286a; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b-856a  17  Ploti>.'us: First Ennead, tr i, ch 1-7
la-4a passim; ch ii 5b-c; tr iv, ch 3, 13d / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 19
151d-152b; ch 23 153d154b; TR IV, CH 28 172a-173b; tr vii, ch 14 200b-c;
TR IX, CH 3 206a-b / Fifth Ennead, tr II, CH 2 215a-c 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  23,  256b-c; ch 29 261a-b; bk xix, ch 13, 519a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 8 626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 3, a I, REP 2 14b-15b; q 18, aa 1-3 104c-107c; q 27, a 2, ANS
154c-155b;  q  45,  a  5, rep i 245c247a; q 51, a 3 277a-278c; q 69, a 2
361c362c;  Q  70,  A  3  365b-367a;  qq  71-72  367a369d; Q 75, A I, ANS
378b-379c;  a 6, rep i 383c-384c; q 76, a 5, rep 3-4 394c-396a; qq 77-83
399b-440b; q 98 516d-519a; qq 118-119 600a-608d; part i-ii, q 17, aa 8-9
692a-693d  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, quo, A 4, rep 3
350d-351d;  part  hi,  q  7, a 9, ans 751d-752c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxv
[37-84]
91d-92b; paradise, vii
[121-148]
116b-c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 137b-c; 138a-139b;
192d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  369d-370b; 384d-390b passim;
397b-398c;  441a-443b; 444c-445c; 447a-b; 456b-458a esp 457a-d 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  30  159c-d;  aph  48,  186d 31 Descartes:
Discourse, part v, 56a-b; 59a60c / Objections and Replies, 156a-d; 207a;
244b-c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  in,  prop  57, scHOL415b 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [469-490]  185b186a; bk vii [307-338] 223b-224b;
[387-550] 225b-229a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 75 185b-186a; 339-344 233a-b

[1081b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, SECT 11-15 I40b 141a; ch
xxvii,  sect 4-6 220a-d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b; bk IV, CH XVI,
sect  12,  370c  371a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 337d 338a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  199c-200c  /  judgement^  578d  580a;  583b-c; 602b,d [fn i] 45
I'\raday:  Researches in Electricity, 836d 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
3a-b;  47c-49c;  60b-61d; 64a-d; 71a-d; 241 b-c / Descent of Man, 331b-c
53  James: Psychology, 4a-7a; 68b-73b esp 68b, 71a; 95b; '699a 54 Freud:
Narcissism,  401ad  /  Instincts,  415b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
647a-648a;  648b-c;  651d-654b;  654d-657d esp 656a, 657b-c; 659d-661c /
Ego  and  Id,  708d-709b;  711c-712a / New Introductory Lectures, 851a-c
3>a.  Continuity or discontinuity between plants and animals: comparison
of  plant  and animal nutrition, respiration, growth, and reproduction 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  403  b-d / Timaeus, 469d-470a 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk vi, ch 10 [148*23-38] 202b-c / Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[199*20-^13]
276c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292^1-11] 384a / Soul, BK I, CH 5
[410^16-411*2]   640d-641a;  bk  II,  CH  2  [413*20-^4]  643b-c;  ch  4
[415^28416*5]  646a-b  /  Sleep,  ch i 696a-697c 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk iv, ch 6
[531^8-9] 58b; BK V, CH
I
[539*15-26] 65b-d;
CH II [543^23-31] 70c; BK viii, ch I
[588^4589*2] 114d-115b
/ Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 3
[650*1-37]
174c-175a; ch 10
[655^27656*8] 181d-182a; bk iv, ch 4 [677^36-678*15]
207d-208a; ch 5 [681*10-^9] 211c-212b; ch 6
[682*^26-28] 213d; CH 10 [686^23-687*1] 218b-c
/  Gait of Animals, ch 4 [705*26-''9] 244a-b / Generation of Animals, bk
i, ch i
[715^17716*2]
255d-256a; ch 23 271b-d; bk ii, ch I
[732*12-24]
272c;
[735*13-26]
275d-276a; ch 3 [736*24-^14] 276d-277b; ch 4 [740*24]- ch 5
[741*32] 281b-282b; bk hi, ch 2
[752*
10-23] 293a-b; ch 5 [755^6-13] 296c-d; ch 7
[757^14-30] 298c-d; ch
ii 302b-304d; bk v, CH I
[778''30-779*4] 321a-b
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 13 [1102*34-^4] 347d / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1252*26-31] 445c
10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch i 167a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  ii  [700-710]  23d-24a;  bk v [783-820] 71b-d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk ii, ch 8, 146a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
18,  a 1, ANS and REP 2 104c-105c; a 2, rep i 105c106b; A 3, ANS and rep
3  106b-107c; q 69, a 2, REP I 361c-362c; q 72, a i, rep 1,5 368b369d; Q
118, A I esp rep 2 600a-601c; q 119 604c-608d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk hi, 143a-144c

[1082a]
(3.  The modes or grades of corporeal life: the classification and order
of   the   various   vital  powers  or  functions,  "ba.  Continuity  or
discontifiuity  between  plants  and  animals:  comparison  of plant and
animal  nutrition,  respiration,  growth,  arid reproduction^ 28 Harvey:
Motion  of the Heart, 278b; 299b'C / Circulation of the Blood, 327d-328a
/  On  Animal  Generation,  368a-b;  369d-370b; 372b; 384c-d; 397c-398c;
428c-429a;  442b-c;  449a-b; 457c-d; 461b-d; 468b-469b; 471b-c 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 27, 158a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch ix, SECT 11-15 140b-141a passim; bk hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b
42 Kai^t: Judgement, 579d'580a; 582b-c 43 Federalist: number 37, 119c 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, part ii, 57b'C 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  47c-49c  passim,  esp  49a-c;  115b;  241b-c / Descent of Man,
372b-c 53 James: Psychology, 8a 3^. The grades of animal life: types and
degrees of mobility and sensitivity; analogies of structure and function
Old Testament: Genesis, 1:20-25 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii,
ch 14
[98*20-23] 134a / Soul, bk
ii, ch 2 [413^4-10] 643c;
[414*1-3] 644a; bk hi, ch
ii
[433^31434*9] 666d; CH 12-13 667a-668d / Sense and
the Sensible, ch i
[436^12-437*17] 673c-674a;
CH  5  [443^17-445*4]  681c-682d  / Youth, Life, and Breathing 714a-726d
passim  9  Aristotle: History ofAnimals 7a-158d esp bk 1, CH 1-6 7a-13a,
bk ii, ch i 19b,d-23d, bk iv, ch 8 59d-62a, bk v, ch i 65a-66a, bk viii,
ch  i  114b,d-115b  /  Parts of Animals 161a-229d passim, esp bk i, ch 4
167d-168c,  ch  5  [645^1646*5]  169b-d  / Gait of Animals 243a-252a,c /
Generation of Animals 255a-331a,c esp bk i, CH 1-19 255a-268a, bk ii, ch
i 272a-276a, bk III 290a-304d, bk iv, ch 4-6 311c-317d, bk v 320a-331a,c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch  2  199d200a  12  AuRELius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  16 262d263a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 18, a 2, REP I 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 50, A 4, REP I
273b'274b;  qq  71-72  367a-369d; Q 76, A 5, REP 3 394c-396a; q 78, a i,
ans  and  REP  4  407b-409a  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the Heart, 274b-d;
277b278d; 280c-283a; 299b-302c / On Animal Generation, 336b-d; 338a-496d
esp  449a-454c, 463d-464a, 470c-472c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
27, 158a; APH 30 159c-d

[1082b]
1024  THE GREAT IDEAS 33/0 4 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix
SECT  11-15  140b-141a;  bk  hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect ix, div 82 487b-c 42 Kant: Judgement, 578d-580a esp
579b-c; 602b,d
[fn
i]  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  273a-274a;  279a-b  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  75b-78c;  82d-94c;  112b-113c;  207a'229a,c  esp  228c-229a,c;
238b239a  /  Descent  ofMan,  255a-265d;  271a-275c;  278c-284b; 300a-b;
331a-341d  esp  332a-c,  337a-341d; 348b-c; 402b-c 53 James: Psychology,
13a-14b;  19b-42b  passim,  esp  40a,  41b; 51a-52a; 705b-706b 54 Freud:
Beyond  the  Pleasure Prificiple, 651d654b esp 653b, 654a / Civilization
and   Its   Discontents,   768d-769a  4.  The  biological  economy:  the
environment  of  the organism; the interdependence of plants and animals
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-13,20-31  6  Herodotus:  History, bk ii,
63b-c;  64b-c;  bk  III,  112d-113b  7  Plato: Republic, bk vi, 377c-d /
Timaeus,  469d-470a  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk ii, ch 2 [194^13] 271a /
Meteorology,   bk  iv,  ch  i  482b,d-483c  /  Longevity  710a-713a,c  9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[487*14-^5]
8a-b; bk v, ch ii
[543^19-31]
70b-c; CH 22 [553^20-23] 80c; ch 31 [557*432] 83d-84a; bk vi, ch 17
[570^29-571*2]
96d;  BK  VIII,  CH  2-29  115c-132d  esp  ch  2-13  115c-125b, ch 18-20
127b-129b, ch 28-29 131c-132d; bk ix, ch i
[6o8^i9]-ch 2
[610^^
19] 134a-136b; ch 31
[618^9-13] 144a-b; ch
32
[619*27-31] 144d-145a; ch
37
[622*8-15]
147c / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 8 [684*1-14] 215b; ch 12
[693*10-24]
225a / Gait of Animals, ch 15
[7i3*3]-ch
18
[714^8]
250d252a / Generation of Animals, bk hi, ch 10
[760*27-^28] 301b-d
10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places 9a-19a,c esp par 1-2 9a-c 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9 191b199a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi [784-787] 40b; BK V [837-877] 72a-c; [925-1010] 73b-74b 17
Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  32,  175d176a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 69, a 2 361c-362c; qq 71-72 367a-369d; g 118, a i,
rep  3 600a-601c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 160c-d; second
day,  187d-188c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  453c  33  Pascal:
Equilibrium  of  Liquids,  401a-403a  / Weight of Air, 415a-b 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 224a-b; 295b296b

[1083a]
d  5  to  5a  CiiAPTER  48:  LIFE AND DEATH 1025 38 MosTLSQViEV : Spirit
ofLiius, bk xiv, 102b,d 104a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 334b,d 337d passim
39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, hk i, 33c 34a; 63a b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   428c-d  42  Kant:  Judgement,  553c-554b;  583b-c;  584d585c  45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry, part ii, 57b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  209b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  227b-228a  49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  9b-10d;  32a-41c  csp  38b-39a;  49d-55b esp 52d-53a, 53d-55b;
65a-d;  68b-69c;  Sla-c; 181a-206a,c passim, csp 184d-188c, 204d-206a,c;
242d-243d / Descent of Man, 268b-269a; 341b,d
[fn 32];
350b-356a:  424a-425d;  430d-432c;  442a-443b;  525b  527c; 554d-555b 53
James:  Psychology,  701a  5.  Normal  vitality  and  its  impairment by
disease,  degeneration,  and  enfeeblement  with  age  7 Plato: Timaeus,
471d'474d  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246*10-^19] 329c-330a /
Heavens,  bk ii, ch 6 [288''i5-i9] 380a-b / Soul, bk i, ch 4 [408^18-29]
638c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vi, ch 25 103c; BK VII, ch I
[581^25-582^4]
107b-c / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 5
[651^37-^18]
176c; ch 7 177c-179a esp [653^1-7] 178d-179a / Generation of Animals, bk
i, ch 18
[725^
18-25] 265d-266a; bk iv, ch 2
[766*^27-34]
308b; BK V, CH i
[78o*i4-*'i2] 322b-d; ch 4
[784^*31-^37] 326b-d
10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 3-4 Id2c; par 9-22 3b-8d 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9 191b199a,c esp ch 8, 194c-d, ch 9,
195c-196a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[11051174] 29a-30a,c; bk hi [445-458] 35d-36a
12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  i  259b,  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 70, A I, REP 7 893d-895d 22 Chaucer: Reeve'
s  Prologue  [3862-3896]  224a-b  /  Wife of Bath's Prologue [6051-6062]
263b264a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 181d-182b 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   33b-c;   156d-158a,c;   394a-395b;  406c-408b  26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[i16] 12d-13a / As You Like
It, act ii, sc vii
[137-166] 608d-609a
28  Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 296a-d / On Animal Generation, 433a-c;
493a-b  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk xi [527-543] 310b311a 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk  i,  384b-385b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 127a-128a 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 352b-353a

[1083b]
38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d-369a / Social Contract, bk hi, 4I9c
d  49  Darwin:  Origin  ofSpecies,  143d 145c csp 145a / Descent of Man,
256c;  323c-327b  passim;  354a-355c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk x,
449b-c;  bk  xi,  499c-500c; bk xv, 617a-b; epilogue r, 665a-d 53 Jamks:
Psychology,  19b-41a  passim,  esp  21a26b;  44a 47a: 431b 433a; 815a 54
Freud:  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 655b657d / Inhibitions, Symptoms,
and  Anxiety, 718a-719d 5a. The nature and causes of health 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  iv, 157a 7 Plato: Charmides, 2d 3b / Symposium, 155d157a /
Gorgias,  282c-283a  /  Republic,  bk  in,  334b-337a;  bk  iv, 355b-d /
Timaeus,  474d475d  /  Philebus, 616d-617a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[8^25-9*28] 13d14b passim / Topics, bk hi, ch i
[116^17-21]
163a-b / Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246*io-*'i9]
329c-330a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292*i4-''i8| 383d-384b / Metaphysics,
bk v, ch 20
[1022**
10-13]  544a  /  Soul, bk i, ch 4 [408*1-2] 637c; bk II, ch 2 [414*4-14]
644a-b  /  Sense  and the Sensible, ch 5 [445*17-31] 683a-b 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk hi, ch 19
[520^19-521*15] 45c-46a; bk vii, ch
i [581^25582*4] 107b-c / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 5
[651*37-^17]
176c; CH 7 177c-179a; bk iv, ch 2
[677*5-^1] 206d-207b / Ethics, bk
ii, ch 2
[1104*10-19]
349c; BK V, ch i
[1129*12-25]
376b-c; ch ii [1138*29-32] 386d; bk vi, ch 12
[1143^21-1144*5] 393b-c passim; bk vii, ch 14
[1154^17-20] 406a,c
/ Politics, bk vii, ch 17
[1336*4-39]
541a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361V7] 602a; ch 7 [1363^34-1364*5] 605b
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine, par 13-19 4c- 7b / Regimen in Acute
Diseases, par 9, 29d / Surgery, par 20 73d / Articulations, par 58, 113a
/  Sacred  Disease,  156b-c  10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 8,
194c-d;  CH 9, 195c-196a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [558-565]
37b  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b 18 Augustine: City
of God, bk xix, ch 13, 519a; BK XXII, ch 24, 610c-611a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49,  A  2 2b-4a; a 3, rep 3 4b-5a; a 4, ans
5a-6a;  q  50,  A I, ans and rep 2-3 6a-7b; a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q 51, a i,
ans  12b-13c;  q  52, a i, ans 15d-18a; a 2, ans 18a-19a; q 54, a i, ans
22d23d  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 134d-135a; bk iv,
234a-235a;  239d-240a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  233c-236a  passim; 368d;
369d-370a;  528c-529b  28  Harvey:  Motion  ofthe  Heart, 296d-297a / On
Animal Generation, 433a-c; 493a-b

[1084a]
(5.  Normal  vitality and its impairment by dis' ease, degeneration, and
enfeehlement  with  age. 5a. The nature and causes of health.^ 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  72b 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 407b 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 412a-417a 38 Rousseau: hiequality, 335a-b; 336b-337a 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 293d-294b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
87d'88a  42  Kant:  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics 368d-369a /
Judgement, 509c-d 44 Bosw'Ehi.: Johnson, 171d-172a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  324d;  356d-357c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 52d 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  635b-c  5b.  The restorative function of rest or
sleep  5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [821-832]  189c  8  Aristotle:  Sleep
696a-701d  esp  ch  2 [455^1328] 698b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts ofAnimals, bk
ii, ch 7 [653* 11-20] 178b-c / Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102*
34-^13]  347d'348a 10 Hippocrates: Prognostics, par 10 21c 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [907-961]  56a-d 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-
Night's Dream, act III, sc II [431-436] 367c / 2nd Henry IV, act III, sc
I  [1-3  1  ]  482d-483a  /  Henry  V,  act IV, sc I [270-301] 554b-c 27
Shakespeare:  King  Lear, act iv, sc iv [1-20] 272b-c / Macbeth, act ii,
sc ii [35-43] 291c-d / Henry VIII, act v, sc i
[1-5] 578a / Satinets, xxvii 590c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii, 413b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
348b-349b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i, 35a-b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 352b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4613-4727]
115a117b  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 91b 50 Marx: Capital, 112b; 128a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk hi, 144d-146d; BK XII, 554b-d; bk xiii, 584c
54 Freud: General Introduction, 478c-d; 617b-c 5c. The nature and causes
of disease Old Testament: Leviticus, 26:16 / Numbers, 12:10-15; 16:46-50
/  Deuteronomy,  28:2122,27-28,35,58-62  /  II Kings, 5:27-(D) IV Kings,
5:27  /  /  Chronicles,  21:14-15—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 21:14-15 / //
Chronicles,  26:18-21  —  (Z>)  //  Paralipomenon, 26:18-21 / Job, 2:7 /
Psalms,  107:17-20—  (D)  Psalms,  106:17-20  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
37:29-31—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 37:32-34 / // Maccabees, 3:2729— (D)
OT, // Machabees, 3:27-29 New Testament: Matthetv, 9:32-33; 17:14-18 / /
Corinthians, 11:25-30

[1084b]
^  1  1026  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5^ to 5c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 32c-d;
38a-b;  bk  II,  64c-d;  bk  hi, 96c; bk iv, 135c-d; 157a 6 Thucydides :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  11,  399b401b 7 Plato: Symposium, 155d-157a esp
156d / Republic, bk hi, 334b'337a; bk iv, 345b-c; 355b-c; bk x, 435a-c /
Ti?naeus,  472a-474b  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk vii, ch 3 [246*10-^19]
329c-330a  /  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  7  [384*2534] 488c 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk hi, ch ii
[5i8''2-4] 43a; ch
15
[519^15-20] 44c; ch 19
[521*10-32] 46a-b; bk vii, ch
i [581^22-582* 4] 107b-c; CH 12 114c; bk viii, ch 18-27 127b131b passim;
ch  29  132c-d  /  Parts of Animals, BK II, CH 5 [651*37-^18] 176c; CH 7
[653^1-7] 178d-179a; bk hi, ch 7 [670^5-11] 199a; bk IV, CH 2 [677*5-^1]
206d-207b / Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 7 317d-318b; bk v, ch 4
[784*31-^35] 326b-d / Ethics, bk ii, ch 2 [1104*
10-19] 349c; BK V, CH i [1129*12-25] 376b-c; CH II [1138*29-32] 3«6d; BK
VII,  CH  8 [1150^ 29-35] 401c-d 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par i
la-b; par 3 ld-2b; par 6 2d-3a; par 9-1 1 3b-4b; par 13-22 4c-8d / Airs,
Waters,  Places,  par  i-io  9a-14a;  par 22 17b- 18a / Regimen in Acute
Diseases,  par  9-10  29d-30d; appendix, par i 35c-d; par 3 35d-36a; par
5-6 36b-37a; par 17 40d-41a / Epidemics, bk i, sect i, par i 44a-b; sect
II,  par  7-8  47a-c;  bk  hi,  sect  hi,  par 1-2 56d-57a; par 15 59b /
Surgery,  par  20  73d  / Fractures, par 31, 87a / Articulations, par 12
96a-b; par 58, 113a / Aphorisms, sect ii, par 51 133d; sect hi, par 1-19
134a-d;  sect  v, par 16-24 138b-c / Fistulae, par i 150a / Hemorrhoids,
par  i  152b  /  Sacred Disease 154a160d esp 155d-156a, 160b-d 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9  191b199a,c  passim;  bk hi, ch 12
208b-209b esp 208d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[459614] 36a-38a; bk vi [769-829] 90c-91b; [10901286] 94d-97a,c
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  14  74b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71,  A  I,  rep 3 105d-106c; q 72, a 5, ans
115a-116b;  Q 77, A 3, ANS 147c-148b; q 88, a i, ans 193a194b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  151b-c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 330b-c; 367b-368a;
369d-370a;  371c-d;  528c-529b  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 296a-d /
Circulation   ofthe   Blood,  305a-d;  316c-d;  321d-322a  /  On  Animal
Generation,  386d-387a;  407a; 423b; 433a-c; 455d-456a; 493a-b 30 Bacon:
Advmcement  of  Learning, 52b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61c 32
Milton  :  Paradise  Lost,  bk xi [477-548] 309b311a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part iv, 155b-157a; 161b162a

[1085a]
c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  412a-417a I 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xiv,  106b107a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336b-337a; 364b-c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 34d-35b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
70a-  71  a,  44  Boswell:  /o/;/;.no/;,  306d-307a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  9d-10a  /  Descent  of Man, 256a; 350d-354a passim; 356d-357b;
380bc 50 Marx: Capital, 115c; 118b-124a passim; 178a; 194b-195b; 204a-c;
236c-237d;  324a-330d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 52d; bk v, 222b;
BK  IX,  372a-374d  53 James: Psychology, 69a-b; 799a-807a esp 799a800a,
806a-  b; 815a; 895a 54 Freud: Origin and Detelopment of PsychoAnalysis,
4c-5a  /  Hysteria, 25a-59d esp 25a30d,'37d-38d, 56b'58c; 87a-97b; llla-
llSa  esp  114b-115a  /  Narcissism,  402d-404a  / General Introduction,
593b-595b; 601b-607b esp 605b-606a / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
744b-747b esp 746c 6. The life span and the life cycle Ga, The life span
of plants and animals, and of diflferent species of plants and animals 7
Plato: Timaeus, 475d 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 9
[279*23-^4]
370c-d  /  Longevity 710a-713a,c 9 Aristotle: History of Anifnals, bk v,
ch 14
[545^15-20] 72b; CH 15 [547^8-11] 74b; ch 18
[550^14-16] 77c; CH 22
[554^6-8] 81b; ch 33
[558*16-20] 84d-85a;
bk \t, ch 4
[563*2-3]
89b; ch 9 [564*25-27] 90c; ch 12 [566^23-27] 92d-93a; ch 17
[571*8-12]
96d-97a; ch 18
[573^16-17],
CH 19
[573^23-29]
99c; CH 20 l574^?o-575^] 100c; ch 21 [575^32-34] 101a; CH 22 [576*26-^4]
102a;   ch  23  [577^3-5]  103a;  ch  24  [577t'28-578*4]  103c;  ch  26
[578*12-13] 103d; CH 29 [578^22-27] 104b-c; bk viii, ch 2
[592*2:5-24] 118c; CH 9 [596*9-13] 122a; bk ix,
CH 7
[613*17-^5] 138d-139a; ch 37
[622*1532] 147d; CH 41 [627^29-628*7] 153a-b; ch 44
[629*^27-34]
155a; ch 46
[630*^23-26]
156a / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 2
[677*20-*^!]
207a-b  /  Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 10 319c-320a,c 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [878-898] 72c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 34a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch XXVI, SECT 4 218a-b 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  99b 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 652d;
655b;  657c-d 6^. The human life span Old Testament: Genesis, 5 esp 5:5,
5:27;  6:3;  9:28-29;  11:10-32; 23:1-2; 25:7-8; 35:28-29; 47:9; 50:26 /
Numbers, 33:38-39 / Deuteron-

[1085b]
Chapter  48:  LIFE AND DEATH 1027 omy, ^54:7 / Joshua, 24:29— (D) Josue,
:ijf:2.C)  / Psalms, 90:10— (D) Psalms, 89:10 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
18:9-10—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,   18:8  5  Kuripidks:  Suppliants
[1080-111:5]  267d-268a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 7b-8a; bk hi, 93d94b
7  Plato: 'Timaeus, 469a; 475d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch
15
[493*^32-494*1]
16a  / Generation of Animals, BK IV, CH 10 319c-320a,c / Rhetoric, bk i,
ch 5
[i36i*'3i-34] 602c
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [69:5-705]  186a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays,
29c-30a;  156d-157b;  535d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk xi [523-548]
310b311a  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 413b-414a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
336a-b / Social Contract, bk III, 419c-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i,  33c-34a  44  Boswell: Johnson, 360b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 324d;
325c-327a 50 Marx: Capital, 118b-d; 194b-195b passim; 229a-b; 318a-b 6c.
The  biological  characteristics  of  the  stages of life Old Testament:
Genesis,  17:15-19; 18:9-15; 21:1-8; 27:1 / Deuteronomy, 34:7 / / Kings,
1:1-4—   (Z))   III   Kings,   1:1-4   /   Proverbs,   20:29  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   14:17-18—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,  14:18-19  New
Testament:  /o/jw, 21:18 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [71-82] 52d 5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [1080-1113]  267d-268a  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 118b 7
Plato: Republic, bk i, 296a-c / Timaeus, 471d-472a 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
i,  ch  4  [408*'!  8-29]  638c  /  Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 23-26
724d726b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk it, ch i
[500*^26-501*7]
23a-b; ch 2-5 23d-24b; bk III, CH II
[5i8*5]-CH
12
[519*9] 42c-43d; ch
18
[520*^7-10]
45b-c; CH 19
[52i*3i]-cH
20
[52i*'iol 46b-c; bk
iv, ch 9
[536*^5-8] 63a-b;
CH 10 [537*^15-20] 64b; bk v, ch 14 71b- 73b; ch 19
[551*13-552*^5]
78a-79b; ch 30
[556**
5-10] 83b; bk VI, ch 3
[561*4-562*22] 87c88c; BK
VI, CH 18-BK VII, CH 12 97b-114a.c passim, esp bk vii, ch i 106b,d-108a;
bk  viii, CH 30 [607*^27-33] 133c; bk IX, ch 5 [611*31- *'6] 137a; ch 32
[619*16-29] 144d; ch 37 [622* 15-31] 147d; CH 44
[629*'27-33] 155a / Parts
of Animals^ bk ii, ch 6
[65i*'20-28]
176d; bk IV, CH 10
[686*^5-28]
218a-b / Gait of Animals, ch ii
[7io*'i2-i8] 248d / Generation
of Animals, bk i, ch 18
[725*^18-25]
265d266a; ch 19
[727*2-10] 267a-b; ch 20
[728**
23-34] 268d-269a; bk ii, ch 6 282d-287a; bk IV, ch 2
[766*^27-31] 308b; ch
6 316c-

[1086a]
(6.   The   life  span  and  the  life  cycle.  6c.  The  biolog7.  ical
characteristics  of the stages of life.) 317d; CH 8 [776^15-23] 318d; bk
v, ch i [778^ 20-779^13] 321a-d; [780*14-^9] 322b-d; ch 3
[781^30-782^19]
324a-b; ch 3
[783b2]-cH
8
[789^21] 325c-331a,c passim / Politics, bk vii,
CH 16
[1335^7-34] 540a-b
/ Rhetoric, bk ii, CH 12
[1389^2-6] 636b; ch
13
[1390*11-16]
637c;  ch  14 [1390^9-11] 638a 10 Hippocrates: Injuries of the Head, par
18  69a-b  /  Articulations, par 12 96a-b; par 29 99c; par 41 103c-104b;
par  52-53  109b-llla; par 55 llla-c; par 60 113b-d / Aphorisms, SECT I,
par  13-14 131d; sect ii, par 39 133c; par 53 133d; sect hi, par 3 134a;
par  18 134d; par 24-31 135a-b; sect vi, par 6 140c; par 30 141a; par 57
141d;  sect  vii,  par  82  144a  /  Sacred Disease, 157b-158b 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk ii, ch 8, 193a-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi
[445458] 35d-36a; bk iv [1037-1057] 57d
12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  i  259b,  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi suppl, Q 70, A I, rep 7 893d-895d 22 Chaucer: Reeve'
s  Prologue  [3862-3896]  224a-b  /  Wife of Bath's Prologue [6051-6062]
263b264a  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 33b-c; 156d-158a,c; 339a-d; 394a-395b;
406c-408b; 429d-430a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[i16] 12d-13a / 2nd Henry IV, act
i, sc ii [201208] 472a-b / Henry V, act v, sc ii [167-174] 565a / As You
Like  It, act ii, sc vii [137-166] 608d-609a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
ii,  sc  ii [197-206] 42c-d/ King Lear, act i, sc i [291-312] 247cd; ACT
II,  sc  IV  [148-158]  260a  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 281a'282c;
300b-c  /  On  Animal  Generation,  352c; 363d383c; 391a-c; 449a-454c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk xi [527-^543] 310b311a 34 Newton: Optics, bk
i,  384b-385b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 127a-128a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy, 352b-353b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336a-b 44 B0SWE1.1.: Johnson,
306d'307a;  360b  47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,531-538] 280b 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species, lld-12a; 219d225b passim, esp 219d-220a, 221b-222a;
257c-258a;  377c-381d passim, esp 377d378c, 381c-d; 511a-525a; 562c-563a
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bkv, 209a-c; bk viii, 305b-310d passim; bk x,
391d-394d;  bk xiii, 584c; 586c; epilogue i, 659d'660b; 665a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  431b'433a;  714a-715b  54  Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis, 15a-16c / Sexual E?ilightenment of Children, 119d-120b /
General  Introduction,  572d-576a passim, esp 573a-b, 574a-c; 579b580d /
inhibitions.  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  746c-d  /  Cii'ilization and Its
Discontents, 770b

[1086b]
d  1028  THE GREAT IDEAS 6c to 7 The causes and occurrence of death: the
transition from life to death 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xi
[215-224] 245b; bk
XVII [290-327] 280a-c 7 Plato: Phaedo, 223c-d; 225b; 246c / Gorgias, 292
d / Republic, bk x, 434c-436a / Timaeus, 471d-472a 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
hi,  ch  13  [435^^4-19]  668c  /  Youth,  Life,  and Breathing, ch 4-27
715d726d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 4
[489*20-22]
lOb-c; bk V, ch 20
[553*1216] 79d-80a; bk
vii, ch 12
[588*7-9] 114c /
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [653^1-7]  178d179a;  bk  hi,  ch 4
[667*32-^14] 195c-d / Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 5
[741^15-24]
282d  10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  2-3  19b-20b;  par  9 21b-c /
Regi?7ien in Acute Diseases, appendix, par 9 38b-c / Aphorisms, sect ii,
par 44 133c; SECT VI, par 18 140d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[417829] 35c-40c
12  Aurelius:  Meditatio7is,  bk iv, sect 5 264b; bk VI, SECT 28 276c 17
Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch 6, 24a; tr IX 34b-d 18 Augustine: City
of God, bk xin, ch 9-1 i 363c-365c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  119,  A I, rep 4 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
72, A 5, ANs 115a-116b; q 85, a 6 182d-184a; q 88, A I, ANS 193a-194b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 156d-157b; 176c-180b; 530a-c 26 Shakespeare: Henry V,
act ii, sc hi
[1-28]
541a-b  28  Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 276d-278a; 296a-d / On Animal
Generation,  407a-b;  433a-c; 493a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Leartiing,
52d-53a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 127c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  4  425b-d;  prop  39  436b-437a  38 Rousseau: Political
Economy.  368d-369a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  419c-d 44 BoswEi.!.:
Johnson, 306d-307a 48 Melville: Moby DicJ{, 351a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,   326b-327a;  383d384c  50  Marx:  Capital,  122c-124a;  194b-195b:
228d229b;  318a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 44b-45b; bk IV,
180d-183c;  bk  x, 406c-410c; bk xi, 499c500c; BK XII, 558a-562d; bk xv,
624d-625b;  epilogue  I, 650d-651a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
vi,  149c-150d;  bk  vi-vii,  170c-177b  54  Freud:  Beyond the Pleasure
Principle. 652b653a; 654c-657d / Ego and Id, 708d-709a; 711d-712a 1

[1087a]
3  to  Sb  Chapter  48: LIFE AND DEATH 8. The concern of the living with
life  and death 8a. The love of life: the instinct of self-preservation;
the  life instinct Old Testament: Genesis, 7,122-2^ / Job, 2:4 / Psalms,
21:4;  34:12-14;  49:6-12;  91:16—  (D) Psalms, 20:5; 33:13-15; 48:7-13;
90:16  /  Ecclesiastes, 9:4-6 New Testament: Matthew, i9:i6-:5o / Marf^,
10:17-31 / LMl{e, 10:25-37 I John, 12:25; 15:13 / / Timothy, 6:17-19 / /
Peter, 3:10-11 5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[189-197]
226c-d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[629-746] 242c-243c
/  Iphigenia  at  Aiilis [1211-1252] 436a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk iv,
140d-141a;   bk   VI,   191a-b;  bk  vii,  224d-225a;  bk  ix,  296c297a
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk vii, 559b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
ix, ch 9
[i 170^1 ^-''S]
423d-424b; bk x, ch 4
[1175*10-22] 429c
/  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  13  [1389^32-35] 637b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  hi 30a44a,c passim 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii
258a-b  15  Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 301d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
iv, par 11 21d22a; bk viii, par 18 57d-58a; par 25 60a / City of God, bk
xix,  ch  4,  513a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 75, a 6, ans
383c-384c 22 Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,282-287]
457b  23  HoBHEs:  Letiathan,  part  i, 86c; 90a; part ii, 115d: 142b-c;
155b-c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 31d-32c; 184a; 267b-c; 339a-d: 511d-512a^
26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act v, sc iv
[111-132] 465c
27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc hi
[306369] 212b-d / King Lear, act v, sc hi
[1841S6] 281b
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 51b-c; 72c73a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  18,  scholPBOP 25 429a-431a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 156-157
201b-202a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch ii, sect 6-8 26b27a; ch hi,
sect  16-18  28d-29b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 124a-129a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  238a-239b; 459a460a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 250b-d 38
Montesquieu:   Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
330d-331b;  337c;  342d-343a;  343c  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  258b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 127 45b-c;
.-uDDiTioNs, 81 128d-129a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[602-807]
16b'21a;
[1544-1626]
37b-39a; part ii
[8909-9126]
216b-221b

[1087b]
1029 48 Melville: Moby Dick, ^^^^'^ 344b 345a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
311a b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 159d 160a; bk VI, 262d 263a; bk
x,  439b  440a; 457a-c; 461d-464a; bk xi, 527a-b; hk xh, 549c 551c; 558a
562d;  epilocue  i,  665a-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v,
118b-119a;  bk  vi,  149c  150d  53  James:  Psychology,  92a  b;  198b;
208a-209b;  700b; 709b 54 Freud: Narcissism, 399b / Instincts, 414d-415b
/ General Introduction, 591d-592c; 607d-608a; 615b-616b; 623b c / Beyond
the Pleasure Principle, 651d-662b esp 653a-d, 657c-659a, 659d661 c; 663c
/ Ego and Id, 708d-712a passim, esp 708d-709b, 711c; 717c / Civilization
and Its Discontents, 790a-b; 791a-d / New Introductory Lectures, 846b-c;
851c-d  8^.  The  desire  for  death: the death instinct; the problem of
suicide  Old  Testament:  /  Samuel,  31 :4-6— (D) / Kings, 31 :4-6 / //
Samuel,  17:23—  (Z))  II  Kings,  17:23  /  / Chronicles, 10:1-6— (D) /
Paralipomenon,   10:1-6  /  Job,  3  esp  3:13-22;  6:8-13;  7:13-16,21;
10:1,18-22;  14:13-14;  16:22-17:1;  17:13-16—  (D)  Job, 3 esp 3:13-22;
6:8-13;   7:13-16,21;   10:1,18-22;  14:13-14;  16:23-17:1;  17:13-16  /
Proverbs,  8:36;  11:19;  21:6  / Ecclesiastes, 4:2-3; 6:3-5; 7-i~4— (^)
Ecclesiastes,  4:2-3;  6:3-5;  7:2-5  /  Isaiah,  28:14-18—  (D) Isaias,
28:14-18  /Jeremiah, 8:3; 20:14-18— (D) Jeremias, 8:3; 20:14-18 / Jonah,
4—  (D)  Jonas, 4 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:2— (D) OT, Tobias, 4:1 / Wisdom of
Solomon,  1:12-16;  2:23-24—  (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 1:12-16; 2:23-25 /
Ecclesiasticus,  23:14; 30:17; 41:2-3— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 23:18-19;
30:17;  41:3-5  New  Testament: John, 11:16 / Acts, 20:24 / Philippians,
1:20-24  / Revelation, 9:6— (D) Apocalypse, 9:6 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King
[1297-1415]
lllb-112b / Oedipus at Colonus
[1211-1248]
125b-c / Antigone
[1261-1353]
141d-142d  /  Ajax  [394-865]  146c-150c  /  Electra  [804-822] 162c-d /
Trachiniae  [871-1278]  177d-181a,c  /  Philoctetes  [779-809]  189a-b 5
Euripides: Rhesus [756-761] 209d / Trojan Women
[622-683] 275b-d
/ Helen
[252-305]
300c-d / Hecuba
[218-582]
354d-357d  / Heracles Mad [1088-1393] 374b-377b 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  9d-10a;  47c-d; BK II, 62d-63a; bk v, 160c-d; bk vi, 199c-d; BK VII,
224d-225a;  245d; bk ix, 303c-304a 7 Plato: Phaedo, 222a-225c / Laws, bk
ix, 753b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch ii
[1138*4-13]
386b-c; bk ix, ch 4 [1166^11-13] 419d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
hi
[31-9^]
30b-31b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 9 114c-116b; CH 24 129a-d

[1088a]
1030  (8.  The  concern  of  the  living  with  life  and death. 8b. The
desirefor  death:  the  death  instinct;  the  problem  of  suicide.^ 12
AuRELius:  Meditations^ bk v, sect 29 272d273a; bk viii, sect 47 289b-c;
bk ix, sect 3 291d-292a; bk x, sect 8 297d-298a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii
[634-704]
142a-144a; bk IV [450-705] 179b-186b; bk xii [593-613] 370a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  47a-c  / Themistocles, lOlc-d / Cato the Younger, 646a-647c /
Cleomenes,  668b-d  /  Marcus Brutus, 814d815c; 818d'819a; 823b-824a,c /
Otho,  875b876c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk vi, 92c-d / Histories, bk II,
227a-228a  17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ix 34b-d / Third Ennead, tr ii,
ch  8, 87b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 18 57d58a; par 25 60a
/  City  of  God,  bk i, ch 17-27 140a-146a; bk xiii, ch 4 361d-362a; bk
xix, CH 4 511a-513c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[40-45]
15c;  XIII 17d-19c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 72-74
98a  /  Pardoner's  Tale [12,645-672] 378b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
69d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  99b-100a; 167a-173d; 294b-297b; 340d-342a;
358b-362a; 511d-512a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[i16]
12d-13a;
[107-114] i3d-14a
/  Richard  II,  ACT V, sc V [1-41] 349d-350a / Julius Caesar, act I, sc
III  [89-102]  573c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc ii [129-159]
32d-33a; act ii, sc ii [211-222] 42d; act hi, sc I [56-89] 47c-d; act v,
sc i
[1-36] 64c-d;
[241-273] 66d-67b
/ Othello, act i, sc hi
[306-369] 212b-d / King Lear, act iv, sc vi
[1-79]
273b-274b  /  Antony and Cleopatra, ACT IV, sc XV [63-91] 344c-345a; act
v, sc ii
[207-316]
348d-350a  /  Cymbeli?je,  act hi, sc IV [73-101] 467c-d / Sonnets, lxvi
596b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d; prop 20, schol
430a-b  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  x [966-1028] 295b296b / Samson
Agonistes  [508-520]  350b-351a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 156-157 201b-202a 35
Locke:  Civil Government, ch ii, sect 6 26b-c; CH XIV, SECT 168 64b-c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  127a-128a  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 85a-d;
173d-176d  esp  175c-d, 176c-d; 182d-184a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit ofLaws,
bk xiv, 107a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 342d-343a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  95c-96a  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 258b; 269a;
272b-c  44  Boswell: Johnson, 214b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  70  31a;  ADDITIONS, 45 123c-d / Philosophy of History, part i,
224d-225a; 228b

[1088b]
1 THE GREAT IDEAS 8^ to %c 47 Goethe Faust, PART I
[602-807]
16b-21a;
[1544-1626] 37b-39a
i  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 356b-357a I 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi,
159d-160a;  BK  V, 200c-d; BK vin, 311a-313a; 337d-338a; bk XII, 535b-c;
558a-562d  53  James:  Psychology,  204b  54  Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle  639a663d  esp  651d-653a,  663c-d  /  Ego  and Id, 708d-709c;
711c-712a;  714c-715a;  716b-717a,c  / Civilization and Its Discontents,
790a-791d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  849c-851d esp 851c-d 8c. The
contemplation  and  fear  of  death:  the  attitude  of  the  hero,  the
philosopher,  the martyr Old Testament: Genesis, 3:19 / Numbers, 23:10 /
Deuteronomy, 30:15-20 / // Sa?nuel, 14:14; 22 :5-7 (D) II Kings, 1 4 : 1
4  ;  22  :5-7  /  /  Kings, 2:1-2— (D) III Kings, 2:1-2 / / Chronicles,
29:15— (D) / Paralipomenon, 29:15 / Job, 6-7; 14; 17; 20:4-11; 21:23-26;
24:22-24;  30:23-24;  34:15  /  Psalms,  6 esp 6:5; 13:3; 18:4-6; 23 esp
23:4;  31:12;  39:4-5;  49;  55:48;  88;  89:47-48;  90:5-12; 103:14-16;
115:17;  116  esp  116:3,  116:15;  144:3-4 (D) Psalms, 6 esp 6:6; 12:4;
17:5-7;  22  esp 22:4; 30:13; 38:5-6; 48; 54:5-9; 87; 88:48-49; 89:5-12;
102:14-16; 113:17; 114-115 esp 114:3, 115:15; 143:3-4 / Proverbs, 7:7-27
esp 7:27; 8:36; 10:2; 11:4,19; 12:28; 13:14; 14:27,32; 18:21; 30:15-16 /
Ecclesiastes,  2:16;  3:1-2,18-21;  7:1;  8:8;  9:1-12;  11:7-12:7—  (D)
Ecclesiastes,  2:16;  3:1-2,18-21; 7:2; 8:8; 9:1-12; 11:7-12:7 / Song of
Solomon,  8:6—  (Z))  Canticle  of  Canticles,  8:6 / Isaiah, 9:2; 25:8;
38:10-19;  40:6-8—  (D)  Isaias, 9:2; 25:8; 38:10-19; 40:6-8 / Jeremiah,
9:17-22;  21:8-10—  (D)  Jeremias,  9:17-22;  21:8-10  / Ezekjel, 18:32;
33:11—  (D)  Ezechiel,  18:32;  33:11  / Hosea, 13:14— (D) Osee, 13:14 /
HabaJ^uJ^, 2:5— (D) Habacuc, 2:5 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:10— (D) OT, Tobias,
4:11  / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:12-2:5; 2:24-3:6; 4:7-5:23; 16:14— (Z)) OT,
BooJ^  of  Wisdom, 1:12-2:5; 2:24-3:6; 4:7-5:24; 16:14 / Ecclesiasticus,
8:7;   10:10-11;  14:11-19;  16:30-17:2;  17:27-28;  18:9-12;  22:11-12;
28:18-21;   33:14;   38:16-23;  41:1-4—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  8:8;
10:12-13;  14:11-20;  16:31-17:3;  17:27;  18:811;  22:10-13;  28:22-25;
33:15;  38:16-24;  41:1-7  /  Baruch,  2:17—  (D)  OT, Baruch, 2:17 / II
Maccabees,  6:iS-y:^2-{D)  OT,  II Machabees, 6 : 8-7 :42 New Testament:
Matthew,  4:16;  10:28  /  Lul^e,  1:79  /  John,  5:24; 8:51-59; II esp
11:23-27;  12:24-25;  15:13 / Acts, 7:54-60— (D) Acts, 7:54-59 / Romans,
5-8;  14:7-8  /  /  Corinthians,  15 / // Corinthians, 1:9-10; 4:9-5:9 /
Philippians, 1:21-24 / / Thessalonians, 4:13-5:11— (Z)) I Thessalonians,
4:12-5:11 /

[1089a]
Sc  Chapter  48:  LIFE AND DEATH 1031 // Timothy, i:io; 4:6-8 / Hebrews,
2:9  i8;  9:27 28 / James, 4:13-16 / / John, 3:14 / Revelation, 2:10-11;
6:8;  9:6;  14:13; 20:6; 21:4— (D) Apocalypse, 2:10-11; 6:8; 9:6; 14:13;
20:6; 21:4 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi [144-151] 41c; [482-49^] 45a; bk xii
[29o-:^28I 85b-c;
bk xviii
[65126] 130d-131c; BK XIX [198-237] 139a b; bk
XXI
[462
467] 153a; bk xxii 155a 160d csp
[289-305]
158b,
[355-366]
159a  /  Odyssey,  BK  XI  243a-249d  csp  [477-489]  247d  5 Aeschylus:
Prometheus Bound
[249-25^]
42d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[i 579-1 779]
128c-130a,c  /  Antigone  [332-375] 134a-b 5 Euripides: Rhesus [756-761]
209d / Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Heracleidae
[593-596] 253b
/ Suppliants
[1108-111:5] 268a
/ Hecuba
[342582]
355d-357d / Heracles Mad
[275-326]
367c-d / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp
[1211-1252] 436a-c
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-10a;  20b-21a; bk II, 64d-65a; bk v,
183b-c;  bk  vti,  224c225a;  bk  viii,  281d-282a;  bk  ix, 303c-304a 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk 11, 395c399a esp 397d-398d; 400d-401a
7  Plato: Laches, 34d / Symposium, 166b-c / Apology, 205d-206d; 20'7c-d;
211b-212a,c  / Crito, 215d-216a; 218b-d / Phaedo 220a-251d esp 230d-235a
/ Gorgias, 286b-287c; 292a-b / Republic, bk i, 297a-b; bk hi, 324c-325b;
BK  VI,  374a-d / Set'enth Letter, 805d-806a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi,
ch  6-9  361a-364b esp CH 6 [1115*24-^6] 361b-c, ch 9 [1117^7-15] 364a /
Rhetoric,  bk ii, ch 5 [1382*19-27] 628b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk i [102-158] 2b-3a; bk ii
[569-580]
22b; bk hi
[31-93]
30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c-44a,c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 4
108d110a;  CH  9  114c-116b;  ch  24  129a-d;  ch  27  132b-133b;  ch 29
134d-138a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b,d-140c;  ch  16  156b-158d; bk hi, ch 5
180d-181d;  ch 22 195a-201a; bk iv, ch i 213a223d; ch 4 225a-228a; ch 10
238d-240d  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect 11-12 258a-c; sect 14
258d;  sect 17 259b-d; bk III, sect I 259b,d; sect 3 260b; bk iv, sect 5
264b;  sect  48  267d-268a;  sect  50 268c; bk VI, sect 24 276b; sect 47
278d; sect 49 279a; bk vii, sect 23 281b; sect 32,35 282a; bk viii, sect
25  287b-c; sect 31 287d; sect 58 290d; bk ix, sect 3 291d-292a; sect 21
293b-c;  bk xii, sect 35-36 310c-d 13 Virgil: Georgics, 11 [490-493] 65b
/  Aeneid,  BK  VI  211a-235a  14  Plutarch: Pericles, 139c / Pelopidas,
232a-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi, lOla-b; bk xv, 172c-173d; bk xvi,
180c-d;  181d-182a;  183d184a,c  /  Histories,  bk ii, 226d-228a; bk hi,
256a-c  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr iv, ch 16 18d19b; TR VI, ch 6,
24a-b; tr vii, ch 3 26d-27a

[1089b]
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 7-14 20d23a; hk vi, par 18 i9 40d
41b;  bk  viii,  par  18 57d 58a; par 25 60a; bk ix, par 23 :?7 68a71b /
City  of  God,  bk  i, ch ii 136d 137a; hk IX, CH II 291b; bk xiii, ch 4
361d  362a;  ch 7-8 362d-363c; bk xix, ch 8 515c 516a 20 Aoi'iNAs: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii. o 61, a ^. ANs 56b-57a; part hi suppl, q 96, a 6
1058a 1061b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[3017-3056]
209b210a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale [15,787-800] 467a 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part i, 79c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-10a; 26d 36b; 99b100a; 115b-121c;
l'24c-125a; 167a-173d; 176c180b; 211b-212a; 294b-297b; 327d-329d 339a-d;
365b-366b;  402c-403c; 404d-405a 470b-c; 473d-477b; 503b-504c; 508a-512a
529c-530c; 535c-536a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[1-32] 12d-13a
/ Srd Henry VI, act v, sc ii
[5-28] lOOa-b / Richard III, act
i, sc iv 114d117c / Romeo and Juliet, act iv, sc v [1-95] 312d-314a; act
v, sc hi
[74-222] 316c-318b
/  Richard  II, act hi, sc ii [144-177] 337a-b / 1st Henry IV, act v, sc
iv
[111-132] 465c /
Julius Caesar, act ii, sc ii
[32-37]
578c;  ACT  III, sc I [98-110] 581c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii
[68-106] 32b-c; ACT III, sc i
[56-90] 47c-d; act
iv, sc III
[20-33]
58a-b; act v, sc i
[83-129]
65b-d;
[202-322]
66c-67d  /  Measure for Measure, act hi, sc i [1-43] 186d-187a; [117136]
188a-b / Othello, act v, sc ii
[7-15]
239a / Macbeth, act i, sc iv
[i-ii]
287b;  ACT  V,  sc  hi [19-28] 307d; sc v [19-28] 308d309a / Antony artd
Cleopatra, act iv, sc xv
[63-91]
344c-345a; act v, sc 11
[207-316]
348d-350a  /  Pericles, act i, sc i [41-55] 422b / Cymbeline, act iv, sc
ii
[203-332] 475b476d; ACT v, sc iv [3-29] 481a-b;
[152-215]
482d-483b / Tempest, act iv, sc i [146-158] 543b / Sonnets, lxxxi 598c-d
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 237b-c; 267a-b; 280b-c; 366d-367a;
427a-429d  30 Bacon: Advancernent of Learning, 26a-c; 73d74a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  67  444d445a;  part v, prop 38-39 461d-462c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk x [782-844] 291b292b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 63
180a;  166,168-169  203a;  199 210b; 210 211b; 215-216 212a; 481 257b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  388a-399b;  459a460a;  466b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  86c-88b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a-b; 186a; 217d220d esp
219c-220d;  327d-328a;  375b-376c;  645c-d  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
238c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 258b; 269a

[1090a]
(8. Tbe concern of the living with life and death, Sc. The contemplation
and  fear  of  death:  the  attitude  of  the hero, the philosopher, the
martyr^  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 93d-94b; 102b; 167a; 169d; 174b-c; 238b;
347a'C;  394a-c;  399d400a;  573b-574a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  197cd;  PART  I,  245b-d;  255a-257a; part iv, 339b-d 47 Goethe:
Faust, part i
[i 544-1 626] 37b-39a;
PART II
[8909-9126] 216b-221b;
[11,384-401]
277a-b  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 27a-28a; 168a-169b; 209b; 238a; 316a-b;
318b;  331a'332a;  351a-b  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 311a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk i, 34b-c; 37d 47b; BK II, 77c-81b; 97a-106d; bk hi,
146d  147c; BK IV, 179b-180d; bk v, 194c-d 200c-d; 216d-218b; 226d-227a;
bk  vii  288b-c;  bk viii, 311a-313a; bk ix, 369a 372a; bk x, 416C'417b;
433d-434a;  439b  440a;  457a-c;  461d-464a;  bk  xi,  481a-482a bk XII,
549c-551c;  558a-562d;  bk  xiii,  569d  570a; bk xiv, 607c-608d; bk xv,
614a-618b  636c-637c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 26a BK v,
118b-119a;  bk  vi,  148d-150d  esp  149c150d  54  Freud: Interpretation
ofDreams,  243a-c / Ego and Id, 716c-717a,c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and
Anxiety,  735d-736b  /  War  and Death, 761c-766d Sd. The ceremonials of
death:  the rites of burial in war and peace Old Testament: Genesis, 23;
49:1-50:13  /  Leviticus,  19:28;  21:1-5  / Deuteronomy, 14:12; 33 / II
Samuel,   1:17-27;   3:31-36—  (D)  //  Kings,  1:17-27;  3:31-36  /  //
Chronicles,  16:13-14— (D) II Paralipomenon, 16:13-14 / Isaiah, 3:16-26;
15:1-4— (Z)) Isaias, 3:16-26; 15:1-4 / Jeremiah, 16:6 {D) Jeremias, 16:6
/  EzeJ^iel,  7:18;  24:16-23— (D) Ezechiel, 7:18; 24:16-23 / Amos, 8:10
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 22:11-12; 38:16-23 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
22:10-13;  ^H  '.16-2:2.  New  Testament:  Matthew,  8:21-22; 27:57-60 /
MarJ^,  15:43-16:1 / Luke, 23:50-24:1 / John, 19:38-42 /James, 5:14-15 4
Homer: Iliad, bk xi
[446-455] 76d-77a; bk
XIX
[198-237]
139a-b; bk xxii
[247-272]
157d-158a; bk xxiii-xxiv 161a-179d / Odyssey, bk xi
[51-80]
243c-d; bk xxiv
[1-190]
317a-319a  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c 5
Sophocles:   Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1579-1779]  128c-130a,c  /  Antigone
131a-142d / Ajax I1040-1421] 152a-155a,c / Electra
[404-471]
159b-d / Trachiniae [1191-1278] 180b-181a,c

[1090b]
1032  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Sd 5 Euripides : Suppliants 258a-269a,c / Trojan
Women
[i 123-1255]
279c-280c  / Phoenician Maidens [1625-1670] 392b-d 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i, 38a-b; bk ii, 65c66c; BK III, 94b-c; bk iv, 128c-d; 136a-d; 157c;
bk  V,  160d-161a;  bk  vi, 196b-c; bk vii, 235b-c; bk ix, 293a; 305a-c;
306b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395c399a; 400c-d 7 Plato:
Republic, bk v, 367b / Laws, bk xii, 793a-794a 13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[451-558]
95b-99a  / Aeneid, bk hi [60-68] 148b-149a; bk iv [474705] 180a-186b; bk
vi
[212-235] 216b-217b;
[295-383] 219a-221a; bk ix
[207-223] 284b285a; bk x [898-908] 327a; bk xi
[182-212]
333a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 46a-b / Nwna Pompilius, 55b-c / Poplicola,
80d;   86a,c   /  Coriolanus,  192c-d  /  Pelopidas,  245a-d  /  Pompey^
537d-538a,c  /  Alexander,  574c-575a  /  Cato  the Younger, 623c-624a /
Demetrius,  747c-d  /  Marcus  Brutus,  810b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
3c-4a;  bk hi, 45d46a; bk xvi, 177b-c 18 Augustine: City ofGod, bk i, ch
12-13   137a138b;   BK  VIII,  CH  26-27  283c-285d  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q  65,  a  i,  ans 879c-881d; a 2, ans and rep 5
881d882c;  A 3, ANS 882d-883d; part hi suppl, q 71 900d-917b 22 Chaucer:
Knight's  Tale [859-1004] 174a-176b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 5a-10a; 32b-c;
36a-b; 405a-c; 473d-477b; 483b-484a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act v,
sc iv
[77-101] 465a-b / Julius Caesar, act v, sc v
[76-81] 596c
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc i
[1-35]
64c-d;  [241-266] 66d-67a / Cymbeline, act iv, sc II [186-290] 475a-476b
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 427d429d 32 Milton: Epitaph on the
Marchioness  of  Winchester  14a-15b  / On Sha^espear. 1630 16a / On the
University Carrier 16b / Aj.nother on the Same 17a-b / Lycidas 27b-32a /
Death of a Fair Infant 57a-59a esp [1-21] 57a-b / Sonnets, xiv-xv 66a-b;
xix  67b-68a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 34d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
263a;  381a-d;  513b;  568d-569a 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson, 193a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  197c-d;  PART  I,  211d'212c;  252a-c;
255a-257a  48  Melville:  Moby DicJ^, 25b-28a; 350b-354b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, bk i, 38b; 43b-44b; BK XI, 512a-b; bk xii, 549d-551c; bk xv,
624d-625b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk vii, 171a'C 54 Freud:
General Introduction, 510b-c / War and Death, 762a-b y

[1091a]
CROSS-REFERENCES For: The doctrine of soul as the principle of life, see
Animal  la,  le;  Soul  ib.  The  general issue concerning continuity or
hierarchy  in  nature,  see  Animal ib-ic, 2c; Evolution 4a, 4c, 7b; Man
i-ic,  8b-8c;  Nature  3b; World 6b. The contrast between the powers and
activities of living and non-living bodies, see Animal of plant, animal,
and  human  life, jf^ Animal ia(i)-ia(4), ic-ic(2), 8d; Man i-ic, 4a-4c;
Soul  2c-2c(3). The anatomical and physiological considerations relevant
to  the analysis of vital powers and operations, see Animal 3-3d, 4b-4c,
5a-5g, 6a^, 8b-8c(4). Discussionsof animal sensitivity and intelligence,
^d-f  Animal  ia(i), ic(2);Man ic; Memory and Imagination i; Mind 3a-3b;
Sense 2b-2c. Other considerations of health and disease, see Medicine 4,
5a-5d.  A  discussion  of  the  human  life  cycle,  see  Man  6c. Other
discussions   of   man's   attitude  toward  death,  see  Happiness  4b;
Immortality  i  ; and for matters relevant to the special problem of the
life  and  death  instincts, see Animal id; Desire 3a; Habit 3a. Another
discussion  of sleeping and waking, see Animal ia(5). Another discussion
of  the  relation  between  the living organism and its environment, see
Animal  iib.  ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in
Greal  Boo^s  ofthe  Western  World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
I. Works by authors represented in this collection, II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Dante. Cormvio {The Banquet), second treatise, chS F. Bacon.
"Of Death," "Of Youth and Age," in Essays Goethe. William Meister Hegel.
The  Phenomenology of Mind, v, a (2) . Science ofLogic, vol ii, sect hi,
ch  i  DosTOEvsKY. The House of the Dead Tolstoy. Three Deaths . Memoirs
of  a  Madman  .  The  Death  of  Ivan  llyitch  II. Epicurus. Letter to
Menoeceus  \  Cicero.  Tusculan Disputations, i — . De Senectute {Of Old
Age)  Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae, xxx (14) Calder6n. Life Is a
Dream  King.  The  Exequy  Browne. Hydriotaphia Gray. Elegy Written in a
Country Church-Yard

[1091b]
Chapter  48;  LIFE  AND  DEATH 1033 Voltaire. "Life," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  E.  Darwin.  The Loves ofthe Plants RichAT. General Anatomy,
Applied  to Physiology and Medicine Bryant. Thanatopsis Shelley. Adonais
Hazlitt.  Table  Tal\,  xxxiii  Lamb. "New Year's Eve," in Essays ofElia
Comte. The Positive Philosophy , bk v Schw^ann. Microscopical Researches
into  the  Accordance in the Structure and Groivth of Animals and Plants
Whewell.  The  Philosophy  ofthe  Inductive  Sciences,  VOL  I, BK IX R.
Browning. The Bishop Orders His Tomb at Saint Praxed's Emerson. Threnody
Schopenhauer.  The  World as Will and Idea, vol HI, sup, ch 42 -. On the
Doctrine  of  the  Indestructibility of Our True Nature by Death — . "On
Suicide," in Studies in Pessimism Lotze. Microcosmos, bk i

[1092a]
1034 THE GREAT IDEAS

[1092b]
ViRCHOw,   Cellular   Pathology  Bergson.  Mind-Energy,  ch  i  Bernard.
Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine  Uexkull.  Theoretical  Biology
Stevenson, "^s Triplex," in Virginibus Puerisque J. S. Haldaxe and J. G.
Priestley.  Respiration  T.H. Huxley. Methods and Results, in Pearl. The
Biology  of  Death  Weismann. "Life and Death," in vol i, Essays Lillie.
Protoplasmic  Action  and  Nervous  Action  upon  Heredity  and  Kindred
Biological  Problems  Santayana.  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith,  ch 23
Tennyson.  Crossing  the  Bar Dewey. Experience and Nature, ch 7 Frazer.
The Golden Bough, part hi; part v, ch Jung. Spirit and Life 13; PART VI,
CH  7  G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of Science, essay viii Hertwig, The Cell
Henderson. Blood Pearson. The Chances of Death J. S. Haldane. Mechanism,
Life  and  Personality  Andreyev. Lazarus . The Sciences and Philosophy,
lect  i-vi  Driesch.  The  Science  and  Philosophy  of  the  OrWoodger.
Biological  Principles  ganism Cannon. The Wisdo?n of the Body LoEB. The
Mechanistic  Conception ofLife Goldstein. The Organism Joyce. Dubliners,
esp  "The  Dead"  Whitehead. Modes of Thought, lect viii OsLER. A Way of
Life  Sherrington.  The  Integrative  Action ofthe Nervous Unamuno. Mist
System  D.  W. Thompson. On Growth and Form . Man on His Nature Bergson.
Creative Evolution Schrodinger. What Is Life? i\

[1093a]
Chapter  49:  LOGIC INTRODUCTION this set of great books, the Organon of
ArisIN  totle,  the  Novum  Organum  of Bacon, Des- :artes' Discourse on
Method  and  his Rulesfor the Direction of the Mind, and Kant's Critique
of  Pure  Reason  indicate or discuss the nature, scope and divisions of
the  discipUne  which  has  come to be called "logic." Though of all the
works  mentioned  the Organon is perhaps the most extensive treatment of
the subject, Aristotle does not use the word "logic" to name the science
or  art  of  which  he  seems  to  be  the inventor— certainly the first
systematic  expounder—in  the  tradition  of  western  thought.  Here as
elsewhere  Aristotle  is  indebted to his predecessors for providing him
with  materials  to  develop  or  criticize:  to  the  sophists  for the
construction   of   arguments,   for   the  formulation  of  methods  of
disputation, and for the discovery of fallacies; to Plato for the theory
of  classification  and definition, for the root notion of the syllogism
and  a conception of proof or demonstration, for the general outlines of
an  intellectual  method  to  which Plato gives the name "dialectic." As
indicated  in  the chapter on Dialectic, Aristotle uses Plato's name for
the  whole  method  of  the  mind  in  the pursuit of truth, in order to
designate  just  one  part  of  his  method,  the  part  concerned  with
probability rather than truth. Yet in the Roman and mediaeval tradition,
the  words "logic" and "dialectic" come to be used interchangeably. This
is  exemplified  by  the  Stoic  division  of the sciences into physics,
ethics,  and logic or dialectic, and by the mediaeval enumeration of the
liberal  arts  of  the  trivium  as  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic  or
dialectic.  So used, these names designate the whole range of discussion
to  be found in Aristotle's Organon. In their opposition to Aristotelian
or what they sometimes call "scholastic" logic, modern r035

[1093b]
inventors  of new methods, like Bacon or Descartes, tend to restrict the
meaning of logic. For them logic is little more than the doctrine of the
syllogism.  And  this  they  judge  to  be no part of genuinely fruitful
method,  or they hold it to be of use mainly as a critical instrument in
disputation  rather  than  discovery. Their identification of logic with
dialectic  (like  their association of both with rhetoric) seems to have
an   intentionally  invidious  significance.  But  with  Kant,  who  was
influenced by the scholasticism of Christian Wolff, "logic" is generally
restored  as  the  name  for the whole range of materials in Aristotle's
Organon^   of   which  dialectic  again  becomes  a  part.  In  his  own
Introduction  to  Logic,  Kant  speaks  of  Aristotle  as "the father of
Logic."  Though  "logic  has not gained much in extent since Aristotle's
time," he says, "there are two amongst more recent philosophers who have
again  brought  general  logic  into  vogue, Leibnitz and Wolfif." Since
their  day,  and  certainly since Kant's, as may be seen from the titles
listed  under  Additional  Readings,  "logic"  prevails  as the name for
treatises  which  discuss,  in  whole  or  part,  the matters treated in
Aristotle's  Organon.  "Logic"  is also used in modern times as the name
for an inquiry or study which bears little resemblance to the discipline
expounded  in  Aristotle's  Organon.  What  is  called "modern logic" to
distinguish it from the traditional Aristotelian or scholastic logic, is
purely  a  science, and in no sense an organon, methodology, instrument,
or  art.  It  does not restrict itself to stating the laws of thought or
formulating  the rules of inference. In the words of Josiah Royce, it is
"the  science  of  order" and it is applicable to the order of things as
well  as  the  order  of  thought. So conceived, the science of logic is
sometimes   regarded   as   having  the  kind  of  generality  which  is
traditionally assigned to

[1094a]
1036  metaphysics;  as,  for example Russell in his essay, "Logic as the
Essence  of  Philosophy."  But it is mathematics rather than metaphysics
with  which  logic  is  identified by its modern exponents. "Logistic or
mathematical  logic,"  writes Russell, "is mathematical in two different
senses:  it is itself a branch of mathematics, and it is the logic which
is   specially   applicable   to  other  more  traditional  branches  of
mathematics."  Since  Boole's  Laws  of  Thought,  which,  according  to
Russell,  initiates the modern development of mathematical logic, "logic
has  become  more  mathematical and mathematics has become more logical.
The  consequence," he says, "is that it has now become wholly impossible
to  draw  a line between the two; in fact, the two are one." Aristotle's
Organon stands to the tradition of logic as Euclid's Elements stsinds to
the  tradition  of  geometry.  In both cases the work of later minds may
alter  considerably the structure and content of the discipline. In both
cases  there are modern departures from the earlier tradition. As in the
one  case  we  have  Descartes' analytical geometry and the various non-
Euclidean  geometries,  so  in  the  other we have Kant's transcendental
logic   and   the   various   non-Aristotelian  logics.  But  all  these
innovations,  even  when  they  might  be described as anti-Aristotelian
rather  than  simply  as  non-Aristotelian,  bear  the  marks  of  their
traditional  origin.  Kant,  for  example,  takes  pains  everywhere  to
indicate  the parallelism between the formulations of his transcendental
logic  and  those  of  Aristotle's  logic.  Even  the various systems of
relational  and  mathematical  logic  usually  attempt  to show that the
Aristotelian logic of subject and predicate, of particular and universal
propositions,  and  of syllogisms can be treated as a special case under
their  own  formulations. The proposals of Bacon or Mill with respect to
induction  and  the method of Descartes, though accompanied in each case
by a critique of the syllogism, are less radical departures, for they do
not  apparently  reject  Aristotle's  basic doctrines of predication and
proof.  Many  of  these issues in logical theory are dealt with in other
chapters, e.g., in Dialectic, In-

[1094b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ..  by  Bertrand  ductiox,  and  Hypothesis, in Idea,
Judgment  and  Reasoning.  Here  we  are  principally concerned with the
conception of logic itself, not with the detailed content of the science
as  much  as  with  its  character as an art or science, its relation to
other   arts   and  sciences,  its  major  divisions,  and  its  leading
principles.  Though  such  considerations are more explicitly treated by
Kant  than by Aristotle, the formative influence of the Organon warrants
examining  it  first.  The  parts of logic, as Aristotle conceives them,
seem  to  be  indicated by the subject matter of the various books which
comprise  the  collection  of  writings  assembled  under  the  title of
Organon.  That  title  has  a bearing on the question whether logic is a
science  or  an  art and on its difference from other sciences and arts.
The word "organon" has the meaning of instrument or method. That in turn
suggests  something to be used as rules of art are used—as directions to
be followed to produce a certain result. Aristotle's own differentiation
of the speculative sciences, the practical sciences, and the arts throws
light  on  this  view  of  logic  as  an  art.  "The  end of theoretical
knowledge,"  he  writes, "is truth, while that of practical knowledge is
action."  In  other  words,  the  theoretical,  or speculative, sciences
differ  from  the  practical sciences in that they are knowledge for its
own  sake  as opposed to knowledge for an ulterior end. According as the
ulterior  end  is  the  production or "making" of something, as distinct
from  human  action or conduct, art is distinct from the other practical
sciences.  "Making  and  acting  are  different,"  Aristotle  says; "the
reasoned  state  of capacity to act is different from the reasoned state
of capacity to make. Hence, too, they are not included one in the other;
for  neither is acting making nor is making acting.'* Logic, then, if it
is  an  art,  will  be  concerned  with  the "making" of something, with
producing a work or an effect. The way in which Aristotle himself refers
to  the  Organon  seems  to  confirm  this  view.  He  regards  it  as a
preparation  for  work  in  the  theoretic  sciences.  "Due to a want of
training  in logic," he writes, some men attempt to discuss the criteria
of  truth  in  mathematics  or  physics  at  the same time that they are
considering the subject matter of these sciences. "They should

[1095a]
know  these things already when they come to a qpecial study, and not be
inquiring  into them while they are listening to lectures on it." Logic,
in  Aristotle's  view,  trains  the  mind  in  the  ways of science. Its
productive  goal  as  an  art  is the making of science itself. For this
reason, in the mediaeval period, logic comes to be called a "speculative
art"  or, with grammar and rhetoric, a liberal art. "Even in speculative
matters,"  Aquinas  says,  "there is something by way of work, e.g., the
making of a syllogism, or of a fitting speech, or the work ofcounting or
measuring.  Hence  whatever  habits  are  ordained  to such works of the
speculative reason are, by a kind of comparison, called arts indeed, but
liberal  arts,  in  order  to  distinguish them from those arts that are
ordained  to  works  done  by  the  body. . . . On the other hand, those
sciences  which  are  not  ordained to any such work are called sciences
absolutely and not arts." But though it may not be a science, absolutely
speal^ing,  because  it is an instrument of intellectual work, logic, in
addition to being an art, may also have some of the characteristics of a
science.  If  it  is  a  science,  what is the object of its knowledge }
Aristotle's  division  of  the  speculative  sciences, which he seems to
present as exhaustive, leaves no place for logic. "There are three kinds
of theoretical sciences," he writes, "physics, mathematics, theology" or
metaphysics,  as  the  last  came  to be called. Each of these sciences,
furthermore,  seems  to  have a distinctive subject matter which is some
aspect  of reaUty, such as change, or quantity, or being. But insofar as
logic   is   concerned  with  the  study  of  terms,  propositions,  and
syllogisms, it deals with elements common to all sciences. This suggests
that  whereas reality is the object of the other sciences, the object of
logic  as  a  science  is science itself, or more generally the whole of
discourse.  It  considers  the  elements  or  patterns of discourse in a
formal  manner; that is, it considers them apart from their reference to
reality  or  their  real  significance  as  the terms, propositions, and
syllogisms  of  particular  subject  matters  or  sciences.  Because  it
separates  the  forms  which discursive thought takes from the matter or
content it may have, logic is traditionally called a "formal science."

[1095b]
Chapter  49: LOGIC 1037 Where Aristotle makes his object the elements of
discourse  (or thought expressed in language), later logicians treat the
formal aspect of thought itself. They deal with concepts, judgments, and
reasoning  instead  of  with  terms,  propositions, and syllogisms. This
difference  results  in a definition of logic as the science of thought;
the  basic  formulations  of  logic  are  the laws of thought. Thus, for
example,  Kant  says that logic "treats of nothing but the mere forms of
thought."  Its  Umits  "are  definitely  fixed  by the fact that it is a
science  which  has  nothing  to do but fully to exhibit and strictly to
prove  all formal rules of thought." The logical principles of identity,
excluded  middle,  and  contradiction,  as  well  as  the  principles of
inference,  are said to be "laws of thought." James proposes as the most
"fundamental principle of inference" what he calls the "axiom of skipped
intermediaries,"  which states that ''slipping intermediary terms leaves
relations  the  same.''  That  "equals of equals are equal" is a special
application  of  this  principle in the sphere of quantities. Because it
applies  to  all subject matters equally, James regards the principle as
"on  the whole the broadest and deepest law of man's thought." In either
conception  of logic as a formal science, questions arise concerning the
relation of logic to other sciences. For Aristotle the question is about
logic  and metaphysics, because both seem to have an unrestricted scope.
Metaphysics  considers  the  being  of  everything  which is; logic, the
formal  components  of  discourse  about  anything.  Aristotle  says  of
philosophy  in  relation to dialetic, that both "embrace all things" but
that "dialectic is merely critical where philosophy claims to know." The
same  comparison could apply to metaphysics and logic. Both "embrace all
things" but not from the same point of view. Aristotle also asks whether
it  belongs  to  metaphysics  as  well  as to logic to inquire "into the
truths  which  are  called  axioms"—especially those which are the first
principles of all knowledge or demonstration, not merely the foundations
of  knowledge  about  some  limited  subject matter. "Since these truths
clearly  hold  good for all things qua being," the science which studies
being qua being {i.e., metaphysics) must be concerned with them. It also
belongs to

[1096a]
1038  THE  GREAT  IDEAS metaphysics as well as to logic "to inquire into
the  principles  of the syllogism." The principles of identity, excluded
middle,  and  contradiction  belong  to both sciences— to the one as the
most  universal  truths about existence, to the other as the basic rules
of  discourse  or  the  laws of thought. This sharing of a common ground
does  not  seem  to  Aristotle  to violate their separateness; but Bacon
charges  him  with  having  "corrupted  natural philosophy by logic." Of
Aristotle's  physics,  he says that it is built of "mere logical terms,"
and,   Bacon  adds,  Aristotle  "remodelled  the  same  subject  in  his
metaphysics  under  a  more imposing title." Whereas Aristotle considers
the  relation  of  logic  to metaphysics, Kant considers its relation to
psychology.  Both  logic  and psychology are concerned with thinking and
knowing.  Distinguishing  between pure and applied logic, Kant says that
pure  logic  "has  nothing  to  do with empirical principles and borrows
nothing  from psychology." Applied logic depends on psychology. In fact,
says  Kant in his Introduction to Logic, it is "a psychology in which we
consider what is the usual process in our thought, not what is the right
one."  Applied  logic ought not to be called logic at all, for "logic is
the  science  of  the  right  use  of  the  understanding and the reason
generally,  not  subjectively,  that  is,  not  according  to  empirical
(psychological) principles, as to how the understanding actually thinks,
but objectively, that is, according to a priori principles, as to how it
ought  to  think."  James  also  insists  upon  the  distinction between
psychology  and  logic . He even uses Kant 's terms in caUing logic an a
priori  and  psychology an empirical science. What the psychologistcalls
"laws  of  thought,"  such  as  the  laws  of  the association of ideas,
describe  the  actual  flow of thought and connections which depend upon
similarity  and  succession.  The  laws  of  logic,  in  contrast, state
reason's  perception of the rational structure of thought itself and the
relations  which must obtain if thought is to be rational. Returning now
to  the  indication  of  the  parts  of  logic which may be found in the
structure  of the Organon, we can see two orders in the books. The first
three   books—   the   Categories,  On  Interpretation,  and  the  Prior
Analytics—deal with terms, propositions, and syllogisms: with the

[1096b]
classification  of  terms  and  their  relation to one another; with the
classification of propositions and their opposition to one another; with
the  analysis  of the various types of syllogisms and the formulation of
the  rules  of  vaUd  inference. Terms are the elements of propositions;
terms  and propositions are the elements of the syllogism. This seems to
determine the order of the first three books. The first three books as a
whole stand in a certain order to the remaining books. Taking the latter
as  a  group, their differentiation from what precedes them seems to lie
in the fact that they deal with terms, propositions, and syllogisms, not
abstracted from all considerations of knowledge and truth about reality,
but  rather with primary emphasis upon the logic of actual knowledge, or
on  the processes of knowing and arguing about what is true or probable.
In  the  traditional  development  of  Aristotelian logic, this division
between  the  first  three  and  the  remaining  books of the Organon is
sometimes  characterized  as  a  distinction hetwetn formal and material
logic. In the Posterior Analytics and the Topics Aristotle considers the
discovery  and  establishment  of  either  the  true or the probable. He
distinguishes  between  indue tion and syllogism (or reasoning) as modes
of  learning and arguing. The later division of logic into deductive and
inductive—sometimes  confused  with  the  distinction between formal and
material logic—does not seem to correspond to the difference between the
Pnor  and  the  Posterior Analytics. In the Advancement of Learning, for
example,  Bacon divides the art of judgment, "which treats of the nature
of  proof  or demonstration," into that which concludes by induction and
that  which  concludes  by syllogism; whereas Aristotle appears to treat
induction  as  that upon which syllogistic demonstration depends for its
primary  and  indemonstrable premises. The distinction between truth and
probability,  or  between  knowledge  and  opinion,  does not affect the
formal  character  of  either induction or syllogism. A syllogism may be
scientific  (/>.,  demonstratively  certain)  ordialectical(/>.,  merely
probable) according to the character of its premises. In either case its
formal  structure  remains  the  same. Similarly, the difference between
scientific and dialectical induction ap-

[1097a]
pears  only in its result, i.e., whether it is knowledge or opinion. The
Posterior  Analytics  2iX\d  the  Topics consider the employment of both
syllogism and induction. The Posterior Analytics treats them in relation
to  the  development  and  structure of scientific knowledge. The Topics
discusses them in relation to the dialectical procedures of argument and
discovery.  The  last  book  of  the  Organon,  which  is concerned with
exposing  the  fallacies in sophistical proofs or refutations, serves to
protect  both  scientific  and  dialectical  reasoning from such soph- *
istry.  Unlike the philosopher or the dialectician, the sophist does not
aim  at  the  truth.  Sophistry  misuses  the weapons of logic— the same
weapons  used by the scientist or dialectician— to produce a counterfeit
of  wisdom  or,  as  Aristotle  says,  "a  wisdom  which  exists only in
semblance.  '  Though  the  dialectician  cannot claim to know, he does,
nevertheless,  deal  with opinions critically and respects the canons of
logic  as  much as the philosopher. The art of logic seems to have three
main  employments.  To  its use by the scientist and the ' dialectician,
Aristotle  adds  its  utilization  by  the  orator  for  the purposes of
persuasion. The rhetorician and the dialectician are most closely allied
because  both  deal with probabilities and disputable matters concerning
which  opposite  conclusions  can  be  drawn. "As in dialectic, there is
induction  on  the one hand and syllogism. . . on the other, so it is in
rhetoric." Aristotle says that "the enthymeme is a rhetorical syllogism,
and  the  example a rhetorical induction." The foregoing suggests that a
certain order obtains between two of the three arts traditionally called
the trivium. The elements and principles of logic are, in a sense, prior
to the rules of rhetoric. The art of rhetoric depends on and uses logic.
The  third art, that of grammar, seems to serve both logic and rhetoric.
It serves the logician in his task of forming terms and propositions out
of  words,  phrases,  and  sentences.  It  serves the rhetorician in his
effort  to  make a forceful use of language. This conception of the uses
of  grammar  appears  in  Aristotle's  Rhetoric  in his consideration of
style,  and  in  the  opening  books of the Organon in his discussion of
univocal  and equivocal names, the parts of speech, simple and composite
expressions, and the different types of sentences.

[1097b]
Chapter  49:  LOGIC  1039 Kant seems to diverge from Aristotle both with
regard  to the unity of logic and wiih regard to the nature and relation
of  its  parts. Formal or elementary logic, Kant thinks, is not the same
as  an  organon  of  the  sciences.  He explains, in his Introduction to
Logic,  that  an  organon  gives  instruction as to "how some particular
branch  of knowledge is to be attained. . . . An organon of the sciences
is  therefore  not  a  mere  logic,  since  it  presupposes the accurate
knowledge  of  the  objects and sources of the sciences. . . , Logic, on
the  contrary,  being  the  general  propaedeutic  of  every  use of the
understanding  and  of  the  reason, cannot meddle with the sciences and
anticipate  their matter." Conceding that it may be called an organon so
far  as  it serves, "not for the enlargement, but only for the criticism
and  correction  of  our  knowledge,"  Kant insists that "logic is not a
general  art of discovery, nor an organon of truth; it is not an algebra
by  the  help  of  which hidden truths may be disAristotle, according to
Kant,  treats  the whole of his logic as an organon, dividing it into an
analytical and a dialectical part. As Kant sees it, the dialectical part
arises from a misuse of the analytical part. This occurs, he says in the
Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  when general or elementary logic {i.e., the
analytic  part)  "which  is  meant  to  be a mere canon of criticism, is
employed  as  if it were an organon, for the real production of at least
the  semblance  of objective assertions. . . . This general logic," says
Kant,  "which assumes the semblance of an organon, is called dialectic."
Kant  here  seems  to  identify  dialectic  with  what  Aristotle  calls
sophistry.   He   says   of   dialectic   that  "different  as  are  the
significations  in which the ancients use this name of a science or art,
it  is  easy  to gather from its actual employment that with them it was
nothing  but  a  logic of semblance. It was a sophistic art of giving to
one's  ignorance,  nay,  to  one's  intentional  casuistry,  the outward
appearance of truth, by imitating the accurate method which logic always
requires."  When  logic  is  treated  as  an  organon,  it "is always an
illusive  logic, that is, dialectical. For as logic teaches nothing with
regard  to  the contents of knowledge . . .any attempt at using it as an
organon  in  order  to  extend  and  enlarge  our knowledge, at least in
appearance, can end

[1098a]
1040  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  in  nothing  but mere talk, by asserting with a
certain  plausibiUty  anything  one Hkes, or, if one likes, denying it."
Yet  Kant  himself retains Analytic and Dialectic as the major divisions
of  his  own  transcendental logic, explaining that he employs the title
ofdialectic,not  for  the  misuse  of  logic, but rather to signify that
portion  of  logic  which  is the critique of "dialectical semblance" or
sophistry.  General or ordinary logic takes no account of the content of
knowledge  and  applies to all objects universally because "it treats of
the  form of thought in general." Transcendental logic does not entirely
ignore  the content of knowledge, but only the content of that knowledge
which  is  empirical  in  origin.  If  there  are transcendentalor«/7non
concepts  which  donot  originate  from  experience, then there can be a
science  which  treats  "of  that  knowledge  which  belongs to the pure
understanding,  and  by which we may think objects entirely a priori.'''
That  is  the  science  Kant  calls ''transcendental Logics It deals, he
writes, "with the laws of the understanding and reason in so far only as
they  Ttier  a  priori  to  objects." That part of it "which teaches the
elements  of the pure knowledge of the understanding, and the principles
without which no object can be thought, is the transcendental Analytic."
The  second  part  of it is the transcendental Dialectic— "a critique of
the   understanding  and  reason  with  regard  to  their  hyperphysical
employment,  in  order  thus  to  lay  bare  the  false semblance of its
groundless  pretensions  .  .  .  serving  as  a  protection of the pure
understanding against all sophistical illusions." The issue between Kant
and  Aristotle  cannot  be  understood if it is read simply as a dispute
about  the  nature  and divisions of logic. Their diverse views of logic
must  be  seen  against  the  larger  background  of their philosophical
differences  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  mind, the nature of
reality,  the  origin  of  knowledge,  and the character of its objects.
Controversies  about  logic  (and  even within logic, about this or that
theory  of  judgment or reasoning) usually reflect fundamental issues in
psychology  and  metaphysics.  The attack made by some modern logicians,
for  example, against the subject-predicate logic of Aristotle cannot be
separated from their rejection of his doctrine of substance and

[1098b]
accident  in physics and metaphysics; even as their own relational logic
represents  a different view of the structure of reahty or the constitur
ents  ot  experience.  On  the other hand, the criticism of Aristotelian
logic  by  Bacon  and  Descartes  seems  to  be  motivated  primarily by
considerations of method. They do not have a different logic to propose,
as do Kant and later symbolic or mathematical logicians. Rather for them
logic  itself  by which they mean Aristotle's logic and particularly his
doctrine  of the syllogism—appears useless for the purposes of enlarging
knowledge,  discovering  new  truths, and developing the sciences. Where
Kant  criticizes  Aristotle  for regarding logic as an organon or method
for  acquiring  knowledge.  Bacon and Descartes complain that logic does
not  serve  that purpose at all, and therefore a novum organum—not a new
logic,  but  a  new  method—  is needed. "The present system of logic is
useless  for  the  discovery  of the sciences," Bacon writes. It "rather
assists  in  confirming  and  rendering inveterate the errors founded on
vulgar  notions  than  in  searching  after truth, and is therefore more
hurtful  than  useful."  The  syllogism, for example, "is unequal to the
subtlety  of  nature.  .  .  .  Our  only hope is in genuine induction."
Induction  is the key to an art of discovery, and the rules of induction
the  heart of a fruitful method of inquiry. The relation of induction to
demonstration   in   Aristotle's   logic,  and  the  difference  between
Aristotle's  and  Bacon's  theories  of  induction, are discussed in the
chapter  on  that  subject.  In  Bacon's view, the Novum Organum departs
radically  from  the old Organon. The new can be substituted for the old
in  its  entirety.  It  may  be  asked,  he  says,  "whether  we talk of
perfecting  natural  philosophy  alone  according  to our method, or the
other  sciences  also,  such  as logic, ethics, politics." His answer is
that "as common logic, which regulates matters by syllogisms, is applied
not  only  to natural, but also to every other science, so our inductive
method  Hkewise comprehends them all." Demonstration is opposed not only
to   induction,  but  to  discovery.  Accordingly,  logic  conceived  as
concerned  only  with  the  rules  of  demonstration is opposed to other
methods which aim at directing scientific inquiry and research.

[1099a]
The  basic  contrast  is  between criticism and construction, or between
examining  what  is  offered as knowledge tor its vahdity and developing
icclmiques  for  adding  new  knowledge  to okl. In his Two New Sciences
Galileo  says  that  logic "leaches us how to test the conclusiveness of
any  argument or demonstration already discovered and completed" but not
"to  discover  correct  arguments  and demonstrations." It does not, "as
regards  stimulation  to  discovery,  compare  with  the  power of sharp
distinction  which belongs to geometry." In the same vein Descartes says
of  logic  that "the syllogisms and the great part of the other leaching
serve  better  in explaining to others those things that one knows . . .
than  in  learning  what is new. . . . This made me feel that some other
method  must  be  found."  The  four rules of the method he then states,
which  codify  the  steps  he  himself  has taken to make discoveries in
geometry  and  physics, seem to him a general procedure for insuring the
advancement  of all fields of learning. As his Rulesfor the Direction of
the  Mind  indicates, Descartes' method does not omit the \ intuition of
principles  and  the  deduction  of  conclusions  therefrom—the apparent
equivalents  of  induction and demonstration in Aristotle's Organon. But
he  explains  why he has "omitted all the precepts of the dialecticians"
even  though  he  is  himself  concerned  with  improving  "our power of
deducing  one  truth  from  another."  Their style of argument, he says,
"contributes  nothing  at  all  to the discovery of the truth. . . . Its
only  possible use is to serve to explain at times more easily to others
the  truths  we have already ascertained; hence it should be transferred
from  Philosophy to Rhetoric." Furthermore, the forms of the traditional
syllogism   do   not   seem  able  to  accommodate  the  connections  in
mathematical reasoning or the structure of mathematical proof. "Everyone
will  perceive  in mathematical demonstrations," Locke writes, "that the
knowledge   gained   thereby,   comes   shortest  and  clearest  without
syllogisms."  Locke  identifies logic with the doctrine of the syllogism
and,  even  more  expficitly  than  Descartes,  rejects  it as an aid to
reasoning.  The  question  whether  logic  is  itself  a methodology, or
includes rules for the discovery as

[1099b]
Chapter  49: LOGIC 1041 well as the demonstration of trutli, is answered
in  terms  of  broader  and  narrower conceptions of the science or art.
Those  who  regard the rules oi logic as primarily a canon of criticism,
which  test  tlie  validity  of  intellectual work, look elsewhere for a
method  whose  rules  are  productive rather than critical. The question
then  usually  arises whether there is one methodology applicable to all
fields  of  inc]uiry, or as many distinct methods as there are different
disciplines  or  subject matters. The difference between the traditional
Aristotelian  and  the modern mathematical logic suggests that there may
be  a plurality of logics. The attempts made by the exponents of each to
subsume  the  other  as  a  special  case  do  not  seem  to be entirely
successful.  Though  Aristotehan  logic  appears  to give a satisfactory
account  of  the  forms  of  judgment  and reasoning in certain types of
discourse,  it  cannot, in the opinion of symbolic logicians, be applied
to mathematics. "Mathematics consists of deductions, and yet," according
to  Bertrand Russell, "the orthodox accounts of deduction are largely or
wholly  inapplicable  to  existing  mathematics." Symbolic logic, on the
other  hand,  may  succeed  in  formulating  the relational structure of
modern mathematics, but it does not, in the opinion of its critics, hold
for  metaphysics—at  least  not  the  sort  of  metaphysics which treats
relation  as a category subordinate to substance. The difference between
the  kind of thinking that men do in science and in law suggests another
type of diversity among logics. The practical or moral judgment seems to
involve a special type of predicate. What Aristotle calls the "practical
syllogism"  and what Aquinas describes as the process of "determination"
quite  distinct  from  deduction—by which positive laws are derived from
natural  law,  seem  to  call  for  a logic of practical thinking, quite
distinct  from  the  logic of all the theoretic sciences. Using the word
"logic"  in  its  broadest sense, we must ask whether there is one logic
common  to  all  the sciences; or a logic which fits mathematics but not
physics  or  metaphysics,  a logic appropriate to speculative philosophy
but  not  to experimental or empirical research, a logic peculiar to the
nature  of the practical or moral sciences, such as ethics and politics,
or to the work of jurisprudence.

[1100a]
1042  THE GREAT IDEAS There is evidence in the great books that sciences
as  different as mathematics and physics, or as metaphysics and pohtics,
differ  in  their  methods of discovery and demonstration. This may mean
that  they differ in their logics as well. Yet it also appears to be the
case that the principle of contradiction applies in all, that fallacious
inference  is  detected  by the same criteria in all, and to this extent
ail  share  a common logic. Where alternative methods have been proposed
within  a single major field—notably in the case of philosophy— this may
reflect   different   conceptions   of  philosophy  itself  rather  than
alternative  routes  to  the same end. doctrine of method 3. Logic as an
art:  its  place  in  education  3fl.  The relation of logic and grammar
inquiring, knowing dialectic, genetic or transcendental criticism

[1100b]
Because  of  their  relevance  to  the  basic  issues  about  logic (and
especially   those  concerning  its  scope  and  unity),  the  rules  of
methodology  in  general and the various methods proposed for particular
disciphnes  are  included  in this chapter. They are also considered, of
course,  in  chapters  devoteJ  to  the  special  disciplines or subject
matters,  e.g.,  Astronomy,  History,  Mathematics, Metaphysics, Physics
,Theology  ;  and  in  the  chapters  on Science and Philosophy. What is
distinctive  about  each of these methods is discussed in those chapters
in relation to the type of knowledge or inquiry which seems to require a
method  of  its  own.  OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGB 1. Logic as a science: its
scope  and  subject matter compared with psychology and metaphysics 1043
lb.  Divisions  of  logic: deductive and inductive; formal and material;
analytic   and   dialectic;   general   and   transcendental   1044   2.
Transcendental  logic:  the  propaedeutic to all a priori cognition; the
transcendental   3^.   The  relation  of  logic  and  rhetoric  1045  4.
Methodology:  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the mind in the processes of
thinking,   learning,  4^.  The  heuristic  principles  of  research  in
experimental and empirical science 1046 4c. The criteria of evidence and
inference  in  historical  inquiry  1  047  4^.  The  diverse methods of
speculative  philosophy:  the role of intuition, analysis, 4^. The logic
of practical thinking: the methods of ethics, poUtics, and jurisprudence
1048 5. Logic as an object of satire and criticism: sophistry and logic-
chopping 1049

[1101a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  voUime  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. Forexamplc,in53 jAMEs:Pj>y<r/io/o^^', 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halvesofthe right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.. Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. Logic as a science: its scope
and  subject  matter  compared  with psychology and metaphysics 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vii,  397a-398c / Sophist, 571a-c / Philebus, 634b-635a 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch i [24*1011] 39a / Metaphysics, bk
hi, ch i [995^6-10] 514a; ch 2
[996^26-997*15]
515b-d; bk iv, CH 2 [1004^15-26] 523d; ch 3-8 524b-532d; bk V, ch 7
[1017*22-28] 537d-538a; bk
xi,  CH  I [1059*23-26] 587a; ch 4-6 589d-592b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk
i, ch i
[1354*1-11]
593a;  cii  2 [1358*2-35] 597d-598b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 7
11  2b-  113d;  CH  17  122d-124a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4
lla-c  18  Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 4 266d267c; CH 7 269c-d /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, CH 31 651d-652b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 57, A 3, REP 3 37b-38a; a 6, rep 3 40a-41a; q 94, A 2, ANs
221d-223a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 58a-b; 72a-d 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  second day, 190b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 55b-61d
esp 56c-58c, 59c-60c

[1101b]
Chapter  49: LOGIC 1043 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2c-3b / Discourse, part
II, 46c-d 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration 430a446b esp 445a-446b 35
Locke:  Human  Understandijig,  bk  iv,  ch xxi 394d-395a,c 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, intro, sect 6 405d-406a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  335d-336a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-6d; 34a-37d; 59c; 210b-c / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals^ 253a-c; 254c-d / Judgement, 463a; 492c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 182d 53 Ja.mes: Psychology, 524a;
867a; 872b-874a; 878a; 880b; 889a-b \a. The axioms of logic: the laws of
thought;  the  principles  of  reasoning  7 Plato: Euthydemus, 72d-73b /
Republic, bk IV, 350d-351b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 3
[1^10-16]
5c-d;  CH  10  [13^1-35] 19a-c / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 1-3 39a-40c /
Posterior   Analytics,   bk  i,  CH  1-2  97a-99a;  ch  ii  105d-106b  /
Metaphysics, BK III, ch I [995''6-io] 514a; ch 2 [996*^26997*15] 515b-d;
bk iv, ch 3-8 524b-532d; BK XI, ch I [1059*23-26] 587a; ch 4-^ 589d592b

[1102a]
(1.  Logic  as  a  science:  its  scope and subject matter compared with
psychology  and  metaphysics,  la.  The  axioms  of  logic:  the laws of
thought;  the  principles of reasoning.) 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch 7 112b-113d. 20 Aquin'as: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, A 2, ANS
221d-223a  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 54c-61a passim 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i 95b,d-103d passim, esp sect 4 96b, sect 16
99b-c, sect 20 lOOc-d; ch ii, sect i 103d104a; CH iii, sect 3 113a-b; bk
iv,  ch  i,  sect 4 307b-c; CH 11, sect 8 311a; ch vn 337a344d; CH viii,
sect  2-3  345a-346b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36b-37b; 39c-41c esp 40d-41c;
64d-65c;              109d-113b              esp              llOd-lllc;
115d-119aespll8a-c;156d-157b:174b-d;194b / Judgement, 492c-d; 542d-543a;
600d-501d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part iv, 362b 53 James:
Psychology, 299b
[fn
i]; 319b-320a; 360b-361a; 667b-'668a; 868b-873a; 878a-879b lb. Divisions
of  logic:  deductive  and  inductive; formal and material; analytic and
dialectic;  general  and transcendental 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk
i,  ch  30  63d64b; bk II, CH 23 90a-c / Posterior Analytics, BK I, CH I
[71^1-11]  97a;  ch 3 [72^25-33] 99c; CH 18 lllb-c; CH 31 120a-c; bk ii,
ch 7
[92*34-^1] 126b; CH 19 136a-137a,c /
Topics, bk I, CH I 143a-d; ch 12 148d; ch 18 [108^712] 152d; bk viii, ch
i
[155^29-156^7] 211c212a;
[156^10-18]
212c-d; ch 14
[164^12-16]
222d / Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; bk viii, ch I [252*20-^7] 335d-336b /
Heavens, bk iii, ch 7 [306^6-18] 397b-c / Metaphysics, bk vi, ch i
[1025^1-16]
547b; BK XI, ch 7
[1064*4-9]
592b; BK xni, ch 4 [1078^18-30] 610b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[1139^24-34]
388c  /  Rlietoric, bk i, ch 2 [1356^*36-^17] 596a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  42a-c; 56a59a esp 57b-58b; 59c-60a; 61d / Novum Organufn,
pref 105a-106d; bk i 107a-136a,c esp aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 69 116a-b,
aph  103-106 127d-128c; bk ii, aph 10 140c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5b-c;
34a-37d  2.  Transcendental  logic:  the  propaedeutic  to  all a priori
cognition;  the  transcendental doctrine of method 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
5b-c; 15c-16c; 23d; 34a48d esp 35b-36a, 39a-41c, 45b-47c; 59c-d; lOlb-d;
113b-120c;  210a-250a,c  esp  210a-c,  211c-218d, 233d-234b, 243c-248d /
Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-254d esp 253b, 254c-d 3. Logic as
an  art:  its  place in education 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 397a-398c /
Parmenides,  491a-c  /  Statesman,  595a-d  /  Philebus,  633a-635a  esp
634b-635a

[1102b]
1044  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lb  to  3a  8  Aristotle:  Topics^ bk i, ch 1-3
143a-144b;  BK  VIII, CH 14 221d-223a,c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
252c-253d / Metaphysics, bk ii, CH 3
[994^31-995*14]
513c; BK IV, CH 3
[1005^2-5] 524c
9  Aristotle  :i?/j<ftor/cr,  bki,  chi  [1354*1-11] 593a 12 Epictetlts:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 7 112b-113d; CH 17 122d-124a; bk ii, ch 25 174b-c
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk iv, par 30 26b-c / City of God. bk viii,
ch  4  266d-267c;  ch  7  269c-d  /  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 31-37
651d-654b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 57, A 3, rep 3
37b-38a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  18b-19a  25
Montaigne: Essays, 61b-c; 69d-77a passim; 448d-449a 28 Galileo: T:vo New
Sciences, second day, 190b-c 30 Bacon: Advaticement of Learning, 31a-d /
Novum  Orgamim,  bk ii, aph 52, 194c-195a 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c; x
16d-17a  /  Discourse, PART II, 46c-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
335d-336a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
36d-37d;  223a-d  43 Mill: Liberty, 287d-288c "ha. The relation of logic
and  grammar  7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus  85a114a,c /
Philebus, 612b-613a / Seventh Letter, 809a-811a 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 1-4 5a-6a / Interpretation, CH 4
[17*1-7] 26b / Prior Analytics,
bk  I,  CH  34-41 66b-68c / Posterior Analytics, BK II, CH 13 [97^38-39]
133c / Topics, bk I, CH 15 149d-152a; ch 18
[108*17-37] 152b-d;
BK II, CH 3 154d-155d; ch 9
[114*26-^14]
160a-b; bk iv, ch 3
[124*10-14] 172d; ch
4
[124*^35-125*4] 173d; BK
V, ch 2
[130^11-15]
180d; ch 4
[133^15-134*4] 184d-185b; ch
7
[136^15-32] 188c-d; BK VI, CH
i [i39^i2]-ch 3
[141*22] 192b-194c; ch
10 202b-203a; ch 14
[151^3-11] 206c; BK VIII, CH 3 [158^8-17] 215b;
CH 7 217c-d / Sophistical Refutations, ch i
[165*1-18] 227b-c; ch 4 [i65°24-i66^2i] 228b229c; CH 10 [170^11-41] 234d-235b; ch 13-14
238d-239d; ch 19-23 243d-247a; ch 31-32 250c-251c: ch 33
[182^13-17] 251d
/  Metaphysics, BK IV, CH 4 525a-528b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii,
par  32-36  107a-108c:  par  41-43  llOa-d;  bk  xiii,  par  36 120c-d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  13  627d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
54c-60c;  65c-d;  PART  III,  172a; part iv, 269b-c; 270a-c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 18d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 253c-254a 30
Bacon:  Advancement ofLearning, 56b-66a esp 58c-59a 31 Descartes: Rules,
xiii, 26b-c / Discourse^ II

[1103a]
d  d  3b  to  4^  Chapter  49:  LOGIC  1045  PART I, 43b; PART VI, 66d /
Objections  and Replies, 290c31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 47, schol
390c-391a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 22-23 175b; 392 239b-240a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxxiii, SECT 19 251c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 10,
256d-257a;  ch  vh  283a-284b  esp  sect 2 283b-c; bk iv, ch iv, sect 17
328d;  ch  v, sect 1-3 329a-b; ch vi, sect 1-3 331b-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,   intro,  sect  19  410c;  SECT  52  422d-423a  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  339d-342c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c  45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 4a-5d; 7c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  182b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 40c-d 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, epilogue i, 672a-b 53 James: Psychology, 144a-b 3^. The
relation of logic and rhetoric 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[882iii2]499b-502b
7  Plato: Phaedrus, 131b-141a,c / Gorgias 252a294d / Philebus, 633a-635a
esp 634b-635a 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 4
[i 7^*1-7] 26b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^19-27]
339d-340a  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1-2 593a-598b; ch 4 [1359^1-18] 599d; bk
ii,  ch  22-26  643c653a,c  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 16,
180d181a  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3637 653d-654b; bk
iv, ch 4 676d-677a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55a-b; 60d; 67c; 72a-d;
part  ii,  127d;  128d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 31a-d; 58c59a;
64a-b;  66c-67c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2c;  x,  16d-17a esp 17a /
Discourse,  part  ii,  46c33 Pascal: Pensees, 22-23 175b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk hi, ch x, SECT 34 299d-300a 4. Methodology: rules for
the  conduct  of  the  mind  in  the  processes  of  thinking, learning,
inquiring,  knowing 7 Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Parmenides, 491a-c /
Philebus,  610d-613a  8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 63d64b /
Topics,  bk i, ch 14 149a-d; bk vih, ch 14 221d-223a,c / Metaphysics, bk
ii,  ch  3  513c-d;  BK  v,  CH  i [1013^1-3] 533a 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i 161a165d / Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[io94''i2-27] 339d340a; bk
ii, ch 2
[1104*14-15] 349c; bk vi,
ch 3
[11:59^^24-34] 388c; ch
ii 392c-393b esp
[ii43''3i-^6]392d-393a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  h,  ch  12  151b152c;  CH  25 174b-c 17
Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4 lla-c

[1103b]
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 55a 56d; 58d 61a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
63d-66b; 240c-242a; 270a 271c; 446d 450a; 453c-454d 28 (Jalileo: Two New
Sciences,  second day, 190b-c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 331a-337a
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, lla-17c esp 14c-15a, 16b-c; 33d 34b;
43d 44c; 47d 49b; 55b 61d esp 57d-58b; 64a-66a; 96d 97a / Novum Organum,
pref  105a-106d;  bk  i  107a136a,c  esp  APH 11-26 107d 108d, aph 39-69
109c-116b, aph 103-106 127d-128c; bk ii, APH 27-:}2 157b-161b esp aph 32
161a'b  31  Descartes: Rules la-40a,c esp iii-vi, 4a-9b, VII 10b-12a, X,
16d-17a,  xii-xiii, 24d-27d, XIV, 28b-29b / Discourse 41a-67a,c esp part
I,  41d-42b,  PART  II, 45b-c, 46c-48b, part hi, 50b-51a, part iv, 52a /
Objections  and  Replies,  237b-c;  267a-277a,c  33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-5
171a-173a  /  Geometrical Demonstration 430a-446b passim 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  intro,  sect  4-7  94a-95c;  bk  i,  ch  hi,  sect 24-26
120a121a,c;  BK  II,  CH i, sect 10 123b-d; ch xi, SECT 15 146d-147a; bk
hi,  ch  x,  sect 34 299d-300a; bk iv, ch hi, sect 22 319c-320a; SECT 30
323a-c; ch iv, sect 17 328d; ch VII, SECT II, 340c-341a; ch xh 358c-363b
passim,  esp  sect  7  360b-c,  sect  14  362d363a;  ch xvii, sect 19-22
379d-380b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 21-25 411b-412a,c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  17 457a-b; sect vh, div 49
471c-d;  sect  vih,  Div  75, 484c; sect xh, div 116, 503d-504a; div 132
509a-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp Ib-d, 3c-d; lOlb-d; 133c-134d;
179d-182b;  218d-227a:  248d-250a,c  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
253a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  293c294b; 336d-337a,c / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d  /  Judgement,  551a552c;  575b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  276c-d; 283d-284d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 690a
-b  4a.  Mathematical analysis and reasoning: the search for a universal
method  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk vi, 386d-387d / Theaetetus, 514b-515d 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 41
[49^32-50*3] 68c
/  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, CH 7 103c-d; CH 10 104d-105d / Topics, bk
vi, ch 4 [141^3-22] 194d-195a; bk vh, ch 3
[153*6-11]
208a-b / Physics, bk ii, ch 9
[200*15-29] 277c-d / Metaphysics, bk
ii, ch 3 513c-d; BK HI, CH 2
[996*22-36] 514d-515a;
BK VI, CH I [1026*7-32] 548a-c; bk vh, ch id
[1036*2-13] 559b-c; bk ix, ch 9 [1051*22-34]
577b-c; bk xi, ch 3 [1061*29-^3] 589c; ch 4 589d-590a; bk xih, ch 2
[io7~^i]-ch
3
[1078*32] 608d-609d

[1104a]
(4.  Methodology:  rulesfor  the conduct of the mind in the processes of
thinking,  learning,  inquiring,  knowing. 4a. Mathematical analysis and
reasoning:  the  searchfor  a universal method.) 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
hi, ch 3
[1112^20-24]
358d; BK VII, ch 8 [1151*15-19] 402a 11 Archimedes: Method 569a-592a esp
569b570a   11  NicoMACHus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  831d-841c  16  Kepler:
Harmonies of the World, 1012b1014b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  85,  A  8,  REP 2 460b-461b 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a-c;
59b-c  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day,  190b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  65b  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 59 112b-c 31
Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  esp  11  2a-3b,  iv, 5c-7d, VI 8a-10a, xii,
24d-25a, xiv-xvi 28a35c, xviii-xxi 36b-40a,c / Discourse, part i, 43b-c;
PART  II,  46c-48b;  part  hi,  50d / Objections and Replies, 128a-129a;
130a-133a,c  / Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 295a-298b, BK II, 304a-306a,
316a-317a,  bk  hi,  331b,  353a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5 171a-173a /
Geometrical Demonstration, 430a-434a: 442a-446b / Arithmetical Triangle,
451b-452a; 458b-459b; 464a-466a 34 Newton: Principles, la-b; bk i, lemma
i-ii  and  scHOL  25a-32a  esp  lemma  ii, schol, 31a32a; prop 31, schol
79a-81a;  bk  ii,  lemma 2 168a-169b; bk hi, lemma 5 338b-339a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xvi, sect 4 166a-b; bk iv, ch i, sect 9
308c-309b; ch II, sect 9-10 311b-c; ch hi, sect 18-20 317d-319c; sect 30
323a-c;  ch  iv,  sect 6-9 325a-326b; ch vh, sect ii, 340c-341a; ch XII,
sect  1-8  358c-360c passim; sect 14-15 362d-363b; ch xvii, sect ii 378b
35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 12 408a-b; sect 19 410c; sect
15-16   415d416a;   sect  i  18-132  436b-439c  passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  iv, div 20 458a-b; sect vh, div 48 470d-471c; sect
XII,  div 131 508d-509a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 109b-llla; 118b119a
42   Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  15c-16c;  17d-19a;  46a-b;  68a-69c;
211c-212a; 215d-217a; 217c218d / Practical Reason, 302d-303b; 330d331a /
Science of Right, 399a-b / Judgement^ 497a-498d esp 498b-d; 551a-553c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  283d-284a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  172a-173b; 249a251b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-d;  epilogue  ii,  694d-695c 53 James: Psychology,
175a-176a; 870a; 874a878a

[1104b]
1046  THE  GREAT IDEAS 4a to 4^ 4b. The heuristic principles of research
in  experimental and empirical science 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk hi, ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, CH 2
[316*5-14] 411c-d
/  Meteorology,  bk  i,  CH  7  [344^5-9]  450b  9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk i, ch 6
[491*5-26] 12c-13a / Parts of Animals, bk
i,  ch  I 161a-165d esp [642*i4-*»4] 165b-d / Gen eration of Animals, bk
hi,  ch  10  [760^28-33 301d-302a 10 Hippocrates : Ancient Medicine, par
1-8 la 3b; par 20 7b-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13 173d177a
16   Copernicus:   Revolutions  of  tJie  Heavenly  Spheres,  505a-506a;
507a-508a  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 888b-890a; 907b908b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c28c  esp  par 6 28c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, a I, rep 2 175d-178a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
377a-d  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone, pref, la-2a; bk i, 6a- 7a esp 6d-7a; bk
ii,  27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131a138b; 148c-149c;
157b-177a,c passim; third DAY, 200a-d; 202d-203a; 207d-208c; 236d237a 28
Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  285c-d  /  Circulation  of  the Blood,
322d-323d;  324c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  331a-337a  esp 331b333d,
335c-336c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13d-14b; 15d; 34b; 42a-c;
56c-59c; 64d-65a / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp pref 105a-106d, bk I, aph
1-26  107a-108d,  aph  50  111b,  aph  70  116b-117a, APH 95 126b-c, aph
104-106  128a-c,  bk  II,  aph  1-9  137a-140c,  aph  52 194c-195d / New
Atlantis,  210d-214d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi 60d-67a,c esp
61d-62c, 66a-b / MeditationSy iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, 215a-b
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  355a-358b;  365b-371a  passim  /  Great Experiment
382a-389b  34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi, rules 270a-271b; general
schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics, bk i, 379a; bk hi, 542a; 543a-b 34HuYGENs:
Light,  pref,  551b-552a; ch i, 553a-554a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk iv, ch vi, sect 13 335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect hi, div 19, 458a; sect iv, div 23-27 459a-460d; sect
IX,  DIV  82  487b-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 5a-13d esp 5c-6c; 210b-c;
215d-216d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, Ic2b; 6d-7a,c; part
i, 17a; 23c; part hi, 87b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169arl74a; 175b;
181b; 184a I

[1105a]
4c  to  4d Chapter 49: LOGIC 1047 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
440b,  d;  467a-b;  659a; 774d-775a 50 Marx: Capital, 6c 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, hi>ilogue ii, 690a-b; 694d-696d 53 James: Psychology, 3b-4a;
120a-  129b  passim;  348a-359a esp '351a-352a; 385a b; 677b; 862a-865b;
882a-886a  passim,  esp  883a-884a  54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a /
Instincts, 412a-b / General Introduction, 463d; 483d485a esp 484d-485a /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 661c-662b / New Introductory Lectures,
815a-b; 818c-819b; 874a'C; 879c; 881b c Ac. The criteria of evidence and
inference  in  historical  inquiry 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 17b-c; bk
ii, 49a56b passim; 59a; 69b-d; 71a-73b; 76d; bk III, 89c-d; 99b-c; bk v,
168b-c;  bk  vii, 254c-d; bk viii, 281d-282b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  353d354b; BK II, 391c-d; bk vi, 523c-524d passim; bk VIII,
586b-d  14  Plutarch:  Romulus  15a-30a,c  passim,  esp  15a-18d  / Numa
Pompilius,  49a-b  /  Themistocles,  102a,c  /  Aristides, 262b,d-263c /
Nicias, 423a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49c-d; bk iv, 66b-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  96b,d;  232c; 296a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  153a158a;  180c-183d;  part  hi,  285d-286a  51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  xiii,  563a-  b;  EPILOGUE  II  675a-696d  54 Freud: General
Introduction,   450d-451a   Ad.   The  diverse  methods  of  speculative
philosophy,  the  role  of  intuition,  analysis,  dialectic, genetic or
transcendental   criticism   7   Plato:  Protagoras,  50d-52d;  57a-c  /
Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Phaedrus  115a-141a,c  esp 131b-141a,c / Meno,
179d-183a  /  Republic,  BK  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Parmenides, 491a-c /
Theaetetus,  514b-515d;  525d-526b  /  Sophist  551a-579d esp 552b-561d,
571a-c  /  Statesman  560a-608d  esp  595a-d  / Philebus 609a-639a,c esp
609a-617d  /  Seventh  Utter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics
97a-137a,c / Topics, BK I, CH I
[ioo*25-*^2i]
143a-b;  bk  VIII,  CH  I  [i55*'i-i6]  211a-b;  ch 14 [163^8-16] 222a /
Sophistical Refutations, ch 16
[175*112] 241a
/ Physics, bk i, ch i 259a-b; ch 2
[184^25-185*19]
259c-260a;  bk  ii, ch 7-9 275b-278a,c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 13 [294^614]
386a; bk hi, ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c
/  Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2 [316*514] 411c-d / Metaphysics,
bk i, ch 3
[98:5*
24-''6] 501c-d; ch 9
[992'»i8-993*2] 511a-b;
bk ii, cn I
[993"3o-*'i9] 511b,d-512a; ch
3 513c-d; bk iii, ch i
[995*23-^4] 513b,d; bk
IV, ch 2 522b-524b esp [1004*25-31] 523b-c; CH 4
[1005^35-1006*28] 525a-c; ch
7
[1012*

[1105b]
17-24I 532a-b; cii 8
[ioi2"29AS]
532b-c; bk VI, CH I 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch 3
[i()29*
34-*'i2] 552a; ch 17
[io4i''6-'^ii] 565a-d; bk
viii, ch 4 [i044'*33-*'2ol 569a-b; bk ix, ch 6
[io48'*35-*'9] 573d-574a; bk x, ch
i [1052^115] 578d-579a; bk xi, ch 3 589a-d; cn 5 590a-d; ch 6
[106:5*13-16]
591b; cii 7
[io63''36-io64*9] 592b;
bk xiii, cii i
[1076*
10-16] 607a; ch 3
[1077**17-1078*31] 609a-d
/ Soul, bk I, CH I
[402*1 ]-cH 2 [403''23] 631a633a; bk
ii, ch 2
[413*11-19] 643a-b; ch
3
[4i4'*2o]-CH 4 [415*22] 644d-645c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b c; cn 6 389d; CH 8
[1142*13-19] 391b; ch
ii  392c393b  esp  [ii43'»3i-^6] 392d-393a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
hi,  ch  4-6  11a12b / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 4 270c-271a 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  2-8  265b-270d  passim  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q i, A 2, ANS and rep i 4a-c; q 2, a 2 lld-12c; Q
32,  A  I,  rep  2  175d-178a;  part  i-ii, q 18 693 b,d- 703a passim 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 56b-d; 60a-b; 65c-d; PART IV, 267a-c; 269b-c
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  h,  101b-106a  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  16b-c;  42a-c;  56c-59c;  61d 31 Descartes :
Rules,  ii-xiv,  2d-33b / Discourse, PART II, 46c-47b; part iv 51b-54b /
Meditations,  69a-71a,c;  72b,d;  i  75a-77c; hi, 82a-d / Objections and
Replies,  119c-120c;  126a-b; 128a-129a; postulate i-vh 130d-131c; 167c;
206c-207a; 237b-238b; 244a-b; 245d-246a; 267a-277a,c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii, prop 10, schol 376d-377a 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
430a434a;  442a-443b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, 87d; intro 93a-95d;
bk i, ch hi, sect 24-25 120a-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
21-25  411b-412a,c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c;
div  7-9 453c-455a; sect ii, div 17 457a-b; sect xh, div 116, 503d-504a;
div  130  508c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339d; 341b-342b; 362a-d passim
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-13d;  16a-c;  109d112d;  115d-116a; 119a-b;
133c-134d;  184b-c;  185b-c; 193a-200c esp 193d-194b, 199a-c; 215d-216d;
218d-227a;  248d-250a,c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253a-c;
254b-c;  263b-d;  264b-d esp 264d; 271a-c: 283d-284d / Practical Reason,
293c-294b  esp 293d [fn 3]; 297a-c; 329d-330c; 335b-c; 336d-337a,c; 358a
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365a-366a; 376c-d / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387a-388d / Judgement, 570b-572d 43 Federalist:
number 31, 103c-104a

[1106a]
1048  THE  GREAT IDEAS (4. Methodology: rulesfor the conduct of the mind
in  the  processes  of  thinking,  learning, inquiring, knowing. Ad. The
diverse  methods  of  speculative  philosophy:  the  role  of intuition,
analysis,  dialectic,  genetic  or transcendental criticism.) 43 IvIill:
Liberty,  287b-288c  / Utilitarianism, 445a-447b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  pref, la-c; INTRO, par 2, 9d-10a; additions, 3 116a / Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  156c-158a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
690a-b  53  James: Psychology, 674a-675b esp 675b; 687a 54 Freud: Beyond
the Pleasure Principle, 661c662b / Netv Introductory Lectures, 874c-875b
esp  875a  4e,  The  logic of practical thinking: the methods of ethics,
politics, and jurisprudence 5 Aristophanes: Wasps [799-1002] 517c-519d 9
Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7 [701*539] 236b-d / Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^12-27] 339d-340a; ch 4
[1095*30-^8]
340c;
[1098^25-^8] 343d-344a; bk
350a esp
[1103^27-1104*9]
[1107*27-32] 352d-353a; bk
359a; bk v, ch 10
[1137^12-31
BK VI, CH I [1138^16-34] 387a-b passim; ch 8-9 390d-392b; ch esp
[1143*31-^6] 392d-393a; bk
395c-398a; ch 8
[1151*15-19] 402a /
Politics,  BK  I,  CH  I [1252*18-24] 445b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 19, A 5, ans 112d-113c; a 7, ans 114d-115d; q 81, A ^, ANS and
REP  2  430c-431d; q 83, a i, ans 436d-438a; q 86, a i, rep 2 461c-462a;
part  i-ii,  QQ  13-15  672d-684a;  q  44, a 2 808b-d 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  76,  A  I,  ans  141a-c;  q  77, a 2, rep 4
145d-147c; Q 95, A 2 227c-228c; a 4 229b-230c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  53a-54a;  58a-b;  60b-61a;  66c-68a;  78a-d;  part ii, 112d; 129a-b;
158c-d 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act ii, sc VII
[1-75] 416a-417a; sc ix
[19-72] 417d418b; ACT
III,  sc  11  [73-139]  420d-421b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,
57d-58b;  79c-80a;  81d-82a;  94d-95b  31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi,
48b-50b  / Objections and Replies, 126a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
27a-80b;  90a-127a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, SECT I
103d-104a;  sect 4 104d-105a; bk hi, ch XI, sect 15-18 303b-304b; bk iv,
ch  hi, SECT 18-20 317d-319c; ch iv, sect 7-10 325b-326b; ch xii, sect 8
360c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 1-5 451a-453b passim; div
9,  454d-455a;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d passim, esp DIV 132,
509c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 75d-81c passim, esp 76d-78b

[1106b]
Ae to 4/ 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 60a-c; 149d-150a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  253a-254d;  264b-d;  266b-c;  271a-c; 283d-284d / Practical
Reason, 291a-297c; 306d-307a; 307d-309b; 309d-310b; 319c-321b; 329a-331a
/  Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics 365a-379d / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  388a-d;  390b;  393a  /  Science  of  Right, 397a-b; 398a-399c;
413d-414a;  416b-417a  43  Federalist:  number 31, 103c-104a; number 85,
258d  43  Mill: Liberty, 284b-d / Utilitarianism, 445a447b; 456a-457b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 3 10a-12c; part hi, par 222-223
73b-d;  par  225  73d-74a;  par  229 75b; additions, 140 139b-c 50 Marx:
Capital, 6a-d; lOa-lld; 301d [fh 3] 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
430c433d  passim,  esp  431a-c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
680d681a;   683d-684a;   690a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  887a-888a  4/.
Theological  argument: the roles of faith, CH 7 reason, and authority 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk i, par i la-b; bk xii, par 32-36 107a-108c;
par 41-43 llOa-d; BK XIII, par 36 120c-d / City of God, bk viii, ch 4-12
266d-273a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  37  635b-c; bk ii, ch 31
651d-652b;  bk  hi, ch 28 668a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i
3a10c; q 2, A 2 lld-12c; q 12, a 12 60d-61c; q 19, A 5, REP 2 112d-113c;
Q  32,  a  I  175d-178a; A 4 180b-d; Q 46, A 2 253a-255a; q 68, a i, ANS
354a-355c;  q  102,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 4 523d-525a; q 113, a 7, rep i
580b-581a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 102, A 2 271b-272a;
part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a  5, rep 2 383b-384b; q 2, a 10 399b-400b; part hi
suppL,  Q  75,  A  3, REP 2 938a-939d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xxiv  142d-144b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i 66a-c; 83b; part 163a-b;
part  hi,  II,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c;  165a-c;  167a-b; 241c-242a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a  212a-213a;  292c-294b  29  Cervantes:  Don
Quixote,  part  i,  122b-c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 12c-13c;
208b-209c; 17b-c; 39d-40a; 41b-d; 95d-101b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
i, 43c / Meditations, 69a-72d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [552-587]
331a332a  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 163a-166a / Pensees, 242-253
217b-220a;  265-290  221b225a;  557-567 272b-273b; 862-866 342b343b; 903
348a  / Vacuum, 355b-356b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvii,
SECT  24  380c-d; ch xvih 380d-384b passim; CH XIX, SECT 14 387d-388a 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi 497b-

[1107a]
503c  passim,  csp  niv  102 497b-d, div 104 498b-c. i>iv 107 499c-500b;
skct  xii,  div  I p, 509c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 206a-b; 307a314a
csp  308c-309a,  310b-312a,  313d-314a;  348c-d;  438b-442a;  670b-c  41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 134a-151c esp 136d140d, 143c-145d; 520b-521c
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 240b-243c / Practical Reason, 348b-349b; 351b-352c
/  Judgement,  588a  613a,c esp 588a-592d, 593d-596c, 603d607c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 158c160b; PART III, 308c-309d; part iv,
360c-361a  5.  Logic as an object of satire and criticism: sophistry and
logic-chopping  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  7 Plato: Euthydemus
65a-84a,c  /  Republic,  bk  VII,  400d-401a  / Theaetetus, 525d-526b 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 21 166c167d; bk III, CH 2 177c-178d; ch
21  193d-195a  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 31 651d-652b;
ch  37  653d-654b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 165b; part iv, 268d;
270d-272c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 12d-13b; 18d;
22b-c;  23b-c;  bk ii, 73b-c; 79c; 101b-106a; bk hi, 150a; 182c; 187b-c;
197b-200d;  bk  iv, 273c-274b CWSS-KEFEKENCES For: Logic as a science in
relation to other sciences, see Dialectic 4; Metaphysics 3c; Philosotion
of  logical  fallacies,  see  Reasoning  3a-3c;  Truth  3d(2)-3d(3). 4a;
Science yb; Theology 5.

[1107b]
d  Chaptkr 49: LOGIC 1049 25 MoNTAifjNF.: Essays, 61b c; 72b-77a passim;
255b 256a; 259d 263b; 448d 449a; 517b 519a 26 Shaklspeauk: Taming of the
Shrew, act i, sc II
[1-44]
205 b-c / Two Gentlemen of Verona, act i, sc i
[70-158] 230a-d
/  Julius  Caesar,  act  i, sc i [1-^6) 568b, 27 Shakespeare: All's Well
That Ends Well, act I, sc III (27-59] 145d-146a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  57d-58b;  60a-61c;  66c-67c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 63
113d-114a 31 Descartes: Rules, x, 16d-17a / DiscoursCy PART II, 46c-d 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  393  240a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x,
SECT  6-13  293a-294d;  bk iv, ch vii, sect ii, 341a-d; ch xvii, sect 4,
373a-c;  sect  6,  376d-377a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 15b-23a esp
19b-20a;  PART  II,  56a-62a  esp  58a-b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,
227a-228a;  234b236b;  318b-321a;  329b-336a;  421b-422b  42  Kant: Pure
Reason,  36d-37d;  lOQb-c;  120c121c; 133d; 157d; 221c-222b / Judgement,
607d-608c  47  Goethe: Faust, part i [1908-1945] 45b-46a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238a-c;  242c-243b;  bk ix, 361d-365c; epilogue i,
672a-b; epilogue ii, 683d-684a 53 James: Psychology, 238b [fn 2]

[1108a]
1050  THE  GREAT IDEAS I. Aquinas. De Fallaciis HoBBEs. Concerning Body,
part  i,  ch  6  Spinoza.  Ofthe Improvement of the Understanding Locke.
Conduct  ofthe  Understanding  Kant.  Introduction to Logic, i-ii Hegel.
Science  of  Logic J. S. Mill. A System of Logic . An Examination of Sir
William  Hamilton's  Philosophy,  ch 20-23 II. Sextus Empiricus. Against
the   Logicians   Porphyry.  Introduction  to  Aristotle's  Predicaments
BoETHius. In Isagogem Porphyri Commenta Abailard. Dialectica Maimonides.
Treatise  on  Logic John of Salisbury. Metalogicon Gilbert de la Porree.
Liber  de Sex Principiis SuAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, liv John of
Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, prologus;
part  ii,  q  1-2  Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part iv
Malebranche.  De  la recherche de la verite, bk vi Leibnitz. 'New Essays
Concerning  Hitman Understanding, BK IV, ch 2 EuLER. Letters to a German
Princess  Coleridge.  Treatise on Method Schopenhauer. The World as Will
and  Idea,  vol  II, SUP, CH 9 Whately. Elements of Logic , W. Hamilton.
Lectures  on Metaphysics and Logic^ VOL II (1-4) De Morgan. Formal Logic
Boole.  Mathematical Analysis of Logic . An Investigation of the Laws of
Thought SiGWART. Logic

[1108b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo\s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas»y i die "A LOTZE. Logic, BK I, INTRO, (1O-I3) Jevons. Pure Logic .
The  Principles  of  Science  .  Studies in Deductive Logic Bradley. The
Principles of Logic BOSANQUET. Logic C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol
ii,  par  1-2 1 8; VOL III, par 154-251, 359-403; VOL iv, par 80152: VOL
VI,  par 102-163, ^^5~237 Venn, Symbolic Logic . Principles of Empirical
or Inductive Logic Brunetiere. An Apologyfor Rhetoric Frazer. The Golden
Bough,  part  i,  ch 3 Lewis Carroll. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland .
Through  the  Lool{ing-Glass and What Alice Found There . Symbolic Logic
CouTURAT.  The  Algebra of Logic PoiNCARE. Science and Method, bk ii, ch
3-5  Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematical (Introductions to
first  and second editions) B. Russell. Prifjciples of Mathematics, ch 2
.  Our  Knowledge  ofthe External World, u . Mysticism and Logic, ch i .
Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  ch  18 W. E. Johnson. Logic
Wittgenstein.  Tractatus Logico -Philosophicus Maritain. An Introduction
to  Logic  Bridgman.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics  Gilson. The Unity
ofPhilosophical  Experience,  ch  i  Santayana. The Realm of Truth, ch 3
Dewey. Essays in Experimental Logic . Reconstruction in Philosophy, ch 6
.  The  Questfor  Certainty,  ch 9 . Logic, the Theory ofInquiry, part i
Weiss. Reality, bk i, ch 7 Blanshard. The Nature of Thought M. R. Cohen.
A Preface to Logic, esp i, ix Dewey and Bentley. Knowing and the Known J

[1109a]
Chapter  'yo: LOVE INTRODUCTION HERE, as in the chapters on God and Man,
almost  all  the great books are represented except those in mathematics
and  the  physical  sciences.  Even  those  exceptions  do not limit the
^'sphere  of love. As the theologian understands it, love is not limited
to  things  divine and human, nor to those creatures less than man which
have  conscious  desires.  Natural love, Aquinas writes, is not only "in
all  the  soul's  powers,  but  also  in  all the parts of the body, and
universally  in  all  things  :  because, as Dionysius says, 'Beauty and
goodness  are  beloved  by  all  things.'  "  Lx)ve is everywhere in the
universe—  in  all  things  which  have  their being from the bounty and
generosity  of  God's  creative love and which in return obey the law of
love  in seeking God or in whatever they do to magnify God's glory. Love
sometimes  even  takes  the  place  of  other  gods in the government of
nature.  Though he thinks the motions of the world are without direction
from  the gods, Lucretius opens his poem On the Nature of Things with an
invocation  to  Venus, "the hfe-giver"—without whom nothing "comes forth
into  the  bright  coasts  of Hfe, nor waxes glad nor lovely." Nor is it
only  the  poet  who speaks metaphorically of love as the creative force
which  engenders things and renews them, or as the power which draws all
things  together into a unity of peace, preserving nature itself against
the  disruptive forces of war and hate. The imagery of love appears even
in  the  language of science. The description of magnetic attraction and
repulsion  borrows  some of its fundamental terms from the vocabulary of
the  passions; Gilbert, for example, refers to "the love of the iron for
the  loadstone."  On  the  other  hand, the impulsions of love are often
compared  with  the pull of magnetism. But such metaphors or comparisons
are seldom intended to conceal the ambiguity of the word 1051

[1109b]
"love"  when it is used as a term of universal application. "Romeo wants
Juliet as the filings want the magnet," writes William James, "and if no
obstacles  intervene  he moves toward her by as straight a line as they.
But  Romeo  and  Juliet,  if a wall be built between them, do not remain
idiotically  pressing their faces against its opposite sides"— like iron
filings  separated  from  the magnet by a card. The love between man and
woman makes all the great poems contemporaneous with each other and with
ourselves.  There is a sense in which each great love affair is unique—a
world in itself, incomparable, unconditioned by space and time. That, at
least,  is  the  way  it  feels  to the romantic lovers, but even to the
dispassionate  observer  there seems to be a world of difference between
the relationship of Paris and Helen in the ///Wand that of Prince Andrew
and  Natasha  in  War  and Peace, or Troilus and Cressida, Tom Jones and
Sophia,  Don  Quixote  and  Dulcinea,  Jason  and Medea,Aeneas and Dido,
Othello  and  Desdemona,  Dante  and  Beatrice,  Hippolytus and Phaedra,
Faustand  Margaret,  Henry  V and Catherine, Paola and Francesca, Samson
and  Dehlah,  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Admetus and Alcestis, Orlando and
Rosalind,  Haemon and Antigone, Odysseus and Penelope, and Adam and Eve.
The  analyst  can make distinctions here. He can classify these loves as
the  conjugal  and  the illicit, the normal and the perverse, the sexual
and  the  idyllic,  the  infantile  and  the adult, the romantic and the
Christian.  He  can, in addition, group all these loves together despite
their apparent variety and set them apart from still other categories of
love  :  the  friendships between human beings without regard to gender;
the  familial  ties—  parental, filial, fraternal; the love of a man for
himself, for his fellow men, for his

[1110a]
1052  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  country, for God. All these other loves are, no
less  than the love between man and woman, the materials of great poetry
even  as  they  are  omnipresent  in  every  human  life. The friendship
ofAchilles  and  Patroclus  dominates the action of the Iliad even more,
perhaps, than the passion of Paris for Helen. The love of Hamlet for his
father  and,  in another mood, for his mother overshadows his evanescent
tenderness  for Ophelia. Prince Hal and Falstaff, Don Quixote and Sancho
Panza,  Pantagruel  and  Panurge  seem  to  be  bound  more  closely  by
companionship than any of them is ever tied by Cupid's knot. The love of
Cordelia  for  Lear  surpasses,  though it does not defeat, the lusts of
Goneril and Regan. The vision of Rome effaces the image of Dido from the
heart of Aeneas. Brutus lays down his life for Rome as readily as Antony
gives  up  his  life  for  Cleopatra.  Richard III, aware that he "wants
love's majesty," implies that he cannot love anyone because he is unable
to  love  himself.  Why  sheuld *'I love myself," he asks, "for any good
that  I  myself have done unto myself"? This element of self-love which,
in  varying  degrees, prompts the actions ofAchilles, Odysseus, Oedipus,
Macbeth,  Faust,  and  Captain  Ahab,  finds its prototype in the almost
infinite amour-propre of Lucifer in Paradise Lost. This self-love, which
in  its extreme form the psychoanalyst calls "narcissism," competes with
every other love in human hfe. Some times it qualifies these other loves
when,  for  example,  it enters into Pierre Bezukhov's meditations about
freeing his serfs and turns his sentiment of brotherly love into a piece
of  sentimentality  which  is  never confirmed by action. Yet self-love,
like sexual love, can be overcome by the love which is charity toward or
compassion  for  others. True self-love, according to Locke, necessarily
leads  to  love  of  neighbor;  and, in Dante's view of the hierarchy of
love,  men  ascend  from  loving their neighbors as themselves to loving
God. Through the love he bears Virgil and Beatrice for the goodness they
represent, Dante mounts to the highest heaven where he is given the Good
itself  to love. The panorama of human love is not confined to the great
works  of poetry or fiction. The same drama, with the same types of plot
and

[1110b]
;  character,  the  same  fines  of  action, the same i compHcations and
catastrophes, appears in the ; great works of history and biography. The
stories  of  love  told by Herodotus, Thucydides, Plutarch, Tacitus, and
Gibbon  run  the  same gamut of the passions, the affections, the tender
feeling  and  the  sacrificial devotion, in the attachments of the great
figures  of history. Here the loves of a few men move the fives of many.
History  itself  seems to turn in one direction rather than another with
the  turning of i an emperor's heart. Historic institutions seem to draw
their  strength  from  the  ardor  of  a  single patriot's zeal; and the
invincible  sacrifices of the martyrs, whether to the cause of church or
state, seem to perpetuate with love what neither might of arms nor skill
of  mind  could  long  sustain.  History's blackest as well as brightest
pages  tell of the lengths to which men have gone for their love's sake,
and  as  often as not the story of the inner turbulence lies half untold
between  the  lines which relate the consequences in acts of violence or
heroism.  Still  other of the great books deal with love's exhibition of
its  power.  A  few  of  the  early  dialogues of Plato discuss love and
friendship,  but  more  of  them  dramatically  set  forth  the love his
disciples  bear  Socrates,  and  Socrates' love of wisdom and the truth.
Montaigne  can  be skeptical and detached in all matters. He can suspend
judgment  about  everything  and moderate every feeUng by the balance of
its opposite, except in the one case ofhis friendship with Etienne de la
Boetie  where  love  asserts  its  claims  above  dispute and doubt. The
princely examples with which Machiavelli documents his manual of worldly
success  are  lovers  of riches, fame, and power— that triad of seducers
which  afienates  the affections of men for truth, beauty, and goodness.
The  whole  of  Pascal's  meditations,  insofar as they are addressed to
himself,  seems  to express one thought, itself a feeUng. "The heart has
its  reasons,  which  the reason does not know. We feel it in a thousand
things.  I  say  that the heart naturally loves the Universal Being, and
also itself, according as it gives itself to them; and it hardens itself
against  one  or  the  other at its will. You have rejected the one, and
kept the other. Is it by reason that you love yourself i^"

[1111a]
(Chapter  In the Confessions of Augustine, a man who anally resolved the
conflict  of  his  loves  lets  his memory dwell on the torment of their
disorder, n order to repent each particular sin against the love of God.
"What  was  it  that  I  delighted  n,"  he writes, "but to love, and be
beloved?  DUt  I  kept  not  the  measure  of  love,  of  mind  to mind,
friendship's  bright boundary; but out of the muddy concupiscence of the
flesh,  and the bubblings of youth, mists fumed up which be- :louded and
overcast  my  heart,  that  I  could Qot discern the clear brightness of
love,  from the fog of lustfulness." Augustine shows us the myriad forms
of  concupiscence  and  avarice  in  the lusting of the flesh and of the
eyes,  and  in  the self-love which is pride of person. In no other book
except  perhaps the Bible are so many loves arrayed against one another.
Here, in the life of one man, as tempestuous in passion as he was strong
of  will,  their  war and peace produce his bondage and his freedom, his
anguish and his serenity. In the Bible, the history of mankind itself is
told  in terms of love, or rather the multipliclity of loves. Every love
is here—of God and Mammon, perverse and pure, the idolatry and vanity of
love misplaced, every unnatural lust, every ecstasy of the spirit, every
tie  of  friendship  and  fraternity,  and  all  the  hates  which  love
engenders. These books of poetry and history, of meditation, confession,
and  revelation,  teach  us  the  facts of love even when they do not go
beyond  that to definition and doctrine. Before we turn to the theory of
love  as  it is expounded by the philosophers and theologians, or to the
psychological  analysis  of love, we may find it useful to summarize the
facts  of  which  any  theory must take account. And on the level of the
facts   we  also  meet  the  inescapable  problems  which  underlie  the
theoretical  issues  formed  by conflicting analyses. First and foremost
seems to be the fact of the plurahty of loves. There are many difl"erent
kinds   of   love—different   in   object,  different  in  tendency  and
expression—and  as  they  occur  in  the  individual Ufe, they raise the
problem  of unity and order. Does one love swallow up or subordinate all
the others.? Can more than one love rule the heart? Is there a hierarchy
of

[1111b]
50:  LOVE  1053 loves which can harmonize all their diversity? These are
the questions with which the most comprehensive theories of love find it
necessary  Plato's  ladder  of love in the Symposium has different loves
for  its rungs. Diotima, whom Socrates describes as his "instructress in
the  art  of love," tells him that if a youth begins by loving a visibly
beautiful form, "he will soon of himself perceive that the beauty of one
form  is  akin  to  the beauty of another," and, therefore, "how foolish
would  he  be  not to recognize that the beauty in every form is one and
the  same."  He  will then "abate his violent love of the one," and will
pass  from  being  "a  lover of beautiful forms" to the realization that
"the beauty of the mind is more honorable than the beauty of the outward
form."  Thence  he  will  be  led  to  love  "the  beauty  of  laws  and
institutions . . . and after laws and institutions, he will go on to the
sciences,  that  he may see their beauty." As Diotima summarizes it, the
true order of love "begins with the beauties of earth and mounts upwards
, . . from fair forms to fair practices, and from fair practices to fair
notions,  until  from fair notions [we] arrive at the notion of absolute
beauty." Aristotle classifies different kinds of love in his analysis of
the  types  of  friendship.  Since  the  lovable  consists of "the good,
pleasant,  or  useful," he writes, "there are three kinds of friendship,
equal in number to the things that are lovable; for with respect to each
there  is  a  mutual  and recognized love, and those who love each other
wish well to each other in that respect in which they love one another."
Later  in  the Ethics he also considers the relation of self-love to all
love  of  others,  and  asks "whether a man should love himself most, or
someone Aquinas distinguishes between love in the sphere of the passions
and  love  as an act of will. The former he assigns to what he calls the
"concupiscible  faculty"  of  the sensitive appetite; the latter, to the
"rational  or  intellectual appetite." The other basic distinction which
Aquinas  makes  is  that  between  love  as  a natural tendency and as a
supernatural  habit.  Natural  love is that "whereby things seek what is
suitable  to  them  according  to  their  nature." When love exceeds the
inclinations of nature, it

[1112a]
1054  THE  GREAT IDEAS does so by **some habitual form superadded to the
natural power," and this habit of love is the virtue of charity. Freud's
theory places the origin of love in the sexual instincts, and so for him
the  many varieties of love are simply the forms which love takes as the
libido  fixes  upon  various  objects.  "The  nucleus of what we mean by
love,"  he  writes,  "naturally  consists ... in sexual love with sexual
union  as its aim. We do not separate from this," he goes on to say, "on
the  one  hand,  self-love,  and  on  the  other,  love  for parents and
children, friendship and love for humanity in general, and also devotion
to concrete objects and to abstract ideas . . . All these tendencies are
an  expression  of  the  same  instinctive activities." They differ from
sexual  love  only  because  "they  are  diverted  from  its  aim or are
prevented  from reaching it, though they always preserve enough of their
original  nature  to  keep  their  identity  recognizable."  Sexual love
undergoes   these  transformations  according  as  it  is  repressed  or
sublimated,  infantile or adult in its pattern, degraded to the level of
brutal  sexuality or humanized by inhibitions and mixed with tenderness.
All  of  these  classifications and distinctions belong to the theory of
human love. But the fact of love's fliversity extends the theory of love
to  other  creatures  and  to  God.  In  the  tradition  of biology from
Aristotle  to  Darwin, the mating of animals and the care of their young
is  thought  to  exhibit  an  emotion  of  love  which is either sharply
contrasted  with  or  regarded  as  the  root of human love. Darwin, for
example,  maintains,  "it  is  certain  that  associated  animals have a
feeling  of  love  for each other, which is not felt by non-social adult
animals."  At  the opposite pole, the theologians identify God with love
and  see  in  God's love for Himself and for His creatures the principle
not  only  of  creation,  and  of providence and salvation, but also the
measure  of all other loves by which created things, and men especially,
turn  toward  or  away from God. "Beloved, let us love one another," St.
John  writes,  "for  love is of God; and everyone that loveth is born of
God,  and  knoweth  God. He that loveth not knoweth not God ; for God is
love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God

[1112b]
.  sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through
him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us . . And
we  have  known  and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love;
and  he  that  dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him." In the
moral  universe of the Divine Comedy^ heaven is the realm of love, "pure
light,"  Beatrice  says,  "light  intellectual full of love love of true
good  full of joy, joy which transcends every sweetness." There courtesy
prevails among the blessed, and charity alone of the theological virtues
remains.  The  beatitude  of  those who see God dispenses with faith and
hope,  but  the  vision of God is inseparable from the fruition of love.
"The  Good  which  is  the  object  of  the will," Dante writes, "is all
collected  in  it; and outside of it, that is defective which is perfect
there."  Desire  and  will  are  "revolved,  like a wheel which is moved
evenly,  by  the  Love which moves the sun and the other stars." Hell is
made  by the absence of God's love— the punishment of those who on earth
loved  other  things more than God. There is a second fact about love to
which  poetry and history bear testimony. Love frequently turns into its
opposite,  hate.  Sometimes  there  is love and hate of the same object;
sometimes  love  inspires  hate, as it occasions jealousy, of the things
which threaten it. Anger and fear, too, follow in the wake of love. Love
seems  to  be the primal passion, generating all the others according to
the  oppositions  of  pleasure  and  pain  and by relations of cause and
effect. Yet not all the analysts of love as a passion seem to agree upon
this  point,  or  at  least they do not give the fact the same weight in
their  theories. Hobbes, for example, gives primacy to fear, and Spinoza
to  desire,  joy,  and  sorrow.  Spinoza  defines  love as "joy with the
accompanying idea of an external cause," and he defines hatred similarly
in terms of sorrow. Nevertheless, Spinoza, like Aquinas and Freud, deals
more extensively with love and hate than with any of the other passions.
He,  like  them,  observes how their fundamental opposition runs through
the  whole  emotional life of man. But he does not, like Aquinas, regard
love as the root of all the other passions. Treating the combination

[1113a]
^f  love and hate toward the same object as a ttiere "vacillation of the
mind,"  he docs not, like Freud, develop an elaborate theory of motional
ambivalence which tries to explain /hy the deepest affections of men are
usually  mixtures of love and hate. A THIRD FACT which appears in almost
every  one  of the great love stories points to another aspect of love's
contrariness.  There  seems  to  be  no happiness more perfect than that
which  love  confirms.  But there is also no misery more pro- "found, no
depth  of  despair greater, than that into which lovers are plunged when
they  are bereft, disappointed, unrequited. Can the pleasures of love be
had  without  its  pains?  Is 'it better to have loved and suffered than
never  to  have  loved at all ? Is it wiser not to love than to love not
wisely  but  too  well.?  Is  the  world  well  lost for love .? ' These
questions  paraphrase  the soliloquies of 'lovers in the great tragedies
and  comedies  of  '  love.  For  every  praise  of  love  there  is, in
Shakespearian  speech  or  sonnet,  an  answering  com-  '  plaint. "All
creatures  in the world through love ' exist, and lacking love, lack all
that  may  persist."  But  "thou bhnd fool, love, what does thou to mine
eyes,  that they behold and see not what they see ?" "The greater castle
of  the ' world is lost," says Antony to Cleopatra; "we have kissed away
kingdoms  and  provinces." But in Juliet's words to Romeo, "My bounty is
as  boundless  as the sea, my love as deep; the more I give to thee, the
more  I  have, for both ' are infinite." Love is all opposites— the only
reality, the great illusion; the giver of life and its consumer; I ' the
benign   goddess  whose  benefactions  men  beseech,  and—  to  such  as
Hippolytus  or  Dido the dread Cyprian who wreaks havoc and devastation.
She  is  a  divinity  to be feared when not propitiated, her potions are
poison,  her darts I are shafts of destruction. Love is itself an object
of love and hate. Men fall in love with love and fight against it. Omnia
vincit  amor,  Virgil  writes— "love conquers all." In the dispassionate
language of the moralist, the question is simply whether love is good or
bad, a component of happiness or an obstacle ! thereto. How the question
is answered depends upon the kind of love in question. The love

[1113b]
Chapter  50:  LOVE  1055  which  consists in the best type of friendship
seems indispensable to the happy life and, more than that, to the fabric
of  any  society,  domestic Such love, Aristotle writes, "is a virtue or
implies virtue, and is besides most necessary with a view to living. For
without  friends  no  one  would  choose to live though he had all other
goods. . . . Friendship seems too to hold states together, and lawgivers
care  more  for  it  than for justice." When it is founded on virtue, it
goes further than justice, for it binds men together through benevolence
and  generosity.  "When  men are friends," Aristotle says, "they have no
need  of  justice."  But  Aristotle does not forget that there are other
types  of  friendship,  based on utility or pleasure-seeking rather than
upon  the  mutual  admiration  of  virtuous men. Here, as in the case of
other passions, the love may be good or bad. It is virtuous only when it
is  moderated  by reason and restrained from violating the true order of
goods,  in  conformity to which man's various loves should themselves be
ordered.  Wlien  the  love  in  question  is  the  passion of the sexual
instinct,   some  moralists  think  that  temperance  is  an  inadequate
restraint.  Neither  reason nor law is adequate to the task of subduing—
or,  as  Freud  would  say, of domesticating— the beast. To the question
Socrates  asks,  whether  life  is  harder  towards the end, the old man
Cephalus  replies  in the words of Sophocles, when he was asked how love
suits  with  age,  "I feel as if I had escaped from a mad and furious In
the  most passionate diatribe against love's passion, Lucretius condemns
the sensual pleasures which are so embittered with pain. Venus should be
entirely  shunned,  for  once her darts have wounded men,"the sore gains
strength  and  festers by feeding, and day by day the madness grows, and
the  misery  becomes  heavier.  . . . This is the one thing, whereof the
more  and  more  we  have,  the more does our heart burn with the cursed
desire. . . . When the gathering desire is sated, the old frenzy is back
upon  them  .  .  .  nor can they discover what device may conquer their
disease;  in such deep doubt they waste beneath their secret wound . . .
These ills are found in love that is true and fully prosperous; but when
love is crossed and hopeless,

[1114a]
1056  THE  GREAT IDEAS there are ills which you might detect with closed
eyes,  ills  without  number;  so  that  it is better to be on the watch
beforehand,  even  as  I have taught you, and to beware that you are not
entrapped.  For  to avoid being drawn into the meshes ol love, is not so
hard a task as when caught amid the toils to issue out and break through
the strong bonds of Venus." In the doctrines of most moralists, however,
the  sexual  passion calls for no special treatment different from other
appetites   and   passions.   Because   it   is   more  complex  in  its
manifestations, perhaps, and more imperious in its urges, more effort on
the part of reason may be required to regulate it, to direct or restrain
it.  Yet  no  special principles of virtue or duty apply to sexual love.
Even the religious vow of chastity is matched by the vow of poverty. The
love  of money is as serious a deflection from loving God as the lust of
the  flesh.  What  is  common  to  all these matters is discussed in the
chapters  on  Duty,  Emotion,  Virtue,  and  Sin. But here one more fact
remains  to  be considered— the last fact about love which the poets and
the  historians  seem  to lay before the moralists and theologians. When
greed violates the precepts of justice, or gluttony those of temperance,
the  vice  or  sin  appears  to  have  no  redeeming features. These are
weaknesses  of  character  incompatible with heroic stature. But many of
the  great  heroes  of  literature  are otherwise noble men or women who
have,  for love's sake, deserted their duty or transgressed the rules oi
God  and  man,  acknowledging  their claims and yet choosing to risk the
condemnation of society even to the point of banishment, or to put their
immortal  souls  in  peril.  The fact seems to be that only love retains
some  honor when it defies morahty not that moralists excuse the illicit
act,  but  that in the opinion of mankind, as evidenced by its poetry at
least,  love  has  some  privileged status. Its waywardness and even its
madness  are  extenuated.  The poets suggest the reason for this. Unlike
the other passions which man shares with the animals, characteristically
human  love  is  a  thing  of  the  spirit as well as the body. A man is
piggish  when  he is a glutton, a jackal when he is craven, but when his
emotional excess in

[1114b]
;  the sphere of love lifts him to acts of devotion and sacrifice, he is
incomparably  human.  That  is why the great lovers, as the poets depict
them,  seem admirable in spite of their transgressions. They ahnost seem
to  be justified--' poetically, at least, if not morally—in acting as if
love  exempted  them from ordinary laws; as if their love could be a law
unto  itself. "Who shall give a lover any law?" Arcite asks in Chaucer's
Knight's  Tale.  "Love  is  a  greater law," he says, "than man has ever
given  to  earthly  man."  To  a  psychologist  like Freud, the conflict
between  the erotic impulses and morality is the central conflict in the
psychic  life  of the individual and between the individual and society.
There   seems   to  be  no  happy  resolution  unless  each  is  somehow
accommodated  to the other. At one extreme of repression, "the claims of
our  civilization,"  according  to  Freud,  "make  life too hard for the
greater part of humanity, and so further the aversion to reality and the
origin  of  neuroses";  the  individual suffers neurotic disorders which
result  from  the  failure  of  the  repressed  energies to find outlets
acceptable  to the moral censor. At the other extreme of expression, the
erotic  instinct  "would  break  all  bounds and the laboriously erected
structure  of  civilization would be swept away." Integration would seem
to  be  achieved in the individual personality and society would seem to
prosper  only  when  sexuality  is  transfonned into those types of love
which  reinforce  laws and duties with emotional loyalty to moral ideals
and invest ideal objects with their energies, creating the highest goods
of  civilization.  To  the  theologian,  the  conflict  between love and
morality remains insoluble—not in principle, but in practice— until love
itself  supplants  all other rules of conduct. The "good man," according
to Augustine, is not he "who knows what is good, but who loves it. Is it
not  then  obvious,"  he  goes on to say, "that we love in ourselves the
very  love  wherewith we love whatever we love? For there is also a love
wherewith  we  love  that  which  we ought not to love; and this love is
hated  by  him who loves that wherewith he loves what ought to be loved.
For  it  is  quite  possible  for both to exist in one man. And this co-
existence is good for a man, to the end that this love which conduces to
our

[1115a]
living well may grow, and the other, which eads us to evil may decrease,
until  our whole ife be perfectly healed and transmuted into good." Only
a  better  love, a love that is wholly virtuous and right, has the power
requisite  to  overcome  love's errors. With this perfect love goes only
one rule, Augustine says: Dilige, et quod visfac— "love, and do what you
will."  This perfect love, which alone deserves to be a law unto itself,
is more than fallen human nature can come by without God's grace. It is,
according  to  Christian  theology,  the  supernatural virtue of charity
whereby   men   participate   in   God's   love   of   Himself  and  His
creatures—loving God with their whole heart and soul and mind, and their
neighbors  as themselves. On these two precepts of charity, according to
the  teaching  of  Christ, "depends the whole law and the prophets." The
questions  which  Aquinas  considers in his treatise on charity indicate
that  the  theological  resolution  of  the  conflict  between  love and
morality  is,  in  essence, the resolution of a conflict between diverse
loves,  a  resolution  laccomplished  by  the perfection of love itself.
Concerning  the  objects  and  order  of  charity, he asks, for example,
"whether  we  should  love  charity out of charity," "whether irrational
creatures  also  ought to be loved out of charity," "whether a man ought
to  love his body out of charity," "whether we ought to love sinners out
of charity," "whether charity requires that we should love our enemies,"
"whether  God  ought to be loved more than our neighbors," "whether, out
of  charity,  man is bound to love God more than himself," "whether, out
of  charity, man ought to love himself more than his neighbor," "whether
a  man  ought  to love his neighbor more than his own body," "whether we
ought to love one neighbor more than another," "whether we ought to love
those who are better more than those who are more closely united to us,"
"whether  a man sought, out of charity, to love his children more i than
his  father," "whether a man ought to love his wife more than his father
and  mother,"  "whether a man ought to love his benefactor more than one
he has benefited." The diversity of love seems to be both the basic fact
and the basic problem for the psy-

[1115b]
Chapter  50:  LOVE  1057  chologist,  the  moralist, the theologian. The
ancient  languages have three distinct words for the main types of love:
eros,  philia, agape in Greek; amor, amicitia (or dilectio), znd caritas
in Latin. Because English has no such distinct words, it seems necessary
to use such phrases as "sexual love," "love of friendship," and "love of
charity"  in order to indicate plainly that love is common to all three,
and  to  distinguish  the  three  meanings.  Yet  we  must  observe what
Augustine  points  out, namely, that the Scriptures "make no distinction
between  amor,  diketio,  and caritas,'' and that in the Bible ''amor is
used  in  a  good  connection."  The  problem of the kinds of love seems
further  to  be complicated by the need to differentiate and relate love
and   desire.   Some   writers   use   the  words  "love"  and  "desire"
interchangeably,  as does Lucretius who, in speaking of the pleasures of
Venus, says that "Cupid
[i.e., desire]
is the Latin name of love." Some, like Spinoza, use the word "desire" as
the more general word and "love" to name a special mode of desire. Still
others  use  "love"  as the more general word and "desire" to signify an
aspect  of  love. "Love," Aquinas writes, "is naturally the first act of
the  will  and  appetite;  for  which  reason  all  the other appetitive
movements  presuppose love, as their root and origin. For nobody desires
anything  nor rejoices in anything, except as a good that is loved." One
thing seems to be clear, namely, that both love and desire belong to the
appetitive  faculty—  to  the sphere of the emotions and the will rather
than  to  the  sphere of perception and knowledge. When a distinction is
made  between  desire and love as two states of appetite, it seems to be
based  on  their  difference in tendency. As indicated in the chapter of
Desire, the tendency of desire is acquisitive. The object of desire is a
good  to  be  possessed,  and  the drive of desire continues until, with
possession,  it  is  satisfied. Love equated with desire does not differ
from  any  other  hunger.  But  there seems to be another tendency which
impels one not to possess the object loved, but to benefit it. The lover
wishes  the  well-being  of  the beloved, and reflexively wishes himself
well  through  being  united  with  the object of his love. Where desire
devoid of love is selfish in the sense of one's seeking goods or

[1116a]
1058  THE  GREAT  IDEAS pleasures for oneself without any regard for the
good of the other, be it thing or person, love seeks to give rather than
to get, or to get only as the result of giving. Whereas nothing short of
physical  possession  satisfies  desire,  love  can  be satisfied in the
contemplation  of  its object's beauty or goodness. It has more affinity
with  knowledge than with action, though it goes beyond knowledge in its
wish  to  act  for the good of the beloved, as well as in its wish to be
loved  in  return.  Those  who distinguish love and desire in such terms
usually  repeat  the  distinction  in differentiating kinds of love. The
difference  between  sexual  love and the love which is pure friendship,
for  example,  is said to rest on the predominance of selfish desires in
the  one and the predominance of altruistic motives in the other. Sexual
love  is  sometimes  called the "love of desire" to signify that it is a
love  born  of  desire; whereas in friendship love is thought to precede
desire  and  to determine its wishes. In contrast to the love of desire,
the love of friendship makes few demands. "In true friendship, wherein I
am  perfect," Montaigne declares, "I more give myself to my friend, than
I  endeavor  to attract him to me. I am not only better pleased in doing
him  service  than if he conferred a benefit upon me, but, moreover, had
rather he should do himself good than me, and he most obliges me when he
does  so;  and if absence be either more pleasant or convenient for him,
'tis  also  more  acceptable  to  me than his presence." These two loves
appear  in  most  of  the great analyses of love, though under different
names:  concupiscent  love  and  fraternal  love; the friendship base on
pleasure or utility and the friendship based on virtue; animal and human
love  ;  sexuaUty and tenderness. Sometimes they I. The nature of love I
a. Conceptions of love and hate: as passions and as acts of will

[1116b]
are assigned to different faculties: the love of desire to the sensitive
appetite  or  the sphere of instinct and emotion; the love of friendship
to  the  will or faculty of intellectual desire, capable of what Spinoza
calls  the  amor  intellectualis  Dei—  'Wit  intellectual love of God."
Sometimes  the  two  kinds of love are thought able to exist in complete
separation from one another as well as in varying degrees of mixture, as
in  romantic  and  conjugal  love;  and  sometimes  the erotic or sexual
component is thought to be present to some degree in all love. Though he
asserts this, Freud does not hold the converse, that sexuality is always
accompanied  by  the  tenderness  which  characterizes  human  love. The
opposite  positions here seem to be correlated with opposed views of the
relation  of  man  to  other  animals, or with opposed theories of human
nature, especially in regard to the relation of instinct and reason, the
senses and the intellect, the emotions and the will. As suggested above,
romantic  love  is  usually  conceived  as involving both possessive and
altruistic  motives,  the latter magnified by what its critics regard as
an  exaggerated  idealization  of the beloved. The theological virtue of
charity,  on  the other hand, is purely a love of friendship, its purity
made  perfect  by  its  supernatural foundation. One of the great issues
here is whether the romantic is compatible with the Christian conception
of  love,  whether the adoration accorded a beloved human being does not
amount  to deification—as much a violation of the precepts of charity as
the  pride  of  unbounded  self-love.  Which  view  is taken affects the
conception  of  conjugal  love  and the relation of love in courtship to
love  in  marriage.  These matters and, in general, the forms of love in
the  domestic  community are discussed in the chapter on Family. OUTLINE
OF  TOPICS  PAGB 1060 lb. Love and hate in relation to each other and in
relation to pleasure and pain I 061 ic. The distinction between love and
desire:  the  generous and acquisitive aims id. The objects of love: the
good, the true, the beautiful; God, man, things 1062

[1117a]
le.  The  intensity  and  power  of  love: its increase or decrease; Its
constructive  or  if.  The  power  of hate 1064 2. The kinds of love 2a.
Lustful,   sexual,  or  selfish  love:  concupiscent  love  (3)  Object-
fixations,  identifications,  and  transferences:  sublimation  (4)  The
perversion,  degradation, or pathology of love: infantile and adult love
2b.  Friendly,  tender, or altruistic love: fraternal love (2) Self-love
in  relation  to the love of others 2c. Romantic, chivalric, and courtly
love:  the  idealization and supremacy of the beloved 1 070 2d. Conjugal
love:  its  sexual,  fraternal,  and  romantic  components  1071  3. The
morality  of love 1072 3^. Friendship and love in relation to virtue and
happiness  ^b.  The  demands  of  love  and  the  restraints of virtue :
moderation in love ; the order of ^c. The conflict of love and duty: the
difference  between the loyalties of love and the obligations of justice
3^.  The  heroism  of  friendship and the sacrifices of love 1074 4. The
social  or  political  force  of  love, sympathy, or friendship 4^. Love
between  equals  and  unequals,  like  and  unlike:  the  fraternity  of
citizenship  1075  4^.  The  dependence  of  the state on friendship and
patriotism:  comparison of love ^c. The brotherhood of man and the world
community 5. Divine love 1077 5^7. God as the primary object of love (i)
Man's  love  of God in this life: respect for the moral law 5^. Charity,
or  supernatural  love,  compared  with natural love (i) The precepts of
charity: the law of love 5^. God's love of Himself and of creatures

[1117b]
Chapter 50: LOVE 1059 PAGB

[1118a]
1060  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tain  cases;  e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
tently  rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. 1. The
nature of love la. Conceptions of love and hate: as passions and as acts
of  will  Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 6:17-18— (D) OT, Book^of Wisdom,
6:18-19  New  Testament:  I John, 4:7-8,16,18 7 Plato: Lysis 14a-25a,c /
Cratylus,  103 b-d / Phaedrus, 115a-129d / Symposium 149a-173a,c / Laws,
bk VIII, 736b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 5
[1105^20-23]
351b; BK IV, CH 6 [1126^20-25] 373d; bk viii, CH I 406b,d-407a esp
[1155*32-^15]
406d407a;   ch  3  [1156^31-^5]  408a;  ch  5  [1157^2833]  409c;  ch  6
[1158*10-17] 409d-410a; bk ix, CH 5
[1166^33-1167*3] 420b; ch 7
[1168*1921] 421d; CH
10
[1171*11-12] 424d /
Politics, bk VII, CH 7
[1327^40-1328*17]
532a-b  /  Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 4 626c-628b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
hi,  ch 1-3 10a11a; TR VI, CH 5 23b-24a / Third Ennead, tr V 100c-106b /
Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch 10, 309a-b; tr vii, ch 33 337d-338b; tr ix, ch 9,
359b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk xiv, ch 7 380c381c / Christian
Doctrine, bk hi, ch 10, 662a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 20,
A 1, ANs and REP I 120a-121b; q 27, a 3, ans

[1118b]
T  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliady bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. Forexample, in 53 James :P5;yr^o/o^jV, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page, theletters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand
side  of  the  page.  For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets, are given in cerBible References : The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g..
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in  the use of The Great Ideas ^ consult the Preface.
and REP 3 155c-156a; a 4, ans and rep 2 156b-d; q 37, a i, ans and rep 2
197c-199a; Q 60, AA 1-2 310b-311d; q 82, a 5, rep i 435c436c; part i-ii,
q 23, a 4 726a-727a; q 25, a 2 731b-732a; q 26 733d-737a; q 28, a i, ans
and rep 1-2 740b-741a; q 29 744d-749a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  62,  A  3,  ANS  and REP 3 61c-62b; part ii-ii, q 23, A 2, ANS
483d-484d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvh
[82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c; paradise, xxvi [1-81]
145d-146c  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, stanza 1-7 54b-55b;
stanza  250-253  87a-b  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61c;  63a  25
Montaigne:  Essays, 424d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 3 373d; part
hi,  prop  13,  schol  400d;  prop 38-49 408a-411b; the affects, def 6-7
417b-d; PART IV, APPENDIX, xix-xx 449a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xx,  SECT  4-5 176d-177a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 453a-456a;
502a-b;  523b-526b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 9b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
343d-345d  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 259a / Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386d

[1119a]
U  to  Ic  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  64a  46  Hegel:  Philosophv of Right,
additions,  ioi  133b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312b,d [fn 27] 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xi, 525c-526b; BK XII, 560a-561c 53 James:
Psychology,  4a-5a;  391b-392a  54 Freud: Instincts, 418c-d; 420a-421a /
General  Introduction,  581b / Group Psychology, 673b674a / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents,  783c lb. Love and hate in relation to each other
and  in relation to pleasure and pain 5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c esp
[465-662]  r.  216a-217c  7  Plato:  Lysis,  18d-19d;  21a-c / Phaedrus,
121c122a  /  Symposium,  160c  / Republic, bk hi, 333b-334b 8 Aristotle:
Topics,  bk  i, ch 15 [106^2-4] 150b 9 Aristotle: Parts ofAnimals, bk i,
ch  5 [644^ 3i-645''*i] 168d/ Ethics, bk vih, ch 2-6 407a410c passim; bk
ix, ch 5 [1167*3-6] 420b; ch 9
[1170^13-^19] 423d-424b; ch
ii 425a-d esp
[ii7i"34-^i3] 425b-c; bk x, ch 4
[11 75*"* 10-22]
429c  /  Politics, bk vii, ch 7 [1327^40-1328" 17] 532a-b / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch ii
[1370^1528]
614a;
[1371*17-24]
614c-d; bk ii, ch 4
[1380*^34-1382*19] 626d-628b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371140] 57d-59a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d-170a 13 \'irgil: Aeneid, bk
iv  [279-705]  174b-186b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk 11, par 16-17
^^c13a;  bk  hi,  par  i  13b-c / City of God, bk xix, ch 8 515c-516a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 23, A 4 726a-727a; q 25, a 2
731b- 732a; a 3, ans 732a-733a; q 26, a 2, ans and rep 3 734d735c; Q 27,
a 4 739c-740a; q 28, a i 740b741a; a 5 743c-744b; q 29, a 3, ans and rep
1,3  746b-747a; q 30, a 2 749d-750d; q 31, A 6, rep 3 756d-757c; q 32, a
3,  rep 3 760d761c; a 4, ans and rep 3 761c-762a; aa 5-6 762a-763c; a 8,
ans  764c-765b;  q 38, a 3 788b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-
ii,  q  28  527b-530a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v 7a-8b; purgatory,
xvii  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i,
stanza  I  la;  BK  II, stanza 111-112 36a; bk hi, stanza 174-175 77a-b;
stanza  218-219  83a; bk V, STANZA 60 128a 23 HoBBEs: La'iathan, part i,
61c-62c;  77b-c  27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida 103a141a,c esp act
hi,  sc  ii  [8-30]  120b-c,  act  iv, sc IV [1-50] 128b-c, ACT V, sc 11
134c-137a  /  Cymbeline,  act  hi,  sc v [70-150] 469d-470c / I Sonnets,
cxxix  606a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 13, schol 400d; prop 19-26
402c-404b; prop 33-49 406c-411b; part iv, appendix, xix-xx 449a

[1119b]
Chapter  50: LOVE 1061 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx, sect
4-5 176d-177a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 30a 32a; 127b-c; 349b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 344b [fn i]; 345d 346b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a 309a;
312b,d
[fn 27]
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk x, 282b-283c; bk xi, 324a b; bk
xii, 366a 368c 53 James: Psychology, 391b-392a; 717a-718a; 809b-810b"[fn
i]  54  Freud:  Instincts,  418c-421a,c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
659b-d / Group Psychology, 677c-678a; 679a-b / Ego and Id, 708d-711a esp
709c-  7 10c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 724a-725a esp 724b-c;
733d-734b;  752c-7'54a,c / War and Death, 766a- b / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  789c-  790c  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 857c-859b esp:
857c, 858c 859a Ic. The distinction between love and desire the generous
and  acquisitive aims 5 Euripides: Iphigenia at Aulis [543-589] 429d430a
7  Plato: Lysis, 20c-d; 23d-24d / Cratylus, 103b-d / Phaedrus, 115a-129d
esp  120b-c.  123b-124a / Symposium, 153b-155c; 164c165b / Laws, bk vih,
735c-736c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 22
[68*25-^7]
89d-90a / Topics, bk vi, ch 7
[146*9-12] 199d; bk vii, ch
i [152^6-9] 207c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch ii
[1118^8-18]
365a-b; bk vih, ch 1-8 406b,d-411d passim; CH 13-14 414d-416d; bk ix, ch
i  416b,d417c  passim;  ch  5 420a-c passim; ch 8 421d423a 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371062] 57d-58a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  24 203c210a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr v, ch 7-TR vi, CH 9 20a-26a / Third Ennead, tr v 100c106b 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par i-bk hi, par I 9a- 13c / City of God,
bk  xiv,  ch  7 380c381c / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 10, 661d662a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, a I, rep 2 108d-109c; a 2, ans
109c-110b;  Q  20, A I, ans and rep 2 120a-121b; a 2, rep 3 121b-122a; q
60,  a 3, ans 311d-312b; part i-ii, q 2, A I, REP 3 615d-616c; q 23, a 2
724c725c;  A  4 726a-727a; q 25, a 2 731b-732a; A 3, ANS 732a-733a; q 26
733d-737a  esp a 2, ANS and REP 3 734d-735c, a 4 736b-737a; q 27, AA 3-4
738c-740a;  q  28, a i, ans and rep 1-2 740b-741a; a 2, ans 741a-742a; a
3,  ans  and REP 2-3 742a-d; a 4 742d-743c; q 30, a 2 749d-750d; q 32, a
3,  rep  3  760d-761c;  A 8, ANS 764c-765b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 62, A 3, ans and rep 3 61c-62b

[1120a]
(1. The nature of love. \c. The distinction between love and desire: the
generous  and  acquisitive aims.) 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv
[4081]  75d-76a; xvii [82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part
i, 61c; 63a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 83d-84a; 398c-399d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part iv, appendix, i-ii 447a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx,  sect 4-6
176d-177b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  346c-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality,
345c-346b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  525c-526b  53 James:
Psychology,   204b-209b   passim   54   Freud:   Narcissism,  404d-406b;
409b-411a,c   /  Instincts,  420a-421a  /  General  Introduction,  581b;
617c-618a  /  Group Psychology, 673b674a; 679a-b; 681c-682b; 693a-694c /
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 783b-c / Neiv Introductory Lectures,
847d'848a  \d.  The  objects of love: the good, the true, the beautiful;
God, man, things Old Testament: Genesis, 29:17-18 / Song of Solomon— {D)
Canticle  of Canticles / Zechariah, 8:19— (D) Zacharias, 8:19 Apocrypha:
Wisdom   of   Solomon,   8:1-3—   (D)   OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  8:1-3  /
Ecclesiasticus,  4:11-19;  9:8;  36:22— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 4:12-22;
9:8-9;  36:24 New Testament: Matthew, 10:37 / Lu^e, 14:26 / Romans, 12:9
/  Colossians,  3:1-2  / / Timothy, 6:10-11 / I John, 2:15-16; 4:20-21 4
Homer: Iliad, bk hi [121-160] 20b-G; bk xiv
[193-221] lOOa-b
5  Euripides:  Andromache  [205-208]  317a  6  Herodotus: History, bk v,
168d-169a;  bk vi, 196d'197b 7 Plato: Lysis, 18d-24d / Phaedrus, 120a-c;
126b-129d  /  Symposium,  161d-167d  /  Euthyphro, 194b / Phaedo, 225c /
Republic, bk i, 296d-297a; bk v-vi, 368c-375b; bk vi, 376d / Laws, BK V,
687b; bk viii, 735b-738c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[72*25-30] 98d
/ Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[1072*23-^4] 602b-c
9  AB.isTorL.E: Ethics, bk viii, ch 2-4 407a-409b; bk IX, ch 3 418c-419a
passim, esp [1165^13-17] 418d; CH 5 [1167*3-6] 420b; ch 7 421a-d esp
[1167^34-1168*18]
421b-c;  CH  8  421d-423a  passim;  ch 9 [ii7o*i3-''i9] 423d-424b; ch 12
425d-426a,c;  bk  x,  ch  4  [1175*10-22]  429c  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1371^12-25]  615a-b; bk II, CH 4 626c-628b; ch 12 [1389*12-15] 636b; ch
13  [1389^32-34] 637b; [1390*14-17] 637c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi [59-78] 30d-31a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d-170a

[1120b]
1062 THE GREAT IDEAS Id 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a;
TR VI 21a-26a / Third Ennead, tr v 100c106b / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 12,
234a-c  / Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch 10, 309a-b; tr vii, CH 33 337d-338b; tr
ix,  ch  9, 359b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par i 13b-c; bk IV,
par  7-20  20d-24c;  bk  viii, par 10-30 55c-61c passim; bk x, par 38-70
81a-89b / City of God, bk xii, ch 8-9 346d-348b; bk XIV, ch 7 380c-381c;
bk xv, ch 22 416a-c; bk XIX, CH 10-17 516c-523a / Christian Doctrine, BK
I,  CH  3-5 625b-626a; ch 9-10 627a-b; CH 22-29 629b-632c; ch 35 634c-d;
ch 38 635c-d; ch 40 636a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 20, A
I,  ANS and REP 3 120a-121b; q 60, aa 3-5 311d-314c; part i-ii, q i, a 8
615a-c;  q 2, a I, REP 3 615d-616c; q 23, a 4 726a-727a; q 27 737a-740a;
q  29,  a  i 745a-c; aa 4-5 747a748b; Q 32, A 5, ANS 762a-d 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 62, A 3, ANS and REP 3 61c-62b; q 66, a
6,  rep  i 80c-81b; Q 67, A 6 87a-c; q no, a i, ans and REP I 347d-349a;
part  ii-ii, q 23, a 4, ans 485d-486b; a 6, rep i 487a-d; q 24, a i, ans
and  REP I 489d-490b; qq 25-27 501a-527b passim 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a; xvi
[85-102]
77d; xvn
[82]-
XVIII
[75]
79b-80c; paradise, i
[97-142]
107b-d; IV
[ii5]-v
[12]
llld-112b; vi
[112126] 114d-115a; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c
22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
61c-62a;   76c-77b   25   Montaigne:   Essays,   84b-85a;  191c-192d  26
Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc i
[214-244] 287d'288a; sc v [43-55] 292b; act
II,  sc  II [1-32] 294b-c 29 Cervantes : Don Quixote, part ii, 381c-382a
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
prop  56, demonst 414a-c; part v, prop 15-16 456c; prop 18 456d; PROP 33
460c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-560]
243a-244a / Samson Agonistes
[1003-1007]
361b  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 81 186b; 100 191a-192b; 323 230a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xx, SECT 4-5 176d-177a; bk iv, ch xix,
sect  i  384c-d  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 15b-c; 17b-c; 50d-51a; 130b-c;
198d-199a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-346a; 347b-c 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,  326a-327a  /  Judgement, 476a-483d; 585d-586a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[8516-8523]
207b;
[9192-9944] 223b-241b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  5d-6b;  bk hi, 113a-115a; bk vi,
249d-250a;  bk  xi,  525c526b; BK xn, 555b-c; 560a-561c; bk xiv, 608a-b;
epilogue i, 659a; 660b-c

[1121a]
ie  Chapter  50:  LOVE  1063  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
26d27d;  BK III, 53d-54b; bk iv, 83c-84a; bk v, 121d-122d passim; bk vi,
167b-168c 53 James: Psychology, 204b-211a 54 Freud: Instincts, 418d 420b
esp   420a-b   /   Group  Psychology,  673b-c  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  775b-c;  783a-b  le.  The intensity and power of love: its
increase   or  decrease;  its  constructive  or  destructive  force  Old
Testament:  11  Samuel,  11-12—  (D)  U Kings, 11-12 / Proverbs, 5:3-14;
6:23-29; 23:26-28 / Ecclesiastes, 7:26— (D) Ecclesiastes, 7:27 / Song of
Solomon,  8:6-7—  (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles, 8:6-7 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
xviii
[1-126]
130a-131c;  bk  XIX  [276-368]  139d-140c;  bk  xxii  [21-98] 155b-156a;
[405-515]   159c-160d   5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  [585-651]  75d-76b  5
Sophocles:   Antigone   [781-805]  138a  /  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  esp
[427-530]  173d-174d  5  Euripides  :  Medea [627-642] 217c / Hippolytus
225a-236d esp
[1-57]
225a-c,
[1268-1282]
235b-c / Suppliants
[990-1071] 267a-c / Trojan Women
[895-1059] 277c-279a / Andromache
[274-308]
31 7d / Iphigenia at Aulis
[543-589] 429d-430a
5 Aristophanes: Birds
[685-707]
551b-d / Lysistrata 583a-599a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk ix, 311b-312d 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi,  523c524c  7  Plato: Phaedrus,
124a-129d  /  Symposium  149a-173a,c  esp  152b-167d  /  Republic, bk v,
361b-c;  bk  ix, 417a-418a / Lau^s, bk viii, 736b 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk vii, ch 7
[1327^401328*17]
532a-b / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 12
[1389^3-5] 636d; CH 13 [i389''22-24] 637a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[1-41]
la-c; BK IV [1037-1208] 57d-60a 13 Virgil: Eclogues, 11 [56-73] esp [68]
7b-8a; x 32a-34a esp
[69] 34a / Georgics, iv [452-527]
95b-98a / Aeneid, bk i [657-756] 121a-123b; BK IV 167a-186b 17 Plotinus:
Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 40 180b-c IS Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
i 13b-c; BK IV, par 7-14 20d-23a; bk vi, par 18-26 40d-43a; bk viii, par
10-30  55c-61c  passim;  BK  x,  par  38-70  81a-89b  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 20, A I, rep 3 120a-121b; q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3
517d-519a; part i-ii, q 25, a 2 731b-732a; Q 26, A 2, REP 1-2 734d-735c;
q  28 740a-744d esp A 6 744b-d; q 29, aa 2-3 745c-747a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq  31-33  536d-558d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, v 7a-8b; xii
[31-48]
16d; PURGATORY, VIII
[67-84]
65a; XV [40-81] 75d-76a; xvii [82]-xviii [75] 79b-

[1121b]
80c; XXIV
[49-63]
90a-b; paradise, i
[97142] 107b-d; xxx-xxxiii 151d-157d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 1-8 la 2a; stanza 31-37
5a-6a;  stanza  58-67  8b  9b; stanza 143-144 19b 20a; bk hi, stanza 1-7
54b-55b; stanza 142-254 73a87b / Kmghfs Tale
[1152-1186]
179a-b / Reeve's Prologue [3853-3896] 224a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6a-b;
39a  40a; 410a c; 414d-416c; 431c-432d 26 Shakespeare: Comedy of Errors,
act v, sc i
[68-86] 165d-166a / Two Gentlemen of Verona,
ACT II, sc IV [126-142] 237c-d; sc vi 239a c / Love's Labour's Lost, act
hi, sc i [175-207] 264a-b; act iv, sc hi [290-365] 271c-272a / Romeo and
Juliet,  act ii 293c-300d / Midsummer-Night's Dream 352a-375d esp act i,
sc  I  [226-251]  354d-355a  /  Merchant of Venice, ACT II, sc VI [1-19]
415b-c / Much Ado About Nothing, ACT 11, sc i
[379-405]
511a; sc in 511d-514b; act hi, sc i [104-116] 515c / As You Like It, ACT
iii,  sc  11 [420-425] 613c 27 Shakespeare: Twelfth Night la-28d esp act
ii,  sc  IV  [82-127]  llb-d,  ACT  HI, sc I [161-176] 15d / Troilus and
Cressida, act hi, sc i [106-146] 119c-120a; sc 11
[8-30] 120b-c; [87-90] 121a;
ACT IV, sc IV
[11-50]
128b-c; act v, sc 11
[i 54-181] 136c-d / Othello 205a-243a,c / King
Lear,  act  v,  sc iii [257-273] 282b / Antony and Cleopatra 311a-350d /
Cymbeline,  act hi, sc IV 466d-468d / Sonnets, xvii-cliv 588d609d passim
29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 79d-80a; 120b-137d; part ii, 381c 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 44 437c-438a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
ix
[990-1189]
269a-273a / Samson Agonistes
[999-1060]
361b-362b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 453a-456a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
i4c-d;  30a-32a; 68d; 167c-169c; 237b-c; 334b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
345c-346b   44   BoswE-Li.:  Johnson,  169d-170b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy
ofHistory, part iv, 323b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3025-3072] 73b-74b;
[4460-4612]
lllb-114b; part ii
[8339-8487]
203a-206b;  [9192-9944]  223b-241b  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 370b-371a 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 70d; bk hi, 116c-117a; 141b-d; 159b-161b;
bk iv, 184c; 185b; bk VI, 235a-238c; 262b-271c; bk viii, 316b-c; 327c-d;
340c-341a,c; bk ix, 377b-c; BK XI, 525c-527a; bk xii, 541d-542b; 557b-c;
560a-561c;  bk  xiv,  608a-b; bk xv, 616a-618b esp 617a-b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 26a-27d; bk vi, 167b-168c; bk viii, 200c201c
54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 657c-d / Group Psychology,
678a-c   /  Ego  and  Id,  708d-712a  passim,'  esp  708d-709a,  711c  /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 791a-d

[1122a]
1064  (1.  The  nature  of  love.)  If, The power of hate Old Testament:
Genesis,  4:1-9;  37  /  // Samuel, 13:15-39— (-C^) ^^ Kings, 13:15-39 /
Esther,  3:2-5;  5:9-14 / Proverbs, 10:12 New Testament: I John, 2:9-11;
3:12-15;  4:20  5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c esp [465-662] 216a-217c 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 34a-b; bk hi, lOOb-lOlb; BK VII, 258d-259a 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 403c404a 7 Plato: Apology, 205c'd
/  Phaedo,  237b  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 7 [1328^1-16] 532b /
Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  4 [1382^1-16] 628a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 29, A 3 746b-747a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch v, 8c; ch xix
26a30a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 141a-b 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry
VI, act i, so hi 73d-74b; act hi, sc ii
[146-195]
87d-88a;  act  V,  sc VI [61-93] 103d-104a / Richard III 105a-148a,c esp
act i, sc i 105b,d-107b, ACT V, sc III [119-206] 144d-145d / Merchant of
Venice,   act  iv.  sc  i  [35-62]  425d-426a  27  Shakespeare:  Othello
205a-243a,c   esp  act  ii,  sc  I  [1-81]  213b-214b,  [295-321]  216c/
Coriolanus,  ACT  IV, sc v [70-152] 380b-381a/ Timon of Athens 393a-420d
esp act iv, sc i 409c-d, sc III 410c-416d / Cymbeline, act hi, sc v
[70-150] 469d-470c
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [81-105]  95a-b  / Samson Agonistes
[819-842]  357b-358a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 30a-32a; 124d; 237b-c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dick,  119a-121a; 134b-136a 49 r3ARwiN: Descent of Man,
312b,d [fn 27] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk iv, 183d-186c; 188a-190c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk v, 137c-142c; bk xii, 393a-394a 53
James:  Psychology, 717a-720b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 328a-b
/  Group Psychology, 677c-678a / War and Death, 764d-765d / Civilization
and  Its Discontents, 787a- 788d; 790a- 791d esp 791 b-c 2. The kinds of
love 7 Plato: Symposium, 153b-155c; 165b-167d / Laws, bk viii, 735c-736c
17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr v 100c-106b / Sixth Ennead, tr ix, ch 9,
359b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk xiv, ch 7 380c381c / Christian
Doctrine, bk hi, ch 10 661c662a 19 Aquinas: Sutnma Theologica, part i, q
20,  A  2,  REP  3  121b-122a;  q  60, aa 1-3 310b312b; q 82, A 5, rep i
435c-436c;  part  i-ii,  q 26 733d-737a esp aa 3-4 735c-737a; q 27, A 3,
ans 738c-739c; q 28, aa 1-2 740b742a

[1122b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS Xfto 2a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, parti-ii, q 66^ A
6,  rep  2  80c-81b;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a i, ans 482d-483d; a 4, ans
485d-486b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82-139] 79b-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii, stanza 128 38a 23 Hobbes*
Leviathan,  part  i, 63a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 83a-85a; 399a-b; 424d425c
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 381c-382a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv, appendix, xix-xx 449a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b;  bk  ix  [990-1189]  269a-273a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy,
522a-525a   37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  14c-d;  167c-169c;  198d199a  38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346b;  348d  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,
289c-290b;  303c; 305c-309a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50a; bk vi,
269c-d;  bk  vii,  276c-277a;  bk  xi, 520a-521b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk ii, 27c-d 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 673b-d; 681c-682a /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 783b-c 2a, Lustful, sexual, or selfish
love:  concupiscent  love  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  39:6-20  / Exodus,
20:14,17 / Leviticus, 18 / Numbers, 25:1-9 / // Samuel, 11; 13:1-14— (D)
//  Kings,  11;  13:1-14  /  Proverbs,  5:1-20;  6:20-35;  7;  23:2635 /
Ecclesiastes, 7:26— (D) Ecclesiastes, 7:27 / Ezekiel, 23— (Z)) Ezechiel,
23  Apocrypha:  Judith,  11:21-23;  12:11-20;  16:7-9—  (D)  OT, Judith,
11:19-21;  12:10-20;  16:8-11  / Ecclesiasticus, 9:3-9; 25:21; 47:19-20—
(Z))  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  9:3-13;  25:28;  47:21-22 / Susanna— (D) OT,
Daniel,  13  New Testament: Matthew, 5:27-32 / Romans, 6:12-13; 7:14-25;
13:13-14 / 7 Corinthians, 6:9-7:11 / Colossians, y-'y / I Thessalonians,
4:4-5 / Hebrews, 13:4 / James, 1:13-16 / I Peter, 2:11 / I John, 2:15-17
4 Homer: Odyssey, bk viii
[266-366]
224d225d 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c esp
[776-835]
lla-d,
[980-1073]
13b-14a,c / Agamemnon [681-781] 59b-60b / Choephoroe
[585-651] 75d-76b; [892-930] 78d-79b
5  Euripides:  Electra [988-1122] 336a-337b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ix,
311b-312d  7  Plato:  Charmides, 2b-c / Phaedrus, 117a-122a / Symposium,
153b-155c  /  Republic,  bk hi, 326c-327b; 333b-334b; bk ix, 417b-418a /
Timaeus,  474b-d;  476b-d  / Laws, bk viii, 735b-738c 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 22
[68*25-^7]
89d-90a / Topics, bk vi, ch 7
[146*3-13] 199d; BK vii, ch
i [152^6-9] 207c t

[1123a]
la  to  la{\)  Chapter 50: LOVE 1065 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk
vi, ch i8
[571^5-10] 97b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371120]
57d-58d;
[1192-1208]
59d-60a; bk v
[962-965] 73c
13 \'ir(.il: Aeneid, bk i [657-756] 121a-123b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv,
64b-c;  bk  xi,  103b-c;  107b-108c;  bk xiii, 137b-c 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead, tr v, ch 1-2 100c102a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 25-26
7a-c;  BK  II, par 1-8 9a-10d; bk hi, par 1-5 13b-14b; BK IV, par 2 19d;
bk  vi, par 18-26 40d-43a / City of God, bk xii, ch 8 346d-347b; bk xiv,
CH  16-18  390a-391c;  ch  26  395d-396c;  bk  XV,  ch 22-23 416a-418c /
Christian  Doctrine,  BK  III,  CH  10  661c-662a; ch 18-21 664d-666b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 98, A 2, ANS and REP 3 517d-519a;
part  i-ii, qq 26-28 733d-744d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q  15,  A  3 453c-454c; q 46, a 3 604d-605a,c; part hi, q 65, A I, rep 5
879c-881d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v 7a-8b; xi
[76-90]
16a; purgatory, viii
[67-84]
65a; XVII [127-139J 79d; XIX
[1-69] 81c-82a; xxv
[io9]-xxvi
[148]
92c-94c:  paradise,  viii-ix 116d-120a esp ix [103-108] 119d 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Crcssida,  bk  hi,  stanza 172-219 77a-83a / Miller s Tale
212b-223b / Reeve s Tale 225a-232a / Squire's Tale [10,813943] 347a-349a
/  Physician's  Tale  366a-371a  /  Manciple  s Tale [17,088-103] 490a /
Parson's  Tale,  par  19  507b-508b;  par  74-86  535b-544a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  63a  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii,
106a-107c;  bk  hi,  164d-166a;  188d-193c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 6a-b;
36c-40a;  83d-85a; 297d-299c; 398c-399c; 406a-434d 26 Shakespeare: Titus
Andronicus 170a-198d esp ACT II 176a-181d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i,
sc v
[40-91]
37b-d; act hi, sc iv [40-96] 55a-c/ Troilus and Cressida 103a-141a,c esp
act iv, sc i
[51-79]
126b-c,  sc  V  [13-63]  130a-c,  act  v,  sc ii 134c- \31Si/ Measurefor
Measure  174a-204d  esp  act  II, sc I [234-257] 181a-b, sc II [162-187]
183d184a / Othello, act i, sc hi [306-388] 212b213a / King Lear, act iv,
sc vi
[109-135]
274c-d;  act  v,  sc  i  277d-278d  /  Pericles,  ACT  I,  PROLOGUE-sc I
421b-423c;  act  iv, sc v-vi 441a-443b / Sonnets, cxxix 606a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part hi, prop 35 406d407b; THE AFFECTS, DEF 48 421b-d; PART IV,
APPENDIX,  XIX  449a  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [443-450] 185a; BK
VIII
[500-643]
243a-246a; bk ix
[9901133] 269a-272a esp [1004-1098] 269a-271a /
Samson  Agonistes  [373-419]  347b-348b;  [766842]  356b-358a 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 402-403 241a; 451-461 253b255a

[1123b]
36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 513a-516a; 521a-b; 525a 526a; 554b-556a 37
Fn  lding:  'Tom  Jones,  9b c; 58b-59b; 130b-c; 138b d; 289b-290b; 321b
322a;  352d  353a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv, 103c104a; BK
XVI,  118a  b;  119a-b; 119d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-346b; 348d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 92c-d; 649d 650c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 301c-d
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 162 58b-d 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i  [2605-2677]  63b-65a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 371c-372c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 15b-16a; bk II, 76a-b; 86b-87b; bk hi,
llla-llSd  esp  113d-115a;  122b-c;  bk  v, 201a-c; 204a-206c passim: bk
viii,  318a-341a,c;  bk xi, 476c-480a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  11,  20a-b;  39a-40a;  bk hi 46a-82a,c esp 53c-54b 54 Freud: ''Wild"
Psycho-Analysis,  128d-129a  /  Narcissism  399a-411a,c  esp  404d-406c,
409b41  Od  /  Instincts, 418c-421a,c esp 420b-c / General Introduction,
569c-585a  esp  569d570a,  574c-d,  580a-581b; 615b-618a esp 616d-618a /
Group  Psychology,  673b-674a;  681c-683d', 693a-695b / Civilization and
Its Discontents, 782a-b,d
[fn i]; 783c; 784a-785a
esp  785a-b  [fn i] / New Introductory LectureSy 854a-863d esp 862b-863c
2a{\)  The  sexual  instinct:  its  relation to other instincts 7 Plato:
Symposium, 157b-159b; 165b-c / Timaeus, 476c-d / Laws, bk iv, 685a-c; bk
VI, 712b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk v, ch 8
[542'*i7-^4] 68d-69a; bk vi, ch i8-bk vii, ch
2  97b-108c passim, esp bk vi, ch 18 97b-99c, BK VII, ch I 106b,d-108a /
Generation  of Animals, bk iv, ch i [764^4-7] 305c / Rhetoric, BK II, ch
7 [i385'*2i-25] 631d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10371057] 57d
22 Chaucer: Wife of Bath's Prologue
[56975744] 258a-b
25   Montaigne:  Essays,  414d-416c;  424d-425b  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,   346a-347d;  349a-350a;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c-477a  36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 555a-556a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-346d 49
Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 287d 53 James: Psychology, 734b-735b 54 Freud:
Narcissism,  401a-402c  /  Instincts,  414d-418c esp 414d-415d / General
Introduction,   574a-576a   esp   574a;  580a-d;  587d-588b;  590a-593b;
615b-616b;  618d-619a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure Principle, 651d-662b esp
653b-d, 654c-d, 657c-659a, 662 b,d
[fn
i]   /   Ego  and  Id,  708d-709c;  710c-712a  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  789c-  790c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 846a-851d esp
847b-d, 849c-850c, 851b-c

[1124a]
1066 THE GREAT IDEAS (2a. Lustful, sexual, or selfish love: concupiscent
love.)  2a{2)  Infantile  sexuality:  polymorphous  perversity 54 Freud:
Origin   and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  15a-18a  esp  15d-16c  /
Hysteria,  113d-114b  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of Children, 119d-120b /
General  Introduction,  530d-531d;  572d-576d; 578b-585a esp 578c-580d /
Group   Psychology,  693a-b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  847c-848d;
855d-861c  2tf(3)  Object-fixations, identifications, and transferences:
sublimation 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10581072] 57d-58a
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d  25  Montaigne: Essays, lOb-llb; 191c-192d;
398c-399d 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[123-195] 87c-88a
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 13-17 400c402a; part iv, prop 6 426a;
prop  44,  schol  437d-438a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-S46a 53 James:
Psychology,    734b-735b   54   Freud:   Origin   and   Development   of
PsychoAnalysis, 16b-20d esp 17b-c, 19a-c, 20a'd / Narcissism 399a-411a,c
esp   399d-400b,   404d406c,  409d-410d  /  Instincts,  414b  /  General
Introduction,  551a-589c  passim, esp 574c-d, 581b-c, 583c-d, 587d-588a,
589a-b;  594d597b;  599d-600d; 616d-622c; 627b-630d; 634b-d / Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 644d645d / Group Psychology, 678d-681a; 681b,d
[fn 4];
685c-686a;  691c-692a;  693a-694b / Ego and Id, 703c-706c esp 704d-705c;
711b-c;  712b-c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 832b834b esp 832d-833b;
847a-849b;   856a-863d  esp  856b-d,  862d-863c  2a{4)  The  perversion,
degradation,  or  pathology  of  love:  infantile  and  adult  love  Old
Testament:  Genesis,  19:4-13; 38:6-10 / Exodus, 22:19 / Lei^iticus, 18;
20:13-16  /  Deuteronomy, 27:21 /Judges, 19:22-30 New Testament: Romans,
i:2^-2j  7  Plato: Symposium, 170b-171c / Laws, bk i, 645d-646a; bk vhi,
735d-736a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk vii, ch 5 399a-d passim 13 Virgil:
Eclogues, vi
[45-60] 20a-b / Aeneid,
bk  VI  [23-30]  211b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par i 13b-c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xv-xvi 21a23d; purgatory, xxvi [25-87] 93b-d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  36c-40a;  84b-85a; 225a; 427b-d 27 Shakespeare:
Pericles  421a-448a,c  esp  act i, prologue-sc i 421b-423c 28 Harvey: On
Animal Generation, 349b-c

[1124b]
2a{2)  to  lb 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, 437d-438a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  ii  [629-870]  125a130a  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 163b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii, 87c88a; bk xvi, 117d; bk xxvi,
219d-221c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93d-94c; 169a 42 Kant: Science of
Right, 419b [fn i] 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[11,676-843]
284a288a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 24a-25a; bk PROP 44, SCHOL IV,
177c-d; BK VI, 271c-d; bk vh, 292b-296a; BK vni, 305b-307d; 322c; bk ix,
355c-d;  357a-b;  357d-358b;  bk  xi,  520a-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a-d;  bk  ii, 39a-40a; bk hi 46a-82a,c esp 53c-54b,
58d-59b,  69d-70c; bk iv, 95b-100c; BK VIII, 200c-201c; bk x, 282b-283c;
bk  xi,  324a-b;  bk  xii, 366a-368c 53 James: Psychology, 735a-b; 802b;
804a805b  54  Freud:  Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 14b-15a;
16d-17a;  18a-b  /  Hysteria,  84a-86c;  90d-96a;  97d-106c esp 97d-99d;
llla-118a,c  esp lllb-115a / Narcissism, 409c410d / Instincts, 415d-418c
/  General  Introduction, S47b-549d esp 548d-549a; 569c-573a; 577a-578c;
583d-591d;  593d-599b;  604c-606a;  611a-d;  619b-622b  esp  620d-622a /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  659b-d  /  Group Psychology, 680c-d /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  718b-d; 724a-728b esp 725d-726c,
728a-b;  733c-735a  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 789d-790c / New
Introductory   Lectures,  847c-850c;  859c-d;  861c-862a  2b.  Friendly,
tender,  or  altruistic  love:  fraternal love Old Testament: Leviticus,
19:17-18,33-34  /  Deuteronomy, 10:18-19 / / Samuel, 18:1-4; 19:1-7; 20;
23:15-18— (£)) / Kings, 18:1-4; 19:1-7; 20; 23:15-18 / // Samuel, i— (D)
//  Kings,  I  /  Psalms,  133—  (D)  Psalms,  132 / Proverbs, 17:17-18;
18:19,24;  27:6  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  6:1,13-17;  7:18-19; 9:10;
25:1;  27:16-21;  29:10,15;  37:1-2,6; 40:23-24— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
6:1,13-17;  7:20-21;  9:14-15;  25:1-2;  27:17-24;  29:13,19;  37:1-2,6;
40:23-24  New  Testament: Matthew, 5:21-26; 19:19; 22:39 / Mar\, 12:31 /
Luke, 10:27 / ]ohn, 15:13 / Romans, 13:9 / Galatians, 5:14 / Colossians,
4:7-18 / / Thessalonians, 4:9-10 / // Timothy, 4 :9-22 / James, 2 :8 / /
Peter,  3:8/  //  Peter,  1:5-7  / I John, 3:11-17 4 Homer: Iliad, bk iv
[153-183] 25c-d; bk vi
[212-236] 42b-c; BK XVI 112a-121d; bk xviii
130a-136d; bk xix
[276-368] 139d-140c; bk
xxiii
[1-261]
161a-163d / Odyssey, bk viii
[581-586] 228c
5 Sophocles: Ajax [666-683] 148d-149a

[1125a]
j  2b  to 2b{2) 5 Euripides: Iphigenia Among the Taiiri [578616] 416a-b;
[674-715)  416d-417b  7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  /  Protagoras,  52b /
Phaedrus,  124a-129d  esp  128d-129c  / Symposium, 153b-155c / Lau>s, bk
viii,   735c-738c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii-ix  406b,d-426a,c  /
Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 4 626c-628b 12 ^v\CTET\JS'. Discourses, bk ii, ch 22
167d-170a  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ix [168-449] 283b-291a 14 Plutarch:
Alcibiades,  156c-158b / Pelopidas^ 233b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
iv,  par  7-14 20d23a; bk vi, par 11-26 38b-43a passim / City of God, bk
XIX, CH 7-8 515a-516a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 23-33
482c-558d  passim  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii 2c-4a; xv 21a-22c;
purgatory, xiii
[i]-xv
[81]
71d76a; xvii
[82-139] 79b-d; xxi
[i]-xxii
[129]
85a-87d;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b  22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale 174a-211a esp
[10921186]  178a-179b, [1574-1627] 186a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 82b-88d;
396a-398c passim; 446d-448c; 472a-473b 26 Shakespeare: Srd Henry VI, act
v, sc vi
[61-93] 103d-104a / Richard II, act
ii, sc hi
[46-49] 333a-b
/  Merchant  of  Venice,  act i, sc I [119-160] 407c-408a; act hi, sc ii
[223330]  422b-423b  /  As You Like It, act ii, sc VII [174-200] 609a-b;
act iv, sc hi [120-133] 620c-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc hi
[62-65]
35a; actiii, sc ii [57-95] 49c-d; [206-225] 51b;
[360-389] 52d-53a / Troilus and Cressida, act
II, sc III [iio-iii] 116d / Othello, act hi, sc hi
[142-144] 223c / Antony and Cleopatra, act v,
sc I [13-48] 345b-c / Coriolanus, act iv, sc iv
[12-22] 379b / Timon of Athens, act
i, sc ii
[91-107] 398a-b
/ Henry VIII, act ii, sc i
[126-131] 559b-c / Sonnets, i-cxvi 586a-604a
29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 428b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  18, schol 429a-d; prop 29-40 431d-437a; prop 73 446c447a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx, sect 5 176d-177a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a; 262a-d / Practical Reason, 326a-b / Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 375d376b 44 Boswell: Johnson, lOla-c;
199a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, ioi 133b / Philosophy of
History,  part  iv,  341a-c  48  Melville:  Moby DicJ{, 36b-39b; 381a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b; 28c31a; 49a; 51d; 56b; bk ii,
69a-c;  95d-96c;  BK HI, 127d-128d; 135c-137c; 140c-142d; bk IV, 167c-d;
183d-186c; 188a-190c; bk v, 220b-c; 222d-223a; bk vi, 262b-c; 266c-267c;
271a-b;  bk  viii,  303b-d;  305d-306a;  311a-b;  327a-333a; 334d-341a,c
passim; bk x, 465a-c; bk XI, 502b-503a; bk xh, 557b-c; bk xiv,

[1125b]
Chapter  50:  LOVE  1067  625c597a  598a;  600d; bk xv, 617b-618a; 626d;
631c-633a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk vii, 180a-189a; bk x,
281b  297d;  epilogue,  408a412d  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology, 673b-c;
681d682b; 693b-694b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 783a-c 2^(1) The
relation  between  love  and  friendship  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [666-683]
148d-149a  7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  / Phaedrus, 115a-118c / Laws, bk
viii,  736a-c  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 22 [68* 25-^7]
89d-90a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 6 [1126^20-25] 373d; BK viii, ch
2-3 407a-408c; ch 5
[1157**
28-37] 409c-d; CH 8 411b-d; bk ix, ch 4-5 419a-420c passim; ch 10
[1171*11-15] 424d425a; ch 12 425d-426a,c / Politics, bk vii, ch 7
[1327^40-1328*17] 532a-b
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d170a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  iv, par 7-14 20d23a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 20, a 2, rep 3 121b-122a; q 60, a 3, ans 311d312b; PART i-ii, Q 26,
a  4  736b-737a;  q  27,  a  3  738c-739c; q 28, a i 740b-741a; a 2, ans
741a-742a;  a 3, ans and rep 2-3 742a-d; a 4 742d-743c; q 29, a 3, rep 2
746b-  747a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-h, q 65, A 5, ANS
74c-75a; q 66, a 6, rep 2 80c-81b; PART ii-ii, q 19, A 6 469a-d; q 23, a
i  482d483d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  82b-88d  esp  83d-85a;  410a-413a;
472b-473b  37  Fielding: Tom ]ones, 291d-292a 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  375d-376b  44  B0SWE1.L: Johnson, 257b; 392b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk viii, 339d341a, c; bk ix, 373c-374a; bk xh,
555a-c;   bk   XV,  617b-d  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  693d-694b  /
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 783b-c 2^(2) Self-love in relation to
the  love  of  others  Old  Testament: Leviticus, 19:18,33-34 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  14:5-7  {D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 14:5-7 New Testament:
Matthetv,  5:38-47; 19:19; 22:39 / Marl{, 12:31 / Luke, 6:27-35; 10:27 /
Romans,  iy.<)  /  Galatians,  5:14  /  James, 2:8 5 Euripides: Alcestis
[614-740]  242c-243c  7  Plato: Laws, bk v, 689b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
viii, ch 7
[1158^291159*12] 410d-411a; ch 12 [1161^16-33] 414a-b;
BK  IX,  CH  4  419a-420a;  ch  8-9  421d-424b  esp  ch  9 [1170*14-^19]
423d-424b;  ch  12  [ii7i''331172*2]  425d  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  5
[1263*40-^4] 458c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1371^12-25] 615a-b

[1126a]
1068 THE GREAT IDEAS (2b, Friendly, tender, or altruistic love:fraternal
love.  2b (2) Self-love in relation to the love of others^ 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 19 125b126c; BK II, CH 17 158d-161a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  iv, par 7-14 20d23a; bk x, par 58-64 86a-87d / City of
God,  BK  XIV,  CH  28  397a-d  /  Christian  Doctrine^  bk  I, CH 22-27
629b-631d; ch 35 634c-d 19 Aquinas: Swnma Theologica, part i, q 20, A I,
REP 3 120a-121b; a 2, rep i 121b-122a; Q 60, AA 3-5 311d-314c; q 63, a 2
326c'327b;  part i-ii, q 27, a 3 738c-739c; q 28, a i 740b741a; a 2, ans
741a-742a;  a 3, ans and rep 3 742a-d; a 4, ans and rep 1-2 742d-743c; q
29,  A 3, REP 2 746b-747a; a 4 747a-c; q 32, aa 5-6 762a-763c; q 40, a 7
797a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, a 4, ans and rep 3
62b-63a; q 66, a 6, rep 2-3 80c-81b; Q 73, A I, rep 3 119c-120c; q 77, a
4 148b-149a; q 84, a 2 175b-176a; part ii-ii, Q 23, A I 482d-483d; q 25,
aa 4-5 503c-504c; A 7 506a-d; a 12 509c-510b; q 26, aa 3-13 511d-520d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82-139] 79b-d
23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan, part i, 83c; part ii, 104d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
486b-489b 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act v, sc vi
[80-84] 104a / Richard III, act v, sc hi [177206] 145c-d
27 Shakespeare: Twelfth Night, act i, sc v
[97-104] 5b
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  46  438c-d; prop 48-49 439a-b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  100  191a-192b; 455-457 253b-254a; 471-477 256a-257a;
492  259b  35  Locke:  Civil  Govertiment, ch ii, sect 5 26a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii,  70b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 58d-59a; 167c-170a esp
169d-170a;  291d-292a;  305d;  330b-c;  354c-d  38 Rousseau: Inequality,
330d-331b;  343d-345c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 262a-d;
268d-270a   /  Practical  Reason,  297a314d  esp  298a-300a,  304d-307d;
321b-327d  esp  325a-327d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 376b-c
43  Federalist:  number  70,  212a  43  Mill: Representative Government,
367d-368a   /  Utilitariariism,  451b-c;  453a-c  44  BoswELL:7o/fnjo/z,
169d-170b;  310d-311a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, ioi 133b
/  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d  49  Darwin:  Descent ofMan,
308d-309a;  310a-d;  316d-317a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 31a-32a;
bk  HI,  146d-147c;  159d-160a;  bk  vi,  254b-c;  267d-268c;  bk  viii,
323b-324b;  bk  ix, 354a355c; bk xii, 545b-547a; bk xv, 617b-d; epilogue
i, 651d-652a; 656d-657a

[1126b]
*.  lb{2)  to 2b(3) 53 James: Psychology, 204b-211a 54 Freud: Narcissism
399a-411a,c  esp  404d406c,  409b'411a,c  /  General Introduction, 528d;
616c-618a  esp  617c-618a / Group Psychology, 677d-678c / War and Death,
758c-d  2^(3)  The  types  of friendship: jEriendships based on utility,
pleasure,  or virtue Old Testament: Proverbs, 14:20; 17:17-18 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   6:1-17;   9'io;   12:8-9;   37:1-9;   40:24—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  6:1-17;  9:14-15;  12:8-9;  37:1-11; 40:24 5 Euripides:
Rhesus
[319-478]
206a-207b / Heracles Mad
[55-59]
365c-d;
[121 4-1228]
375c / Orestes
[356-806] 397b'402c
/  Iphigenia  at  Aulis [334-401] 427d-428b 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian
War,  bk  ii,  397b-c  7  Plato: Lysis 14a-25a,c / Symposium, 153b155c /
Gorgias,  285d-286b  / Republic, bk i, 299b-c / Seventh Letter, 805b-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 2-8 407a'411d; ch 13-14 414d-416d; bk ix,
ch i 416b,d-417c passim; ch 5
[1167*10-20]
420b-c; ch 9
[1169*^22-1170*12] 423b-d; ch
10 424c-425a passim, esp [1170^23-31] 424c; ch ii 425a-d esp
[1171*20-33]
425a-b; ch 12
[1172*2-8]
425d-426a; bk x, ch 3
[1173^32-1174*1]
428a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361^35-40]
602c; BK II, CH 4
[1380^34-1381^38]
626d627d; CH 12 [1389*35-^3] 636d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22
167d170a;  bk  hi,  ch  16  191a-d;  bk  iv, ch 2 223d224b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  16-17  12c13a; bk iv, par 12-14 22a-23a; par
21-23  24c-25a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 4, A 8, ans
636a-c;  q 26, a 4, rep 3 736b-737a; q 27, A 3 738c-739c; q 31, a 6, rep
3  756d757c  20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 23, A I, rep 3
482d-483d;  a  3, rep i 485a-d; A 5, ans and rep 3 486b-487a 22 Chaucer:
Tale  ofMelibeus,  par  20-21,  409a-b  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii,
24a-b  23 HoBBEs: Leviathan, part i, 77b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 82b-88d
26  Shakespeare:  Two Gentlemen of Verona, ACT II, sc VI 239a-c; act iv,
sc  i  245b-246b  /  Richard  II,  act v, sc i [55-70] 345d / Midsummer-
Night's  Dream, act hi, sc ii [192-219] 364d-365a / 2nd Henry IV, act v,
sc v 501b502c / Julius Caesar, act iv, sc ii
[10-27]
587d  /  As You Like It, act ii, sc vii [174-190] 609a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [57-99] 49c-50a; [206-225] 51b;
[360-389] 52d-53a /
Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc hi
[iio-iii]
116d  / Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act I, sc II 397a-400a, act iv, sc
i 409c-d, sc iii
[464-543] 415d-416d

[1127a]
r(4)  Chapter 50: LOVE 1069 30 Bacon: Advancement ofLearning, 84a-b; 89a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, i'art iv, proi> 70-71 445c446b; APPENDIX, ix 448a;
xxvi 449c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165b-166a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
167c-170a esp 169cl170a; 364d 365a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92a-c 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals^  262c-263a  44  Bos\\'v.ll:
Johnson, 193a; 423c-d; 533b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 28c-29d; bk
III,  137c-140c  passim; bk viii, 322c; 329c-332a passim; bk xv, 617b-d;
639a-b  2b(4)  Patterns  of  love  and  friendship  in  the  family  Old
Testament:  Genesis, 4:1-16; 9:18-29; 16; 21:9-21; 22:1-19; 24; 25:21-34
esp  25:28;  27;  29:21-30; 32-34; 37; 42-48; 50:15-23 / Exodus, 2:1-8 /
Judges,  11:30-40  /  Ruth, 1:3-18 / / Samuel, 1:1-8: i8-3i-(D) / Kings,
"1:1-8;  18-31  /  // Samuel, 13:1-20; 14; 18:33— (D) // Kings, 13:1-20;
14;  18:33  /  Proverbs,  10:1; 15:20 / Micah, 7:5-6— (D) Micheas, 7:5-6
Apocrypha:  Tobit passim, esp 4:1-4— (£)) OT, Tobias passim, esp 4:1-5 /
Ecclesiasticus,  25:1;  40:23— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 25:1-2; 40:23 New
Testament:  Matthew, 10:21,35-37; 12:4650; 19:29 / Marl{, 3:31-35; 13:12
/  Lul^e, 8:1921; 12:51-53; 14:26; 15:11-32; 18:29-30 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
xxii [1-98] 155a-156a; [405515] 159c-160d; bk xxiv [159-804] 172d-179d /
Odyssey, bk ii 188a-192d; bk xi
[458-540]
247c-248b; bk xiv-xv 260a-271d; bk xvi
[167-225] 273d-274b; bk xvii [31-60] 277b-c;
BK xxiii
[1-245] 312a'314d; bk xxiv
[290361] 320a-d
5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [956-1078] 37d-39a,c / Choephoroe
70a-80d esp [212-305] 72b-73a,
[892-930]
78d-79b / Eumenides
[653-666] 88a
5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[324-460]
117a-118b,
[1150-1446]
124d127b / Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax
[12901315] 154a-b / Electra 156a-169a,c / Trachiniae
170a-181a,c  5  Euripides:  Medea 212a-224a,c esp [976-1270] 220b-222d /
Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[614740] 242c-243c
/ Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp
[990-1113] 267a-268a /
Trojan Women [740798]276c-d; [11 56-1255] 279d-280c / Andromache
[309-420]
318a-d / Electra
[988-1122]
336a-337b / Hecuba
[383-443]
356a-d / Heracles Mad
[562-584]
369d-370a;
[632636] 370c / Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d /
Orestes 394a-410d esp
[2 11 -3 15]
396a-397a,
[1012-1055]
404a-c / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a-424d esp
[769-908] 417d-419a
/ Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 7a-b; 8a-10a;
32a-c; bk ii, 73b-74d; 76b-d; bk hi, 89d; 95d-96c; lOOb-lOlb; 114d-115a;
116a; bk iv,

[1127b]
143b  144b; bk vi, 194d-195b; 212c 213a; bk IX, 311b 312d 6 TiiucYDiDEs:
Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 398c d 7 Plat(x Republic, bk i, 296d-297a; bk
v,  360d-365d 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk hi, CH 2 [753*7-15]
294a-b / Ethics, bk vii, ch 4
[ii-}8"26->4] 398d; bk
viii, ch i [ii55»i6-2i] 406b,d; cii 7
[1158*^12-24]
410c-d; ch 8
[ii59'*26-32] 411b-c; ch 9-12 411d-414d
passim; ch 14
[i 163*^12-27] 416c-d; bk
ix, ch 2 417c-418b; ch 4
[ii66"i-9]
419a-b; ch 7
[1168*21-27] 421d
/  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c; bk ii, ch 3-4 456c-458a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1018] 74b
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 23 128c-d 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv
[60-64] 15b
/  Aeneid,  BK  III  [692-715]  166a-b;  bk  v  [42-103] 188a190a; BK VI
[679-702] 229a-b; bk viii
[554584] 273b-274b; bk ix [280-302] 286b-287a;
BK X [822-828) 324b-325a; bk xi [29-71] 328b330a;
[139-181] 331b-333a; bk xii [409-440]
365a-b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  62d-63c / Solon, 66b-d; 71d-72a /
Pericles,  139a-140a  /  Coriolanus, 174b,d-176b; 189d-191d / Tifnoleon,
196b-198b  /  Marcus  Cato,  286b-287b / Alexander, 542a-545b / Cato the
Younger,  623c624a  /  Agis,  654c-655a / Demetrius, 727a-b; 740d-741c /
Marcus  Brutus,  807b-d;  811c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lOc-d; bk xi,
107b108c;  bk  xii,  115a-c; 118d-119b; 128a-131b; BK XIV, 141b-143d; bk
xvi, 183a-c / Histories, BK IV, 282b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi,
par  19-21  18b-19b; bk v, par 15 31a-c; bk ix, par 17-37 66a-71b / City
of God, bk xix, ch 14 520a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 60,
a  4,  ans  312c-313b;  q  96,  a  3,  rep  2  512a-c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  26,  aa  8-1  1 516a-519a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xxxii
[i]-
XXXIII  [90] 47c-50c; paradise, xv-xvii 128b133c passim 22 Chaucer: Wife
of Bath's Prologue
[58935914] 261a-b / Clerl(s Tale 296a-318a
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xvii, 24b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
155b  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 8c-d; bk ii, 81a-83b;
bk hi, 144b-c; 196b-d; BK IV, 243b-244d; 248d-250a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
66c-67a;   83a-84b;   184a192d  esp  184a-d;  358b-362a;  409d'434d  esp
410a-422b;  472a-473a  26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry VI, act iv, sc v-vii
23d-26a / 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc v [55-113I 82b-d / Richard II, act i,
sc ii
[1-41] 322d323a / 2nd Henry IV, act ii, sc hi 477d-478c;
act iv, sc iv-v 492d-496d / Julius Caesar, ACT II, sc I [234-309] 577a-c

[1128a]
(2b.  Friendly,  tender,  or  altruistic  love:fraternal  love.  2b  (4)
Patterns of love andfriendship in thefamily^ 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet^ act
i, sc hi
[5-51]
34c-d;  [84-136]  35b-d;  act  iv,  sc  v  [115-216] 60d-62a / King Lear
244a-283a,c  /  Coriolanus,  ACT  I,  sc  III  355b-356b;  act  ii, sc i
[110-220]  362a-363b;  act  v,  sc hi 387a-389b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  84b-c  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk iv [720-775] 168a169a /
Samson Agonistes
[1476-1507]
371b372b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165b-166a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
17d-19a,c;  22d-25a;  44b-d; 65b-c; 126c-127c; 235b-238d; 304a-c; 405a,c
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  117c;  BK  XIX, 140a-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  326c-d;  327c-d;  350b;  364d-365b  /  Political
Economy,  368b-c  /  Social Contract, bk i, 387d-388a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  92d-93a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 419a-420b 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 57a; 57d-58a; 90c; 305b; 424d-425a; 510b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par  158  58a;  additions,  iio  134d; 112 135a /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d;  part  i,  211d212c;  PART HI,
288c-289b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3620-3775]
88b92a  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 387a-388b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  2c-3a;  7d-8d; 13a-14b; 25a-31a; 37d-47b; 55c-59a; bk hi, 119a-131c;
bk  iv,  165a-168d;  179b-180d;  183d-184b;  192b-193d;  bk  v,  203a-d;
210b211a;  BK  VI,  247a-248a;  251a-b;  252d-254c; 270b-274a,c; bk vii,
276b-277a;  290b-291a;  BK  viH, 305b-310d; 314c-316a; 326b-329c; bk IX,
357a-b;  bk  x, 406c-410c; 412d414b; 416c-417b; bk xi, 485a-486d; bk xh,
553c-d; bk xv, 614a-618b; epilogue i, 650d674a,c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk iv, 90b-92b; 100c-109a,c; bk v, 117c-121d; 137a-c; bk vi,
148d-150d;  bk  x,  285a-297d; epilogue, 408a-412d 53 James: Psychology,
189a; 190a; 717b; 735b736b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 240d-248a
/  Narcissism,  406b-c  /  General  Introduction, 528d-530b; 581b-583d /
Group  Psychology,  685c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 783 b784a /
New Introductory Lectures, 856b-861c; 862d-863c 2c. Romantic, chivalric,
and courtly love: the idealization and supremacy of the beloved 7 Plato:
Lysis, 15c-d; 18b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11411191] 59a-d

[1128b]
1070  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2. i^ 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, 11 2c-4a; v
7a8b;  purgatory,  ii [106-133] 55c-d; xiv [91126] 74c-75a; xxiv [49-63]
90a-b;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b  22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida la-155a /
Knight's Tale 174a-211a esp [1092-1186] 178a179b,
[i 574-1 627] 186a-b /
Tale  of  Wife of Bath 270a-277a esp [6832-6846] 276b-277a / Franl^lin's
Tale
[11,099-125]
352b;
[11,754766b] 363a / Sir Thopas 396a-400a
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 106a-b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  82b-88d esp 84b-85d; 307a; 416d-419b; 426c-431c 26 Shakespeare:
Taming of the Shrew 199a228a,c esp act i, sc i [151-181] 204a-b, act ii,
sc  I  [115-326] 209b-211c / Two Gentlemen of Verona 229a-253a,c esp act
ii, sc iv [126-177] 237c-238a, act hi, sc i [169-187] 242b, sc n
[66-98] 245a-b / Love's Labour's Lost 254a284d esp act iv, sc hi 268b-272c, act v, sc ii
[762-888] 283a-284b / Romeo and Juliet 285a319a,c
esp  act ii, sc ii 294b-296b / Midsummer-Night's Dream 352a-375d esp act
i, sc I [128-179] 353d-354b / Much Ado About Nothing 503a-531a,c esp act
hi,  sc i-ii 514b516d / Henry V, act v, sc ii [98-306] 564b566a / As You
Like  It  597a-626a,c  esp  act  ii,  sc IV [22-56] 605c-d, ACT hi, sc v
615c-617a, act IV, sc I [93-108] 617d-618a, act v, sc ii
[32-45] 622b
27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night  la-28d  esp  act i, sc I [1-15] la-b /
Hamlet,  acti,  sc  hi 34b-35d esp [5-51] 34c-d, [84-136] 35b-d/ Troilus
and  Cressida  103a-141a,c  esp  act  hi,  sc ii 120b122c, ACT IV, sc IV
128b-129d,  act  v,  sc n 134c-137a / All's Well That Ends Well 142a173d
esp ACT I, sc i
[88-244]
143b-144c / Othello, ACT I, sc hi
[158-169]
210c-d  /  Cymbeline, act i, sc iv [36-185] 453a-454b / Tempest, act hi,
sc  i  537b-538b / Sonnets, cxxx-cxxxi 606a-b 29 Cervantes : Don Quixote
esp part i, 3a-b, 32c-34d, 43d-45a, 80b-89c, 94a-98a, part ii, 317a-331a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi, prop 33-36 406c407c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  iv  [172-340]  156a159b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 14b-16b; 55d;
68d-69a;   72a-73a,c;   76c-77b;   84a-c;  108c-lllc;  124d;  199b-200a;
400a-402d   38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxviii,  244a'C  44
B0SWE1.1.:  Johnson,  107a;  291a;  409c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofHistory,
part iv, 323b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3374-3413] 82b-83a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  23a-24a; 35b36c; 49b-c; 50a; bk hi, 129d-130b;
160d161b;   BK  IV,  165a-168d;  183d-193d  passim;  bk  VI,  249d-250a;
251d-254c; 262b-271c; bk VII, 276c-277a; 291a-292b; 296a-302d; bk

[1129a]
Id Chapter 50: LOVE 1071 VIII, 314b; 316b-c; 318a-340c; bk ix, 367c369a;
373c-374a;  377b-d;  379a-381d; bk x, 417c-421c; 439d; 443c-444a; bk xi,
520d521b;  522c-527b;  bk  xii, 539c-545a; 555d556a; bk xv, 635a-644a,c;
epilogue  i,  652b654a  53 James: Psychology, 190a 54 Freud: Narcissism,
410c-d  /  Group  Psychology, 682a-683a; 694c-695d / Civilization and Us
Discontents, 768a 2d. Conjugal love: its sexual, fraternal, and romantic
components  Old  Testament: Genesis, 2:23-24; 24:67; 29:2830 / / Samuel,
1:1-8—  (D)  /  Kings, 1:1-8 / // Samuel, 11; 13:1-20— (D) II Kings, 11;
13:1-20  / Proverbs, 5; 6:20-7:27 / Ecclesiastes, 9:9 / Song of Solomon—
{ID)  Ca/iticle  of Canticles Apocrypha: Tobit, 6:10-17— (D) ^T, Tobias,
6:11-22 / Ecclesiasticus, 7:19,26; 25:1; 40:23 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
7:21,28;  25:1-2; 40:23 New Testament: Matthew, 19:4-6 / Mar}{, 10:6-9 /
/ Corinthians, 7:1-15,32-34 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 / Colossians, 3:18-19 /
/  Peter,  3:1-7 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xiv [153-360] 99d-101d / Odyssey, bk
xxiii
[152-365]
313d-316a; bk XXIV [191-202] 319a 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[681-781] 59b-60b
/ Choephoroe
[585-651]
75d-76b;
[892-930]
78d-79b   5   Sophocles:   Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  5  Euripides:  Medea
212a-224a,c  esp [446-662] 215d-217c / Hippolytus 225a-236d esp [373481]
228b-229b / Alcestis 237a-247a,c esp
[152-198] 238c-239a, [329-368] 240a-b / Suppliants
[990-1071]
267a-c / Trojan Women
[634-683]
275c-d  /  Helen  298a-314a,c  /  Andromache  315a-326a,c  esp [147-308]
316c317d  /  Electra  [988-1122]  336a-337b  5  Aristophanes: Lysistrata
583a-599a,c / Thesmophoriazusae 600a-614d esp
[383-532]
604d-606a 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi, 197a-c; bk ix, 311b-312d 7 Plato:
Symposium, 152d-153a / Republic, BK V, 361b-363b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
viii, ch 12 [1162*15-28] 414c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11921287] 59d-61a,c
13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[452-527]
95b-98a / Aeneid, bk ii
[730-794]
144b-146b; bk iv
[1-361] 167a-177a
14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 39d-40b / LycurgusNuma, 62d-63c / Solon, 71d-72a
/  Demetrius, 731a-b / Antony, 756c-779d / Marcus Brutus, 807b-d; 811c-d
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  64b-c;  bk xi, 107b110a; BK XII, 121c 17
Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr v, ch i lOOc-lOlc

[1129b]
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk it, par 2-8 9blOd; BK IV, par 2 19d; bk
vi, par 21-25 ^IC' 42d; BK IX, par 19 22 67a-d / City of God, BK XIV, CH
16-26  390a-396c; bk xv, ch 16 411b-c / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 12
663a-c;  ch 18-21 664d-666b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92 A
2, ANS 489d-490c; q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 28, a
4, ans 742d-743c 20 Aquians: Summa Theologica, parti-ii, q 105, A 4, ANS
318b-321a;  part  ii-ii, q 26, a ii 518b' 519a; part hi, q 6, a i, rep 3
740b-741b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, viii
[67-84] 65a; xxv [109-139] 92c-d
22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Tale  212b-223b  /  Wife  of  Bath'  s  Prologue
[5583-6410]  256a-269b  /  Tale  of Wife ofBath 270a-277a / Clerl(s Tale
2963318a  /  Merchant's  Tale  319a-338a  / Franklin's Tale [11,041-125]
351b-352b  /  Manciple's  Tale *[i7, 088-103] "^90^ / Person s Tale, par
79-80  541a-542a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 155b-c; part iv, 272d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  8c-d;  bk  II,  73b-74b;
106a-108d;   109c-126d;   BK   III,   144d-146a;  148d-150d;  154a-156c;
159d-163c; 166a-169d; 186d-188c; 196b-d; 197b-198b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
37c-39c;  84a-b;  89d90c; 306d-307a; 358b-362a; 406a-434d esp 410a-413a;
472a-473a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act v, sc hi
[80-195]
28a-29b; sc v
[48-78]
31d-32a / Comedy of Errors, act ii, sc i 152a-153b; sc 11
[i 12-148] 154c-d; act hi, sc
ii
[1-70]
157c158b;  ACT V, sc i [38-122] 165c-166b / Two Gentlemen of Verona, act
i,  sc  ii [1-34] 230d231b / Richard II, act v, sc i [71-102] 345d346b /
Henry V, act v, sc ii [98-306] 564b566a / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i
[261-309]
577b-c / As You LiJ^e It, act iv, sc i
[i 15-157]
618a-c;  act v, sc iv [114-156] 625a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc
ii
[137-159]
33a; sc iii
[5-51] 34c-d; sc v
[34-91] 37b-d;
ACT  III,  sc  I  [120-157]  48b-c  /  Merry Wives of Windsor 73a-102d /
Othello  205a-243a,c  esp  ACT  IV,  sc  III  235d-237a,  act  v,  sc ii
238d243a,c  / Cymbeline 449a-488d esp act ii, sc V 463a-c, act hi, sc iv
466d-468d, act v, sc V [25-68] 483c-484a,
[129-227] 484d-485d
/  Tempest,  act  iv,  sc i [1-133] 542b-543a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part i, 120b137d; PART II, 261c-262a; 270c-271a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  appendix,  xix-xx  449a  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [440-504]
162a163b;
[736-775]
168b-169a; bk v
[443-450]
185a; bk viii
[39-65]
233a-b;
[491-520]
243a-b;  bk  ix  [226-269]  252a-253a;  [952-959]  268a;  bk x [888-908]
293b-294a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 193b-194a; 522a523a

[1130a]
(2.  The  kinds  of  love. 2d. Conjugal love: its sexual, fraternal, and
romantic  components.^  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  2b-c; 14b-16b; 17a-b
30a-32a;   118d;   124a-125b;   130b-c;   167c-168d  230a-231c;  283b-c;
289b-291a;  321b-322a  332a-333a; 349b-350b; 352d-353a; 360b-d 405a,c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  364d-365b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92c-93a;
649c-652a  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 419a-420b 44 BoswEi.1.: Johnson,
22a; 57a; 64a; 107a; 160b; 194a; 291a; 294d-295a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  158 58a; par 161-168 58b-60c; additions, ioi-ioS
133b-134c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[4243-4250]
104a;  PART  II  [9356-9944] 227a-241b 51 Tolstoy: War a?id Peace, bk i,
3a-c;  bk hi, 122b-c; BK IV, 177a-179d; bk vi, 245d-249d 269c-d; bk vii,
287a-291a  passim;  301b-302d  bk VIII, 311a-313a; epilogue i, 660d-661b
669d-672a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Kara7nazov,  bk  i,  4a5b;  BK II,
21b-24d;   39a  53  James:  Psychology,  735a-b  54  Freud:  Narcissism,
404d-406b  /  Group  Psychology,  694b-695a / New Introductory Lectures,
862d-863c  3.  The morality of love 3</. Friendship and love in relation
to  virtue  and  happiness  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [666-683]  148d-149a  5
Euripides: Suppliants
[955-1164] 266d-268c
/  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d-430a  7 Plato: Lysis, 19d-24b /
Symposium,  152d155c;  164c-167d / Republic, bk i, 299b-c; 308b-309b; bk
hi, 333b-334b; bk ix, 417b418a / Critias, 485c-d / Seventh Letter, 804c;
805b-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch i
[116^31-39]
162d;
[116^36-117^4]
163c; ch 2
[118^1-7]
164d; CH 3 [118^5-9] 165c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch ii 346c-347a; bk
IV, CH 6 373d-374b passim ; bk vih, ch i
[i i 55*
1-32] 406b,d; ch 2 [1155^16-26] 407a-b; ch 3
[1156^6-32] 408a-c; ch 4-5 408c-409d; ch 6
[1158^22-28] 410a-b; ch
7
[i 158^29-1 159=*! 2]
410d-411a;  ch 8 411b-d esp [1159^2-10] 411c; ch 13 414d-415d passim; bk
ix, ch i [1164^33- ^6] 417b; CH 3 418c-419a passim; ch 4 419a420a; ch 6
[1167^5-15] 420d-421a; ch 8-12
421d-426a,c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1360^1930]
601a-b;
[1361^35-40]
602c; bk ii, ch 4
[1381*^36-^9] 627b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10581191] 57d-59d
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d170a; BK HI, CH 16 191a-d; bk
iv, ch 2 223d224b

[1130b]
I  1072  THE  GREAT IDEAS 3/0 3^ 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi, sect 9
303b  14  Plutarch: Alcibiades, 156c-158b / Pelopidas, 233b-d / Cato the
Younger,  623a-b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par i 13b-c; bk IV,
par  7-14 20d-23a; bk vi, par 11-26 38b43a passim / City of God, bk xix,
ch  3,  SlOd; ch 5-9 513d-516c; ch 13-14 519a-520d / Christian Doctrine,
bk  i,  ch 27-30 631d633 b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 60, A
4,  REP  3  312c-313b;  part  i-ii, q 4, a 8 636a-c; q 27, a i 737b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, partii-h, q 23, AA 3-8 485a-489c; q 31, a i,
rep  3  536d537c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi [13-90] 15b16a;
PURGATORY, XV
[40-81]
75d-76a; xvii
[82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida, bk h, stanza 111-112 36a; stanza i
19-128  37a-38a;  bk  hi, STANZA 241-247 86a-b; stanza 254-258 87b88a 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii, 24b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk   i,   65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  82b-88d;  396a-398c  passim;
431c-432d;  478b-c  26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act iv, sc III
268b-272c / Richard II, act ii, sc hi
[46-49] 333a-b / Midsummer-Night's Dream,
act I, sc I [67-78] 353a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii
[57-99]
49c-50a  /  Othello, act iv, sc ii [47-64] 233c-d / King Lear, act v, sc
hi
[1-26] 279a-b
/ Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act i, sc ii
[91-107] 398a-b, ACT
iii,  sc  11 [71-94] 404c-d, sc HI [27-42] 405b, ACT IV, sc I 409c-d, sc
hi
[249-305]
413c-414a  /  Sonnets,  xxv  590a;  cxxxvii-cLii  607a-609c  31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  46  438c-d; PROP 70-73 445c-447a; appendix, ix
448a;  XX 449a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 211 211b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
165b-166a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  17a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
343d-345c   /  Political  Economy,  373c-374a  43  Mill:  Representative
Government, 367d-368a 44 Bosvvell: Johnson, 83b-c; 107a; 423c-d; 490a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, ioi 133b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3125-3136]
76a-b;
[3374-3413]
82b-83a; part ii
[9356-95731
227a-232a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 36b-39b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
312a-314b;  317c-d; 592d-593a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15b- 16a;
bk  HI, 116c-117a; 122b-c; 127d-128d; bk iv, 183d-186c; bk v, 201a-c; bk
vi, 266c-267c; BK VIII, 311a-313a; 327a-329c; 340c-341a,c; I

[1131a]
3^  to  3c  Chapter  BK  IX,  377b-c;  bk  x,  465a-c;  bk xi, 476c480a;
525c-526b;  bk  xv,  641c 643b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
27c-d; BK III, 58d-59b; bk vi, 158b-159a; 165b-170b passim 54 Frcld: War
and   Death,  758c-d  /  Civilization  and  Us  Discontents,  774d-775a;
782d-783b;  792a-796c  3^.  The  demands  of  love and the restraints of
virtue:  moderation  in  love; the order of loves 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant
Maidens la-14a,c / Agamemnon [681-781] 59b-60b / Choephoroe
[585-651] 75d-76b; [892-930] 78d-79b
5 Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d / Electra
[988-1122]
336a-337b / Iphigenia at Aulis
[543-589] 429d-430a
7  Plato: Symposium, 165b-167d; 170b-171c / Republic, bk hi, 333d-334b /
Timaeus,  474b-c  /  Lau^s,  BK V, 687b; bk viii, 735b-738c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*11-16]
341b  /  Politics,  bk  vii, ch 7 [1327^40-1328*17] 532a-b 12 EvicTLTvs:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  ii  116d-118d;  BK  II,  cH 10 148c-150a; ch 18
161a-162b; bk IV, cH 2 223d-224b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 39d-40a / Solon,
66b-d  /  Alexander, 550b-551a / Demetrius, 740d741c / Antony-Demetrius,
780c-d  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a; tr vi, ch 5
23b-24a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  V 100c-106b / Sixth Ennead, tr ix, ch 9,
359b-c  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  1-8 9alOd; par 16-17
12c-13a;  bk  hi,  par i 13b-c; BK VI, par 18-26 40d-43a; bk vii, par 11
47a-c;  BK  VIII, par 10-30 55c-61c passim; bk xiii, par 8 112b-c / City
of  God,  bk  xh,  ch  8  346d347b; BK XIV, ch 7 380c-381c; bk xv, ch 22
416a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 27 631d; BK III, ch 10, 662a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 98, A 2, ANS and rep 3 517d-519a;
part  i-ii,  q  26, a 3, rep 3 735c-736b; q 28, a i, rep 2 740b741a; a 5
743c-744b;  q  29, a 4 747a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
55,  A  I,  REP  4  26b-27a;  q 62, a 2, rep 3 60d-61b; Q 66, A 6, rep I
80c-81b;  q  73, a i, rep 3 119c120c; q 77, A 4 148b-149a; q 84, a 2 esp
rep  3 175b-176a; q 86 184a-185c; part ii-ii, q 15, A 3 453c-454c; q 23,
a 5, rep 1-2 486b-487a; a 6, rep I 487a-d; q 25, a 4, rep 3 503c-504a; a
5  504a-c;  qq  26-27  510b-527b;  q  45,  a  6  602b-603c;  q  46,  a 3
604d-605a,c;  q  184, a i 629a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v 7a-8b;
xi
[13-90]
15b-16a; purgatory, xvi
[85-102]
77d; XVII [82]-xviii
[75] 79b-80c; xix [1-69]
81c-82a; xxv [i09]-xxvi
[148] 92c-94c; xxxxxxi 99b-102b; paradise,
i [97-142] 107b-d; VI
[i 12-126] 114d-115a

[1131b]
50:  LOVE  1073 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 240 119b
120a  23  HoBBus:  I^et'iathan,  part  i, 63a 24 Rabhlais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  188d-191c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 89d-90c; 184a-d;
350d351b;  353c-354b; 398c-399d; 406a-434d esp 431c 432d 26 Shakespeare:
Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  ii,  sc VI 300c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
appendix,  xix-xx 449a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [443-450] 185a; bk
viii
[500-617] 243a-245b
/  Areopagitica,  390b-391a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  8c-10c;  78c-d;
198d199a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345c-346d  44  Boswell:  /oA/zjow,
67c-68a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 106 134a 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk hi, 122b-c; 127d-128d; bk v, 201a-c; bk vi, 249d-250a;
BK   viii,  318a-340c;  bk  xi,  476c-480a;  epilogue  I,  660d-661b  52
Dostoevsky:   Brothers   Karamazov,  bk  ii,  20a-b  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  624a-625b  /  Group Psychology, 682 d 3c. The conflict of
love  and  duty:  the  difference  between the loyalties of love and the
obligations  of justice Old Testament: Genesis, 22:1-19 / Exodus, 23:4-5
/  Leviticus,  19:17-18  /  Deuteronomy,  13:6-11;  21:18-21  /  Judges,
11:28-40  /  //  Samuel,  11-13—  (D) II Kings, 11-13 / Proverbs, 20:22;
24:29;  25:21  New  Testament:  Matthetu, 5:38-48 / Romans, 12:17-21 / I
Peter,  3:8-18  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  vi [369-502] 43d-45a 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon [184-247] 54a-c 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d esp
[1-^9]
131a-132a,
[162-210] 132c-d,
[441-470] 134d135a
/   Philoctetes   182a-195a,c  esp  [895-1292]  190a-193c  5  Euripides:
Hippolytus 225a-236d / Orestes
[356-806]
397b-402c  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata
583a-599a,c esp
[706-780] 592b-593b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv, 139a-b; bk vi, 197a-b; bk vii, 223c-d 7
Plato:  Euthyphro  191a-199a,c  / Seventh Letter, 813d-814a 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk hi, ch i
[116*31-39]
162d;  CH2  [118^1-7]  164d  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 6 373d-374b
passim; bk viii, ch I
[1155*22-28] 406d; ch 7
[1158^29-1159*13] 410d-411a; ch 9
[1159^251160*8] 411d-412b; ch ii 413b-d; bk viii, ch
12 [ii62*29]-BK IX, CH 3 [1165^37] 414d-419a;

[1132a]
(3.  The  morality  of  love.  "be.  The  conflict of love and duty: the
difference between the loyalties of love and the obligations of justice^
BK IX, CH 5 [1167^10-20] 420b-c; ch 6 [1167^515] 420d-421a 12 Lucretius:
'Nature of Things, bk iv
[11211140] 58d-59a
12  AuRE'Lius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b; BK VIII, SECT 39 288c
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv [333-361] 176a-177a 14 Plutarch: Poplicola,
77d-79c  /  Coriolanus,  189d-191d  / Timoleon, 196b-198b / Marcus Cato,
278d-279c  /  Agesilaus,  482b-c;  486c;  491c-492b  / Agis, 654c-655a /
Antony,  756c779c  esp  772b-c  /  Marcus  Brutus,  816c-d  15  Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  hi, 248c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 23, A
5,  REP  3 135d-137d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 66, A 4,
REP  I  78c-79b; q 114, a 4 373a-d; part ii-ii, Q 23, a 3, REP I 485a-d;
qq  25-27 501a-527b; qq 31-33 536d-558d; q 44 592d598c 21 Dante: Divi?ie
Comedy, purgatory, x
[7093] 68a-b; xv [85-114] 76b-c
25  Montaigne: Essays, 83a-87c 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act
iv, sc III 268b-272c /Julius Caesar, act hi, sc ii
[11-44] 583d-584a
27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a350d  esp  act hi, sc x-xi
332c-334a,  sc  xiii 334c-337a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 71b-c;
108c-109b; 177a-b; part ii, 332d-333b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
24b;  75d76a  32  Milton: Samson Agonistes [843-870] 358a-b 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  27b-30a  esp  29d;  77c78b; 79d-80b; 116d-117a 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  373a-b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233c 42 Kant:
Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 259a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  368c-d;  371b-372a;  375d-376b  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
389c-390a,c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  466c-467a; 468b-469b; 474b-c 44
Bosw-Ei.!.'.  Johnson, 2d-3a; 392b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par 162 58b-d; additions, 23 120d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi,
123d-124a;  bk  VI, 271d; bk vii, 291a-292b; 301b-302b; BK VIII, 338c-d;
bk ix, 365d-366a; bk xi, 474a-b; 520c-d; bk xii, 545b-547a; 548d549c esp
549b;  epilogue  i, 655b-c; 670d671a 54 Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  20c-d  /  General  Introduction, 452c-d; 573c / War and
Death,   757c-759d   /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  783c-784d;
785c786d; 799a-800a esp 800a; 801a

[1132b]
1074  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3c  to  4 bd. The heroism of friendship and the
sacrifices of love Old Testament: Genesis, 29:20 /Judges, 11:2840 / Ruth
/  I  Samuel,  20;  23:15-18—  (D)  I  Kings,  20;  23:15-18  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  6:14-16— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 6:14-16 New Testament:
/o^«, 15:13 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xvi 112a-121d; bk xviii
[1-126] 130a-131c
5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c / Prometheus
Bound 40a-51d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[324-460]
117a-118b  /  Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax [126613 1 5] 154a-b / Trachiniae
170a-181a,c esp
[1157-1258] 180a-181a,c
5 Euripides: Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Heracleidae
[295-332]
251a-b;
[500-601]
252c-253b / Suppliants [990-1071] 267a-c / Heracles Mad
[55-59] 365c-d;
[562-584] 369d-370a;
[12141228] 375c
/ Phoenician Maidens [929-1018] 386b-387b / Orestes
[356-806]
397b-402c;
[1069-1097] 404d-405a
/ Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 73d 7 Plato:
Symposium, 152b-153b / Republic, BK V, 366d-367a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
viii, ch 7
[1158^291159^12] 410d-411a; bk ix, ch 2-3 417c-419a;
CH 8 [1169^18-^2] 422d-423a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ix [168-449] 283b-291a
14  Plutarch: Theseus, 12a-b / Alcibiades, 156c158b / Pelopidas, 233b-d;
238d-239d   15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xvi,  183a-c  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part ii-ii, Q26, A 4, REP 2 512c-513b; a 5 esp rep 3 513b-d;
Q 184, A 2, REP 3 629d-630d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxii
[124]-
xxxiii  [90] 49a-50c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 358b-362a 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry VI, act iv, sc vVII 23d-26a / Merchant of Venice 406a-433d esp ACT
I,   sc  I  [153-160]  407d-408a,  act  hi,  sc  II  [295-299]  423a  27
Shakespeare:   Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a350d  /  Sonnets,  lxxxvii-xc
599c-600a  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk ix [896-989] 267a269a / Samson
Agonistes  [871-902] 358b-359a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 30a-31a;
bk  HI,  127d-128d;  135c-137c;  140c-142d;  159d160a;  BK  IV,  167c-d;
185b-186c; bk vii, 277d278a; 291a-292b; 301b-302b; bk viii, 327a330a; bk
xii,  545b-547a;  bk xv, 615a-616a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
iv,  96b-99a;  bk  v,  121d-122d;  bk  xii,  367c-368c  4. The social or
political  force  of  love,  sympathy,  or  friendship  5 Aristophanes :
Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 31d-32a; bk hi,
106a-c; bk iv, 126a-b; bk vi, 189c; bk vii, 225d-226b; bk vni, 281d-282a

[1133a]
4  to  4^  Chapter  50: LOVE 1075 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ir,
395d-399a;  bk  hi,  419a;  bk vi, 523c-524c; 534b-c 7 Plato: Symposium,
152b-d;  154a-b  / Republic, BK V, 360d-365d / Laws, bk iv, 678c679a; bk
v,  692b-c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch i [1155*22-28] 406d; CH 4
[ii57''25-27]  409a;  ch  9-12  411d414d;  bk  IX,  ch 6 420c-421a; ch 8
421d-423a esp
[1169*6-32] 422c-423a
/  Politics, bk ii, CH 3-4 456c-458a; ch 5 [1263*23-^27] 458b-d; bk III,
CH  9  [1280^33-1281*4]  478c;  bk  iv,  ch  II  495b-496d; bk vii, ch 7
[1327^40-1328*17] 532a-b 12 AuRELius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  21a-24d  /  Lycurgus  32a48d  / Numa Pompilius,
59d-60b  /  Pelopidas, 233b-d; 238d-239d / Agesilaus, 482b-c; 483d484a /
Pompey,   521c-d  /  Demetrius,  737b-d  /  Aratus,  835b-c;  844b-d  18
Augustine:  City  ofGod,  bk  xix, ch 24 528b-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xi [13-90] 15b16a; XIII
[52-78]
18b-c;  xxxii-xxxiii 47c51b; pu»rgatory, xvii [82-139] 79b-d 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  hi, STANZA 4-5 55a; stanza 250-253 87a-b 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii, 24a-d; ch XXI, 32a-c 23 HoBBEs: Leviathan,
part  i,  63a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 86d-87b; 396a-d; 467b470a; 486b-489b
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  46 410c; PART IV, prop 18, schol
429a-d; prop 29-40 431d-437a passim; prop 73 446c-447a; appendix, ix-xii
448a-b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  70b  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones,
169d-170a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 15d16a; bk v, 18d-19c;
bk  xii,  93d-94a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331b; 343d345c; 362c-d /
Political  Economy,  372b-377b  /  Social  Contract, bk iv, 437c-438c 42
KaxNt:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  269d / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of Ethics, 375d-376b 43 Federalist: number 2, 31c-d; number 17
69a-70d;  number 27, 95c-d; number 46, 150c-151a 43 Mill: Representative
Government, 424c-425d; 428b-c / Utilitarianism, 453a-454a; 459d-461c esp
460a; 469c-470c 44 Bosv/Ehi.: Johnson, 169d-170b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  172b-d  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a-310d esp 309a,
310b;  592d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk hi, 135c-137c; 140c-142d;
146d-147c;  159b-161b;  bk  v,  214c216d;  bk  IX,  379a-388a,c;  bk xi,
513d-521c;   527b-532a,c;  epilogue  i,  669b-c  53  James:  Psychology,
717b-718a  54 Freud: Group Psychology, 672a-695d csp 674a, 678a-c, 680b,
686b-c / Ego and Id,

[1133b]
707c-d  /  War  and Death, 758c-759d / Civilization and Its Discontents,
781  d-  791  d  esp  782c,  783b-c, 785c-d, 791c; 799a-d; 802c 4a. Love
between  equals  and  unequals,  like  and  unlike:  the  fraternity  of
citizenship 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1063-1084]
109a-b  6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 87c-88a; bk vii, 258d 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk ii,395d399a esp 396c-d 7 Plato: Lysis, 19d-21b /
Protagoras,  52b  / Republic, bk v, 360d-365d / Laws, bk vi, 707c-708a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155*22-28] 406d; [1155*33-^^12]
406d-407a; ch 3 [1156^723] 408a-b; ch 6
[ii58*27]-ch
7
[1159*12]
410b-411a; bk viii, ch 8 [ii59'^i]-bk ix, ch 3
[1165^37] 411c-419a
/ Politics, bk iv, ch ii 495b-496d; bk vii, ch 7
[i327''40-i328*i7]
532a-b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  13 120b-c; bk II, CH 22
167d-170a  12  AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  xi, sect 9 303b 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  20d-21a  /  Lycurgus,  36a-b  /  Cato  the  Younger, 623a-b 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk xii, 121d-122a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch
15-16  521a-522a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 60, X 4, ANS
312c-313b;  q  96,  a 3, rep 2 512a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii, q 26, A 8 516a-517a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, vi
[58151] 61b-62c
30 Bacon; Advancement of Learning, 89a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
27  404b-d;  PART IV, PROP 29-40 431d-437a; prop 73 446c-447a; appendix,
ix-xii  448a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 5 26a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,   part  iv,  165b-166a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  113d-116d;
308a-314d  38  Montesquieu  :-5/7/nV  of  Laws, bk v, 19a-d 38 Rousseau:
Political Economy, 372b-377b 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 326b-327a / Pref
Metaphysical   Elements  of  Ethics,  375d.-376b  /  Science  of  Right,
400b,d-401b  43  Federalist:  number  14, 62a-b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
459d-461c esp 460a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 224a; PART
IV,  341a-c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  381a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
317c-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15a-b; bk v, 214c-216d; bk vi,
242c-243c;  27ab-c;  bk  vii,  278c-279b; 280b-281a; bk viii, 311a-313a;
314c-316a;  326b-c; 329d-330a; 330d-332a; bk xi, 513d-521c; 527b-532a,c;
bk  xii,  543b544a;  bk  xiii,  576a-b;  bk  xiv,  608d;  bk xv, 617b-d;
621b-626d; 631c-633a; 640a; epilogue I, 652b-654a; 669d-672a

[1134a]
1076  The  social  or politicalforce of love, sympathy, (4 orfriendship.
4a. Love between equals and unequals, like and unlike: the fraternity of
citizenship.)  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-170b 54
Freud:  Group  Psychology,  674b-675a;  676c-d;  687d; 691d-692a 4b, The
dependence of the state on friendship and patriotism: comparison of love
and  justice  in  relation  to  the  common  good 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii
[230-250] 84c-d 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[162-210]
132c-d / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[929-1018]
386b-387b  6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 142c; bk vii, 225d'226b; 239a-c;
258b'd; bk viii, 273d 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397d398c;
402b-404a;  bk hi, 419a 7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 308b-309b / Laws, BK V,
692b-c; 694d / Seventh Letter, 804b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch i
[i 155^^22-28]
406d; CH 9-12 411d-414d; bk ix, ch 6 420c421a; ch 8 421d-423a esp
[1169^6-32] 422c423a /
Politics, bk ii, ch 3-4 456c-458a esp ch 4
[1262*40-^23]
457c-d; bk hi, ch 9
[1280^^3-1281*4]
478c; BK IV, ch ii 495b496d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d / Pelopidas, 233b-d / Sertorius, 467d-469a
/  Dion,  784d785a;  798b-d  18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 21-24
524a-528c  19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, A 5, ANS
313b-314c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 99, A I, rep 2
245c-246b;  a  2, ans 246b-247a; part ii-ii, q 26, A 3, ans 511d-512c; a
8,  ans  and  rep 3 516a-517a; qq 37-42 570c584d; Q 45, A 6 602b-603c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  84b-85a;  382b-383d; 471a-c 26 Shakespeare: Richard
II,  act  i,  sc  hi  [275309]  326c-d;  act  ii, sc i [40-68] 328a-b 27
Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act v, sc hi
[94i7i]388a-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d; appendix, ix-xvii
448a-d  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-870] 358a-b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  xxiia-d;  bk  IV, 15d-16a; bk v, 18d-19c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  323b-d; 325a-b / Political Economy, 372b-377b esp 373c-374a
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437b-438c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
ofMorals, 269d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 375d376b

[1134b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4^  to  \c 43 Federalist: number 2, 31c-d; number 14,
62a-b; number 27, 95c-d; number 45, 148b-d; number 62, 189b-c; 191b-c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  343a;  424cI  425d; 428b-c 44 'Qos^'
-EiA.:  Johnson,  253c 46 Hegel: Philosophy ofRight, part hi, par 267269
84b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 283c-d; part hi, 298c-d 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 214c-216d; bk xi, 474a-b; 475b-476c; bk
xii,  537b-538a  4c.  The brotherhood of man and the world community Old
Testament:  Genesis, 4:1-15 / Exodus, 12:48-49; 22:21; 23:9 / Leviticus,
19:1718,33-34; 24:22 / Deuteronomy, 10:18-19 / / Kings, 8:41-43— (D) ///
Kings,   8:41-43   /   Psalms,  22:27-31;  68:29-35;  103:19-22;  133:1;
145:11-13— (D) Psalms, 21:28-32; 67:30-36; 102:19-22; 132:1; 144:11-13 /
Isaiah,  2:1-4—  (D)  Isaias,  2:1-4 / Jeremiah, 16:19-21— (D) Jeremias,
16:19-21  /  EzeJ^iel, ^y 126-28— (D) Ezechiel, 37:26-28 / Micah, 4:1-4—
(D)  Micheas,  4:1-4  /  Malachi,  2:10—  (D) Malachias, 2:10 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  25:1—  (Z))  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 25:1-2 New Testament:
Matthew,  12:46-50;  19:19;  22:39;  23:8-9; 25:34-40 / Mar\, 12:31-33 /
Luhe,  10:27  I  John,  1:12;  13:34-35;  15:9-17;  17:26; 18:36 / Acts,
17:22-34 esp 17:24-26 / Romans, 8:14-19; 12; 13:8-10; 14:10 / Galatians,
5:13-14  /  Ephesians,  2:13-22;  4:1-16  esp  4:13-16;  4:32;  5:1-2  /
Philippians,  2:1-2  /  Colossians,  y.g-ij  esp 3:11 / / Thessalonians,
4:9-10  /  Hebrews,  13:1-3  / James, 2:8 / I Peter, 1:22; 3:8 / I John,
2:9-11; 3:2,10-18; 4:7-5:2 / II John, 5 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk vi
[207] 216b; bk
vii
[181] 220a; bk xiv [55-56] 260d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 20b-d; 31d-32a; bk IV, 137a-138c; bk vi,
189c  9  Aristotle: Po/z//<r^', bk i, ch 2 [1252^6-8] 445d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 9 114c-116b; CH 13 120b-c; BK II, ch 10 148c-150a;
ch 20, 164d-165c; bk hi, ch ii 187a-b; ch 22, 199c-d; CH 24 203c-210a 12
AuRELius:  Meditations,  bk  hi, sect 4 260b261a; sect ii 262a-b; bk iv,
sect  3-4  263b264a;  bk vi, sect 44 278b-c; bk xi, sect 9 303b; SECT 13
303d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
llOa-llla;  bk vi [845-853] 233b-234a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii,
ch  21-22  357a-c;  ch  27,  359d;  bk  xix, ch 7 515a-c; CH 17, 522d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 26, AA 6-8 514a-517a; q 184, a
2,  rep  3  629d'  630d  22  Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 31 517b-518b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 471a-c

[1135a]
to  5^(1) 27 Sharespeare: Timon of Athens, act iv, sc i 409c-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 31d-32a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix,
ix-xvii  448a-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  ofLaivs,  bk  xxiv,  206c  38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 355b-c / Political Economy, 369a-b; 373c / Social
Contract,  bk  IV,  437c-d  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 449c-458a,c csp
455c456a,  457a-458a.c  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  424c-428a  passim,  esp 426a-b / Utilitarianism, 451 b-c 44
Bosw'ei.l: Johnson, 392b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 224a
49  Darwin:  Descent'  of  Man,  317c-d;  318d 50 Marx-Kngels: Communist
Manifesto,  428a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii, 69a-c; bk v,
198b-203a  passim,  csp  199b 200d, 202d: 217a; BK VI, 244d-245d; bk ix,
375d:  bk  x,  466b-c;  BK  XII,  548d-549c  esp  549b: 555b-c; bk xiii,
575d-577a;  bk  xv, 625c-626d: 632b-c 52 DosTOEVSKv: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  i,  13c-d; bk v, 121d-122d; bk vi, 164b-170b esp 166c-167b 54 Freud:
Group  Psychology,  674c-d;  691d-692a  /  War  and Death, 755a-761c esp
755b-757c,  761a-c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 783a-b; 785d-788d
esp  786a-c, 788b-c . Divine love >«». God as the primary object of love
Old  Testament: Deuteronomy, 6:4-9 New Testament: Matthew, 6:33 / Lu/{e,
12:31  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 16, 158b-d; bk III, CH 24
203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  12, 243c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i
la-b;  bk  iv, par 7-20 20d-24c; bk vii, par 22 50a; 1bk VIII, par 10-30
55c-61c passim; bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c; bk x, par 8-1 1 73b- 74b; par 38
81a;  bk  xii,  par  10  101c;  par 23 104b-c / City of God, BK X, CH 18
310b-d;  bk  xii,  ch 8-9 346d-348b; bk xiv, ch 7, 380c-d; bk xv, ch 22,
416c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 3-4 625b-c; ch 9-10 627a-b; ch 22-23
629b-630c;  bk  hi,  ch 10, 662a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
12,  A  I,  ans  50c-51c;  a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 60, A 5 313b-314c; part
i-ii,  q i, a 8 615a-c; g 2, a I, rep 3 615d-616c; a 8 621c-622b; q 4, A
8,  ans and rep 3 636a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 109,
A  3  340c-341b;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  2,  rep  2 490b-d; q 25, a 12
509c-510b; q 26, aa 2-3 511a-512c; Q 27, a 3 522c-523b; a 8 526c-527b 21
Dante:   Divi?je  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [4081I  XXX-XXXI  107b-d;  IV
145d-146c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 99b-102b; paradise,
i
[97-142J
[ii5]-v [12] llld-112b; xxvi [1-81]

[1135b]
Chapter 50: LOVE 1077 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 88c-89a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, appendix, iv 447b-c; part v, prop 15-16 456c; prop 18
456d;  PROP  ^2  V-,  460b-c  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  325a-327d /
Judgement,  504b-505a;  611a-c  51  'I'olstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk ix,
373b-377b  passim;  bk  xi,  525c-526b; hk xii, 560a 561c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 127b-137c passim 5a{\) Man's love of God in
this  life:  respect  for  the moral law Old Testament: Exodus, 20:5-6 /
Deuteronomy,   5:9-10;   6;   7:9-11;  10:12;  11:1,13,22;  ly.y,  19:9;
30:6,15-20  /  Joshua, 22:1-6; 23:11 — (D) Josue, 22:1-6; 23:11 / Psalms
passim,  csp  18:1,  31:23,  97:10,  116:1,  119:132, 122:6, 145:20— (D)
Psalms  passim, esp 17:2, 30:24, 96:10, 114:1, 118:132, 121 :6, 144:20 /
Ecclesiastes,  12:13  /  Liaiah,  29:8-9— (D) Isaias, 29:8-9 / Jeremiah,
2:2—  (D)  Jeremias,  2:2  Apocrypha:  Tobit,  13:12-14— (D) OT, Tobias,
13:16-18 / Ecclesiasticus, 2; 7:30; 10:19; 13:14; 25:11-12; 34:16; 47:8—
(Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2; 7:32; 10:23; 13:18; 25:14-16; 34:19; 47:9-10
New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:36-38  / A/^r^, 12:30-32 / Lul{e, 10:25-28
/John,  14:15,21,2324  /  Acts, 20:22-24; 217-15 / Romans, 5:5; 8:28 / 7
Corinthians,  8:1-3  /  Ephesians,  3:14-21  /  II  Thessalonians, 3:5 /
Jatnes,  1:12;  2:5  / / Peter, 1:7-8 / I John, 2:5,12-17; 4:19-5:3 / II
John,  6  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 16 121d122d; BK II, CH 16,
158b-d;  bk  hi,  ch  24  203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch 12, 243c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk iii, par 15-16 17a-d; bk iv, par 14-19 22d-24b; bk vii,
par  23-24  50b-51a;  bk  viii,  par  10-30 55c-61c passim; bk ix, par i
61c-d;  wk  x,  par 8 73b-c; par 38-70 81a-89b / City of God, bk x, ch i
298b,d-299d;  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk  xii, ch 20 355b-357a; bk xiv, ch 28
397a-d;  bk xv, ch 22 416a-c; bk xix, cii 20 523d-524a; bk xxi, CH 15-16
572c-574a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  15-16  628b-d;  ch 22-23
629b-630c;  ch  26-27  631b-d;  ch  29-30 632a-633b; ch 33 633d-634b; ch
35-37  634c-635c; bk ii, ch 38, 654c 19 Aquinas: Su?mna Theologica, part
i,  q 62, A 9, REP I 324a-325b; q 82, a 3, ans and rep 3 433c-434c; part
i-ii,  q  27, a 2, rep 2 737d738c; q 28, A 5 743c-744b; q 35, a 5, rep i
775d-777a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, A 5, ANS and
rep  1,3 74c-75a; q 67, a 5 85d86d; Q 73, A I, rep 3 119c-120c; q iio, a
i  347d-349a; q 114, a 8 376a-d; part ii-ii, q 23, A I, rep I 482d-483d;
q  24,  a  2,  rep  2  490b-d; aa 4-12 491d-500d; q 27 520d-527b ^sp A 4
523c-524a; q 34 558d-562d; q 184, aa 1-3 629a-632c

[1136a]
1078 THE GREAT IDEAS {5a. God as the primary object of love. 5^(1) Man's
love  of  God in this life: respect for the moral law.) 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xv [4081] 75d-76a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, III
[91-108] llOb-c; XI 122a-123c; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c 22 Chaucer: Troilus
and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza 263-267 154b-155a / Parson's Tale, par 31
517b-518b  23  HoBBEs: Leviathan, part hi, 240d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  80b-81a  31  Descartes: Meditations, iii, 88d-89a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part iv, appendix, iv 447b-c; part v, prop 15-16 456c 32 Milton
:  Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk V [153-208] 178b-179b 33 Pascal:
Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 463-492 255a-259b;
544  266a;  556  270b-272a  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  321b-329a esp
326b327a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 370a-b; 375a-b /
Judgement,  504b-505a;  509a-c;  593a-d;  611a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part hi, 307b308a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 525c-526b;
BK  XII, 560a-561c; bk xiv, 608a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
v,  127b-137c  passim  5a{2)  Beatitude  as  the  fruition  of  love  18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c / City of God, bk xxii,
ch  29-30  614b618d  /  Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c; CH 32-33
633c-634b;  ch  38 635c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 62, AA
7-8 322d-324a; a 9, rep i 324a-325b; part i-ii, Q 2, A 8 621c-622b; q 4,
aa  1-3  629d631d; A 8 esp rep 3 636a-c; q 5, a 4 639a-640b 20 Aquinas :
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, A 5, ans and rep 1,3 74c-75a; q 67, a
6  87a-c;  Q  114,  a 4 373a-d; a 8 376a-d; part ii-ii, q 23, A I, rep I
482d-483d;  q  24,  a 6, rep i 493d-494b; a 7, rep i 494b-495b; a 8, ans
and  REP  I 495b-496a; a 9, ans and rep 3 496a-d; a ii, ans 498b-499c; q
25,  a 10 508b-d; q 26, a 13 519d-520d; q 28, a 3 528d-529c; q 184, a 2,
ans  and  rep  1-2  629d630d; part hi suppl, q 90, a 3 1014d-1016a; Q 93
1037c-1040c  esp  a 3 1039d-1040c; qq 95-96 1042c-1066a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xv [4081] 75d-76a; paradise 106a-157d esp iii
[34-90] 109d-110b, IV [ii5]-v
[12] llld-112b,
xxi
[19-102]
138c-139b, XXII
[61-69]
140b, XXVI
[1-81]
145d-146c,  xxviii  148d-150b,  XXX  [34-45] 152a-b, xxxiii 156b-157d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv  447b-c;  part v, prop 21-42
458a-463'd esp prop 32-37 460b-461c, prop 42 463b-d

[1136b]
5a(2)  to  5^(1) 32 Milton : Sonnets, xiv 66a 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
346b-347c  5b. Charity, or supernatural love, compared with natural love
New  Testament: / Corinthians, 13 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par
23-24  50b-51a;  bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c  passim; bk X, par 38-70
81a-89b;  bk  xiii,  par  8  112b-c / City of God, bk xv, ch 22 416a-c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch 10, 662a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 8, A 3, ANS and REP 4 36b-37c; q 60 310a-314c esp A I, REP 3
310b-311a,  a 5, ans and rep 4-5 313b-314c; q 62, a 2, rep i 318d-319c a
7  322d-323b;  q  63, a i, rep 3 325c-326c PART i-ii, Q 26, A I, ANS and
rep 3 734a-d A 2, ans 734d-735c; a 3, ans and rep 4 735c736b; Q 29, A I,
ANS  and  rep  3  745a-c; aa 4-5 747a-748b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
parti-h,  q  62, A 3, ANS and REP 3 61c-62b; q 65, a 5, rep i 74c-75a; q
109,  a  3  340c-341b;  q  no,  a  i 347d-349a; part ii-ii, q 24, aa 2-3
490b491  d;  A  10  496d-498a;  q  25,  aa  7-8 506a507c; Q 26, A 3, ANS
511d-512c;  a  5  513b-d; A 6, ANS 514a-d; aa 8-1 i 516a-519a; q 31, a 3
538b-539c;  q  32,  a 9 548c-549b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xv
[4081]  75d-76a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, IV [ii5]-v [12] llld-112b;
viii-ix  116d-120a  23  HoBBEs:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  240d  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 80b-81a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[576-605]
331b-332a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  793  326b-327a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
26a-27a  44  B0SWEL.1.: Johnson, 392b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
50a;  bk hi, 128c-d; bk v, 214c-218b; bk x, 465a-c; bk XI, 525c-526b; bk
xii,  560a-561c;  bk  xv,  617d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
121d-122d  passim  54  Freud: Group Psychology, 691d'692a / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents,  786a-d 5^(1) The precepts of charity: the law of
love  Old  Testament:  Leviticus,  19:17-18,33-34  /  Deuteronomy,  6:5;
10:12,18-19;  11:1,13,22;  13:3-4;  19:9;  24:19-22; 30:6,16 / Proverbs,
10:12; 25:21-22 Apocrypha: Wisdom ofSolomon, 3:9; 6:17-18— (D) OT, Bool^
of Wisdom, 3:9; 6:18-19 / Ecclesiasticus, 4:1-10; 13:14; 28:1-8; 29— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  4:1-11; 13:18; 28:1-11; 29 New Testament: Matthew,
5:20-26,38-48;  19:19;  22:34-40  /  Mar}{^,  12:28-34  / Luke, 6:27-38;
10:25-37  I John, 13:34-17:26 passim / Romans, 8:35-39; 12:9-21; 13:8-10
/  Corinthians,  8:1-3;  135  16:14  / // Corinthians, 2:411; 6; 8:7-8 /
Galatians, 5 / Ephesians, 1:4;

[1137a]
d  5b(2)  to  5c 3:17-19; 4:1-2,13-16,32; 5:1-2 / Philippians, 1:1-1 1 ;
2:1-2  /  Colossians,  3:12-15  / / Thessalonians, 3:12; 4:9-10; 5:8 / /
Timothy,  1:5;  6:11  /  //  Timothy,  1:7 / Hebrews, 10:24-25; 13:1-3 /
James,  2:8  / / Peter, 1:22; 2:17; 3:85 4:8-10 / // Peter, i:y / I John
esp  2:5, 2:15, 3:10-23, 4:7-5:3 / II John 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
x,  par  3-4  72a-b  /  City of God, bk x, ch 3 300b 301a; bk xxi, CH 22
576a-c;  ch  27  583a-586a,c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  22-30
629b-633b;  ch 33 633d-634b; ch 35 634c-d; bk ii, ch 7 638d639c; BK III,
CH  10  661c-662a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 60, A 5,
CONTRARY  313b-314c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, A 3,
contrary 72d-73d; q 91, a 5 211c212c; Q 99, A I, REP 2-3 245c-246b; a 2,
ans  246b-247a;  qq  106-108  321a-337d;  part  ii-ii,  Q 23, A 4, REP 3
485d-486b;  qq  2527  501a-527b; q 44 592d-598c; q 184, a 3 630d-632c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi [1-30] 68d-69a; xiii
[22-39]
72a-b; paradise, xi 122a-123c 22 Chaucer: Prologue [529-541] 168b / Tale
of  Melibeus  401a-432a  esp par 55-78 426a-432a / Parson's Tale, par 31
517b-518b;  par  68-69  533b-534b;  par  91-92  547a-b  26  Shakespeare:
Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv,  sc  I  [182-205] 427c-d 27 Shakespeare:
Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii,  sc  II  [71-79] 182d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  338b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [576-605]  331b332a  /  Areopagitica,
409b-410a  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  91a-94a / PenseeSy 663-670
293b-295b  passim  35  Locke:  Toleration, la-2c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
26a-27a  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason, 327c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
312b,d  [fn 27] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 214c-215b; BK VI, 271d;
bk  ix,  375d-376a; 377a-b; bk X, 465c; BK XI, 525c-526b; bk xii, 557b-c
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  26a-27d; 37c-38a; bk iv,
83c-84a;  bk v, 125d127b; 127b-137c passim; bk vi 146b,d-170d passim; uk
xii,  398a-b  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 786a5b{2) The
theological  virtue  of  charity:  its relation to the other virtues New
Testament: Romans, 5:5 / / Corinthians, 13 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
vi,  par 7-20 20d24c; BK VII, par 23-24 50b-51a; bk x, par 40 81c / City
of  God,  bk  x,  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk xiv, ch 7, 380c-d; bk xxi, ch 16
573b-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-40 635b636a, c; bk ii, ch 41
656a-c; bk hi, ch 10 661c-662a

[1137b]
Chapter  50:  LOVE 1079 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, A 4,
rep  3  309a  310a; q 82, a 3, rep 3 433c434c; Q 95, A 4, ans 509b 510a;
part i ii, q 4, A 2, rep 3 630b-631a; a 8, ans and rep 3 636a c; q 26, a
3,  ans  and  rep  4 735c-736b; Q 28, A 2, contrary and ans 741a-742a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 58, A 3, rep 3 43b-44a; q 62, a
2,  rep  3  60d  61b;  AA  3-4  61c-63a; q 65, aa 2-5 72a-75a; q 66, A 6
80c-81b;  q  67, a 6 87a-c; o 73, a i, rep 3 119c-120c; q no, a 3, rep i
350a-d;  a  4,  ans  350d  351d;  q  114, a 4 373a-d; a 6 374c-375b; A 8
376a-d; part ii-ii, q 4, aa 3-5 404c407a; q 19, a 6 469a-d; a 10 472b-d;
qq  2346  482c-605a,c;  q 184, aa 1-2 629a-630d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory,  xv  [4081]  75d-76a;  paradise,  hi  [34-90]  109d-110b; XXI
[34-102] 138c-139b; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
240d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  80b81a  32 Milton:
Sonnets,  xiv  66a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  XII  [576-605]  331b-332a  /
Areopagitica,  409b410a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  793  326b-327a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  la-2c  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 26a-27a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  214c-218b 5c. God's love of Himself and of creatures Old
Testament:  Deuteronomy,  7:6-15;  10:15,18  / Psalms passim / Proverbs,
3:12  /  Song of Solomon— {D) Canticle of Canticles / Isaiah, 43; 63:7-9
(D)  Isaias, 43; 63:7-9 /Jeremiah, 13:11; 31 — (D) Jeremias, 13:11; 31 /
EzeJ^iel, 16— (D) Ezechiel, 16 / Hosea— {D) Osee / Jonah, 4— (/)) Jonas,
4  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 7:28; 11:2226; 12:13-16; 16:20-29— (D)
OT,   Bool{   of   Wisdom,   7:28;   11:23-27;   12:13-16;   16:20-29  /
Ecclesiasticus,  11:14-17; 16:11-17:32; 33:1015— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
11:14-17;  16:1217:31; 33:10-15 New Testament: Matthew, 6:25-34; 7:7-11;
10:29-31  /  Lul^e, 11:1-13; 12:6-7,22-28 / John, 3:16-21; 13:31-17:26 /
Romans,  2:4;  5:5;  8:29-39 / // Corinthians, 13:11 / Galatians, 2:20 /
Ephesians,  3:14-20;  5:1-2 / / Timothy, 1:14 / Titus, ^'.^-J I Hebrews,
12:6  I  I John, 3:1-2,16; 4:7-5:5 / Revelation, 3:1921— (D) Apocalypse,
3:19-21  7  Plato: Timaeus, 447c-448a 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World,
1050a-b 1071b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vh, par 16, 48d bk xiii, par
1-2  llOd-lllb  /  City  of  God,  bk VII, CH 31 261d-262a; bk xii, ch 9
347b-348b  BK  XIX,  CH  13 519a-520a; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a; ch 18
574c-575b;  ch 24 577b579d; BK XXII, ch i 586b,d-587b; ch 24 609a-612a /
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 3132 633b-d

[1138a]
(5.  Divine  love.  5c.  God*s  love  of  Himself  and of creatures.) 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 3, a I, REP I 14b-15b; q 6, a 4
30b-d;  q  19,  a  2,  ANs  and  REP  2-4  109c-110b; a 4, ans and REP I
lllc-112c; Q 20 119d-124a; q 27, aa 3-4 155c-156d; q 37 197c-200c; q 74,
a  3,  rep  3-4  375a-377a,c; q 82, a 5, rep i 435c-436c; q 93, A 4, ANS
494c-495b;  part  i-ii,  q  28,  a  3,  contrary  742a-d;  a 4, contrary
742d-743c  20  Aquinas: Sumtna Theologica, part i-ii, q 65, a 5, ans and
rep  3  74c-75a; qq 109-114 338a378a,c esp q no, a i 347d-349a, a 4, ans
350d-351d;  part ii-ii, q 23, aa 1-2 482d484d; Q 24, AA 2-3 490b-491d; a
8,  ans  495b496a;  a  12  499c-500d; q 184, a 2, ans 629d630d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, i [37-40] Ib-c; purgatory, hi
[103-145]
57a-c; x
[22-45]
67c-d; XI [1-30] 68d-69a; xv [40-81] 75d-76a; XXVIII
[91-96]
97a; paradise, hi
[34-90]
109d-110b; vii
[1-120]
115a-116b; x
[1-27]
CROSS-REFERENCES yc(2); Immortality ^i.

[1138b]
1080  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5ff  120b-c;  XIII  [52-87] 126a-b; xix [86-90]
135d136a; xxvi
[1-66] 145d-146c; xxvii
[97-120]
148b-c;  XXIX  [13-48] ISOb-d; [127-145] 151cd; XXXII [i39]-xxxiii [145]
156a-157d  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, STANZA 1-7 54b-55b;
stanza 250-253 87a-b; BK V, STANZA 263-267 154b-155a / Tale of Melibeus,
par  78 431b-432a 31 Descartes: directions and Replies, 229c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part v, prop 17, corol 456d; PROP 19 457a; prop 35-36 460d-461c
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [56-343] 136b143a; bk iv [411-439]
161b-162a  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 3 405b-c; sect 154
444a-b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 186c-d 42 Kant : Judgement, 592a-c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 381a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 271d-272b;
bk IX, 373b-377b passim 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 24a-c;
bk  v,  127b-137c passim; bk vi, 153a-d; bk vii, 189a-191a,c passim For:
The  basic  psychological  terms in the analysis of love, see Desire 3c;
Emotion  i,  2-20;  Pleasure and Pain 7a; and for the comparison of love
and  knowledge,  see Knowledge Other discussions of the objects of love,
see  Beauty  3;  Desire  i, 2b; Good and Evil la, 3c; Truth 8e; Will yd.
Other  considerations  of  the  sexual instincts, sexual love, and their
normal  or abnormal development, see Desire 4b-4d; Emotion ic, 3c-3c(3);
Habit  3-3a; Pleasure and Pain 4b, 7b, 8b-8c; Temperance 2, 6a-6b. Other
considerations  of  conjugal love and its components, see Family ya. For
the moral problems raised by love, see Duty 8; Justice 3; Opposition 4d;
Pleasure  AND Pain 8b; Sin 2b; Temperance 6a-6b; Virtue and Vice 6e. The
role  of  friendship  in the life of the individual, the family, and the
state,  see  Family  yc; Happiness 2b(5) ; State 3e; Virtue and Vice 6e;
and  for  other  discussions  of  the  brotherhood  of man and the world
community,  see  Citizen 8; Man iib; State lof; War and Peace iid. Man's
love  of God, or charity, as a theological virtue, see Desire yb; Virtue
and  Vice  8d(3),  8f;  Will  yd;  and  for the fruition of this love in
eternal  beatitude,  see  Happiness  ycGod's  love of Himself and of His
creatures, see God 5h; Good and Evil 2a.

[1139a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Boof{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I. Plutarch. "Of Envy and Hatred," "How to Know a Flatterer from
a  Friend,"  "Of Brotherly Love," "Of Love," "Five Tragical Histories of
Love,"  in  Moralia  Augustine.  Of  Continence  —  .  Of  Marriage  and
Concupiscence  Aquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De Caritate — . Summa
Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 106-107, 114-119, 151-154 —. The Two Precepts
of Chanty and the Ten Commandments Dante. La Vita Nuova {The New Life) —
.  Convivio  {The  Banquet)  F.  Bacon.  "Of Love," "Of Friendship," "Of
Followers  and  Friends," in Essays Pascal. Discours sur les passions de
Vamour  Hume.  A  Treatise  ofHuman Nature, bk ii, part ii A. Smith. The
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  r^RoussEAU.  Eloisa {La nouvelle Heloise)
Goethe.  Sorrows of Young Werther . Elective Affinities Tolstoy. The Law
ofLove  and  the Law of Violence . Anna Karenina . On Life I'reud. Three
Contributions  to  the  Theory ofSex . ''Civilized*' Sexual Morality and
Modern   Nervousness  .  Contributions  to  the  Psychology  ofLove  II.
Catullus.  The  Poems  Cicero.  Laelius de Amicitia {OfFriendship) Ovid.
Amores . The Art of Love Amis and Amilon Song of Roland Petrus Alphonsi.
Disciplina  Clericalis,  fables  i-ii  {Concerning  the Complete Friend)
Bernard of Clairvaux. On the Love of God, CH 7 Abailard. Letters William
of  Saint-Thierry.  De Natura et Dignitate Amoris Aucassin and Nicolette
Chretien  de  Troyes.  Arthurian Romances Andre le Chapelain. The Art of
Courtly Love Tristan and Iseult

[1139b]
Chapter  50:  LOVE  1081  The Romance of the Rose Francis of Assisi. The
Little  Flowers  of  St. Francis of Assisi, CH 21-22 Petrarch. Sonnets .
The  Triumph  of  Love Boccaccio. // Filocolo . Decameron Sir Gawain and
the  Green Knight Gower. Confessio Amantis Albo. The Bool{ of Principles
{Sefer  ha-Ik]^arim),  BK  III,  CH 35 Thomas a Kempis. The Imitation of
Christ,  bk  ii; BK III, CH 5-10 Villon. The Debate ofthe Heart and Body
of  Villon  Valentine  and  Orson G. Pico della Mirandola. a Platonicl^^
Discourse  upon  Love  Ebreo.  The  Philosophy  of Love Ariosto. Orlando
Furioso  Castiglione. The Bool^ of the Courtier Michelangelo. Sonnets R.
Edwards.  Damon  and Pithias P. Sidney. Astrophel and Stella John of the
Cross.  The  Living  Flame of Love Donne. Songs and Sonnets Spenser. The
Faerie  Queene, bk iv . Epithalamion . An Hymne of Heavenly Love Suarez.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae, xxx (16), xlvii (14) Burton. The Anatomy of
Melancholy,  part  hi,  SECT  i-iii  TiRso  DE  Molina.  The  Love Rogue
CoRNEiLLE.  La  Place Royale Carew. a Rapture Crashaw. The Flaming Heart
Marvell.  To His Coy Mistress J. Taylor. "The Marriage-Ring," in Twenty-
Five  .  A  Discourse  of the Nature, Offices and Measures of Friendship
MoLiERE.  Le misanthrope {The Man-Hater) Malebranche. De la recherche de
la  verite,  bk  iv, CH 5-13 Racine. Andromaque . Phedre La Fayette. The
Princess ofCleves Dryden. Allfor Love CoNGREVE. The Way of the World

[1140a]
1082  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Richardson. Pamela HuRD. Letters on Chivalry and
Romance  Voltaire. "Charity," "Friendship," "Love," "Love of God," "Love
(Socratic  Love),"  in  A  Philosophical Dictionary F. ScHLEGEL. Lucinde
Schleiermacher.  Soliloquies  Schopenhauer.  The World as Will and Idea,
vol  III, SUP, CH 44 Byron. Don Juan Manzoni. The Betrothed Stendhal. On
Love  .  The  Red  and  the  Blac\  . The Charterhouse of Parma Emerson.
"Love,"  in  Essays, i Balzac At the Sign of the Cat and Racist . Cousin
Bette  C. Bronte. Jane Eyre E. J. Bronte. Wuthering Heights Kierkegaard.
Either/Or  .  Stages  on  Life's  Way  .  Wor\s  of Love E. B. Browning.
Sonnetsfrom  the  Portuguese Hawthorne. The Blithedale Romance Flaubert.
Madame  Bovary  Michelet. Uamour Turgenev. Liza Meredith. Modern Love E.
Hartmann. Philosophy of the Unconscious^ (c) XIII (3)

[1140b]
Patmore.  Mystical  Poems  of  Nuptial  Love H. Sidgwick. The Methods of
Ethics, bk i, ch 7; BK III, CH 4 Rossetti. The House of Life L. Stephen.
The  Science  of  Ethics  Stevenson.  Virginibus Puerisque C. S. Peirce.
Collected  Papers, vol vi, par 287-317 Frazer. The Golden Bough, part i,
ch  11-12  Chekhov.  The  Sea-Gull  Rostand. Cyrano de Bergerac Bradley.
Ethical  Studies,  vii  -.  Aphorisms  .  Collected  Essays,  vol  i (3)
GouRMONT.  The  Natural  Philosophy  of  Love  Shaw.  Man  and  Superman
Santayana.  Interpretations  of  Poetry  and  Religion, CH 5 . Reason in
Society, ch i , 7 GiDE. Strait Is the Gate Synge. Deirdre of the Sorrows
Ellis. Studies in the Psychology of Sex J. R. Harris. Boanerges Scheler.
Wesen  und  Formen  der  Sympathie D. H. Lawrence. Women in Love Nygren.
Agape  and  Eros  Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things Past C. S. Lewis. The
Allegory ofLove Rougemont. Love in the Western World Xirau. Amor y mundo
D'Arcy. The Mind and Heart of Love PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.

[1141a]
[página ilustrada]

[1141b]
Sp. cadet A Mats tH

Pye i: tit prt raps ou

Lg ath kel

[1142a]
T5^TS^75i^7S^5S^5^y^^^^^^^55^^^5S^?S^^^5SH^5S^^^^^^^^^7^^^vS^^^
^5^^^5^^75^^^>55i>5^   ^^^fyy^   THE   GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3
^5S^5S^5S^5^

[1142b]
~ FAMILY j^ ANGEL FATE ANIMAL FORM ^ ARISTOCRACY GOD ART GOOD AND EVIL ^
ASTRONOMY  GOVERNMENT ^^ BEAUTY HABIT ^ BEING HAPPINESS 9^ CAUSE HISTORY
§  CHANCE  HONOR  ^^  CHANGE  HYPOTHESIS  i  CITIZEN IDEA 1 CONSTITUTION
IMMORTALITY  1  COURAGE  INDUCTION  ^^  CUSTOM  AND  INFINITY CONVENTION
JUDGMENT  1  DEFINITION  JUSTICE  1 DEMOCRACY KNOWLEDGE 1 DESIRE LABOR g
DIALECTIC LANGUAGE i DUTY LAW EDUCATION LIBERTY 1 ELEMENT LIFE AND DEATH
EMOTION LOGIC ETERNITY LOVE ^1 EVOLUTION MAN i EXPERIENCE MATHEMATICS 1

[1143a]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes 2 and 3 MATTER MECHANICS MEDICINE MEMORY AND
IMAGINATION  METAPHYSICS  MIND MONARCHY NATURE NECESSITY AND SIN SLAVERY
SOUL  SPACE  STATE  TEMPERANCE  THEOLOGY  TIME  TRUTH  PLEASURE AND PAIN
TYRANNY  POETRY  PRINCIPLE PROGRESS PROPHECY PRUDENCE PUNISHMENT QUALITY
QUANTITY REASONING CONTINGENCY OLIGARCHY ONE AND MANY OPINION OPPOSITION
PHILOSOPHY PHYSICS

[1143b]
5^vS^vS^v^f^^^^^?S^vS^vS^v^v^vS^^^v^f^v^^^^vS^52i^5S?^^         RELATION
RELIGION  REVOLUTION  RHETORIC  SAME  AND  OTHER  SCIENCE SENSE SIGN AND
SYMBOL UNIVERSAL AND g^»^^g5»y^ PARTICULAR VIRTUE AND VICE WAR AND PEACE
WEALTH WILL WISDOM WORLD T^^^^^T^

[1144a]
‘e | pute

set

: olteleeteets La

. olga Seo seek

[1144b]
[página ilustrada]